CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF UTICA, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Common Council, 2003 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
UTICA, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Jacqueline K. Noonan 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kenneth Sikora 
Russell Barthelmeh 
William Osladil 
Barbara Montag 
Faith Terenzi 
Charles Cuddington 
Common Council 
____________ 
James McGrail 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Beth Ricketts 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Utica, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the common council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTERCHT:1CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLECHTCT:1CODECD1:1CODE APPENDIXCDA:1CODE COMPARATIVE TABLESCCT:1STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLESLT:1CHARTER INDEXCHTi:1CODE INDEXCDi:1 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. M. Cathrine McGrail, City Clerk, and Mr. William J. McGrail, Jr., City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Utica, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Utica, Michigan. 
(c)  Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Utica, Michigan. 2003. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No.Date
AdoptedIncluded/
OmittedSupp. No.37B11- 9-2005Included2125B12-13-2005Included2153-A 2-14-2006Included2129-18 4-11-2006Included210D 5-31-2006Included2134-A 6-21-2006Included2110A 7-18-2006Included2111B 7-18-2006Included2155 9-12-2006Included2Ord. of11-14-2006Included2Ord. of 11-27-2006Included2156 5- 8-2007Included2129-19 5-29-2007Included2157 2-12-2008Included2Ord. of 3-10-2008Included282-E 3-11-2008Included2116D 7-14-2009Included3158 8-11-2009Included3Ord. of12- 8-2009Included3159 6-14-2011Included3Ord. of 7-12-2011Included3160 3-13-2012Included3161 3-13-2012Included3Ord. of  4-10-2012Included3162 6-12-2012Included3163 6-12-2012Included3160-A 4-16-2013Included3164 5-20-2013Included3163-A 7- 8-2013Included3Ord. of 1-14-2014Included3 
PART I - CHARTER 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the People of the City of Utica, Macomb County, Michigan, formerly known as the Village of Utica, by virtue of the authority of the Constitution of the State of Michigan and the Public Acts of the Legislature of the State of Michigan duly adopted, do hereby ordain and establish this Charter for the City of Utica in order to promote, maintain and better provide for the interests and welfare of all of the People. 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the Utica City Charter, as adopted by the voters on November 4, 1997. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Official title. 
    The official title shall be "The City of Utica." 
Section 1.2. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries for the City of Utica shall be registered at the Office of the Great Seal, State of Michigan, Lansing, Michigan. 
State law reference- Boundaries and annexations, MCL 117.6 et seq. 
Section 1.3. - Wards. 
    There shall be one (1) ward in the City of Utica, which shall comprise the boundaries of the City of Utica as described in Article 1, Section 1.2 of this Charter. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provided for at least one ward, MCL 117.3(e). 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIVE OFFICE 

Section 2.1. - Mayor: Qualifications and terms of office. 
    There shall be a Mayor of the City, elected by the registered electors. No person shall be elected to the office of Mayor unless he/she shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City, and shall be a resident thereof for a period of at least one (1) year prior to the date of the election at which such Mayor is elected. The term of office of the Mayor shall be for a period of two (2) years, commencing January 1 succeeding his/her election. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for a mayor, MCL 117.3(a); mandatory that charter provide for qualifications of city officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Section 2.2. - Duties of office. 
    The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and conservator of the peace. He/She shall, by virtue of his/her office, be a member of the Common Council and shall have the right to vote on all questions and to offer resolutions, introduce ordinances and exercise all other rights, powers and privileges of a member of the said Council. He/She shall not have the right to veto. He/She shall countersign all orders drawn upon the City Treasury. He/She shall from time to time furnish information to the Council concerning the affairs of the City and of the public property belonging thereto, and see that the laws relating to the City and the ordinances and regulations of the Council are enforced. He/She shall have full power and authority to nominate appointees for all appointive offices provided for under the provisions of this Charter or which may hereafter be created and it shall be the duty of the Common Council to vote on such nominations not later than the next regular meeting of the Council after nomination is made by the Mayor. He/She shall execute, in the name of the City, all bonds and obligation issued by the City and all contracts and other documents requiring execution on behalf of the City. The Mayor shall perform such additional duties as are or may be prescribed in this Charter or by resolutions and ordinances of the City. 
State law reference- Mayor to be chief executive officer, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 2.3. - Mayor pro tempore. 
    The Common Council at its first meeting in January following its election or as soon thereafter as it may deem it necessary, shall elect one of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tempore of the City, with full power to perform all duties of the Mayor in the event of the absence or disability of the Mayor. 
Section 2.4. - Common council: Qualifications and terms of office of members. 
    The legislative authority of the City shall be vested in the Common Council, consisting of the Mayor and six (6) members to be elected at large by the registered electors in the City. The members of the Common Council shall be qualified and registered electors of the City, and shall be residents thereof for a period of at least one (1) year prior to the date of the election at which such Council member shall have been elected. Three Common Council members shall be elected every two (2) years. The term of office of the members of Common Council shall be for a period of four (4) years commencing January 1st. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for an elected legislative body, MCL 117.3(a); mandatory that charter provide for qualifications of city officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Section 2.5. - Regular meetings. 
    The Common Council shall meet in the Council Chambers on the second Tuesday in each month provided, however, that if any such Tuesday shall be a legal holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place the next secular day which is not a holiday. Common Council shall have the authority to reschedule regular meetings as they deem necessary. There shall be a written or printed journal of minutes of each session of the legislative body for keeping in the English language. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for keeping a journal in English, MCL 117.3(m). 
Section 2.6. - Special and emergency meetings. 
    Special meetings of the Common Council may be held upon the request of the Mayor or any two (2) members of Common Council, provided a good faith attempt is made to give all Common Council members at least eighteen (18) hours notice of the time and place at which such meeting shall be transacted. The business to be transacted at such special meetings shall be confined to the business proposed at the time of notice unless all members of the Council attend such meeting, in which event any business which might lawfully come before a regular meeting may be presented and acted upon. 
Section 2.7. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members in attendance of the Common Council shall constitute a quorum of the Council for the transaction of business, but a less number may adjourn a regular meeting and compel the absent members to attend in such manner as shall be prescribed by the Common Council. 
Section 2.8. - Rules of procedure. 
    The Common Council shall prescribe rules of order governing its own proceedings, provided, however, that the rules of procedure of any preceding Common Council shall be followed until modified or amended. 
Section 2.9. - Resolutions, motions and recording of votes. 
    All proceedings of the Common Council shall be by resolution or motion except where, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, it shall be necessary to take action by the adoption of an ordinance. The vote upon any resolution, ordinance or motion shall be taken upon roll call and entered in the Minute Book of the Common Council. The journal of minutes of any meeting shall be signed by the City Clerk, after reading and approval by the Common Council, shall be attested by the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore thereof. 
Section 2.10. - Reconsideration. 
    Any member of the Common Council shall have the right to reconsider their vote upon any resolution, ordinance, or action adopted by the Common Council. Any member of the Common Council may file with the City Clerk within thirty-six (36) hours after the adoption of such resolution, ordinance, or action taken by Common Council a written statement of the reasons for such reconsideration. Said adoption shall be held in abeyance until action is taken upon such reconsideration. Such reconsideration shall be acted upon by the Common Council at its next regular meeting unless a special meeting is called for that purpose. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for the manner of adopting, amending or repealing ordinances, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 2.11. - Hearing before common council. 
    Any resident maybe heard at the Council meeting under the rules prescribed by the Common Council in accordance with the Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). 
State law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(l). 
Section 2.12. - Disbursement of funds of the city. 
    No disbursement of funds of the City shall be made unless authority is granted by the appropriate action of the Common Council. 
Section 2.13. - Vote required to adopt motion, resolution or ordinance. 
    The concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the Common Council shall be required for the adoption of any motion, resolution or ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Vacancy in elected office. 
    In the event that the office of mayor becomes vacant, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall become the mayor of the City. Common Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore. Such officers will hold office until the next regular municipal election when such vacancy shall be filled under the provisions of this Charter. 
(a.)	All other Vacancies, except those caused by a recall election, shall be filled by nomination for appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the Common Council, as in other appointive offices and such appointees shall hold office until the next regular election at which such office is to be filled under the provisions of this Charter. 
(b.)	In the event that a Common Council vacancy is not filled within ninety (90) days from the date of the vacancy, a special election shall be held to fill said vacancy for the remainder of the vacant term. Candidates shall file in the same manner as he/she would for any regular City election. 
(c.)	In the event that by reason of vacancies, the Common Council shall be reduced to less than four (4) in number, the remaining members thereof shall call a special election to fill all vacancies in the Common Council. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for ordinance adoption procedures, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 2.15. - When common council may declare office vacated. 
    If any elected officer shall fail to subscribe to the constitutional oath of office within two (2) months of certification of the election, Common Council may declare the office vacated and shall have power to proceed to fill such vacancy as herein provided. 
Section 2.16. - Appointive officers to hold office until successors are appointed and qualified. 
    All appointed officers, unless removed under the provisions of this Charter, shall hold office until their successors have been duly appointed and have qualified. 
Section 2.17. - Property to be delivered to successor. 
    Whenever any elected officer shall resign or be removed from office, or the term for which he/she has been elected or appointed expires, he/she shall deliver over to his/her successor all books, papers, monies and effects in his/her care and custody. Any person willfully violating the provisions of this section may be prosecuted. 
ARTICLE III. - APPOINTED OFFICE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for qualifications, duties and compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d). (Back)
Section 3.1. - General provisions of office: Creation of appointed office. 
    There shall be a City Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor and City Attorney who shall be hired pursuant to a competitive hiring process as determined by Common Council. Such appointment shall be pursuant to other Charter provisions. 
Section 3.2. - Compensation. 
    All appointed officers shall receive compensation as shall be determined by Common Council. 
Section 3.3. - Office hours. 
    All appointed officers shall be required to devote sufficient time to the official duties of the City to properly perform the same, and shall maintain such office hours as the Common Council shall determine. 
Section 3.4. - City clerk: Custodian of the seal, books and records of the city. 
    The City Clerk shall be the clerk of the meetings of the Common Council and shall be its clerk, recording all proceedings, ordinances and resolutions of the Common Council, and in the event of the absence of the City Clerk at any such meeting, the Deputy Clerk or designee of the Clerk shall perform the duties of the Clerk at such meetings. 
Section 3.5. - Certify records. 
    The City Clerk shall, when required, make and certify, under the hand and seal of the City, copies of the papers and proceedings of the matters therein contained to the same extent as the original would be. 
Section 3.6. - Power to administer oaths. 
    The City Clerk shall have authority to administer oaths and affirmations. 
Section 3.7. - Custodian of election supplies. 
    The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all ballot boxes, election supplies and equipment. 
Section 3.8. - Disposition of monies. 
    The City Clerk or his/her designee shall pay over to the City Treasurer periodically all monies received by him belonging to the City and shall account for same in whatever method generally accepted by State Law. 
Section 3.9. - City clerk to receive all complaints. 
    All complaints of citizens relative to the public service shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and referred to the proper department for investigation and report, and upon receiving such report it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to advise the citizen making such complaint of the report so made. The City Clerk in receiving any complaint may require that such complaint be made in writing and subscribed by the citizen offering the same. 
Section 3.10. - City clerk to execute contracts. 
    The City Clerk, in conjunction with the Mayor, shall execute all contracts, documents and instruments requiring execution on behalf of the City. 
Section 3.11. - Water and sewer department. 
    The City Clerk shall keep complete records of all receipts for the accounts of the Water & Sewer Systems; keep the account of all users of such water supply and sewer system; direct billings for such accounts; pay over all monies received therefrom to the Treasurer; authorize water shut off where accounts are two billings delinquent; authorize the placing of delinquent bills as a lien on property; to appear on property tax bills; and supply statistical information from such records to the Common Council, Governmental Department or Bondholders, at stated intervals or upon request, keeping a true copy thereof on file for public inspection. 
Section 3.12. - Other powers and duties. 
    The City Clerk shall have such powers and perform such other duties as may be provided by general laws of the State, and as the Common Council may by resolution or ordinance direct. 
Section 3.13. - Deputy clerk. 
    The Common Council may create the office of Deputy City Clerk, and fix the compensation therefor. Such Deputy or Deputies shall possess all the powers and authority of the City Clerk in his/her absence, and upon all other occasions, such powers as shall be delegated to such deputy or deputies by the Common Council or by the City Clerk. 
Section 3.14. - City treasurer: Powers and duties. 
    The Powers and Duties of the City Treasurer shall be as follows: 
(a.)	He/She shall receive all taxes and other monies belonging to and the receivables by the City and keep an accurate account of all receipts and expenditures thereof, on receipt of monies paid on taxes for real and personal property, he/she shall place upon the tax roll after the description of such property, the name and address of the owner of same; and shall perform such other duties with reference to the collection of taxes as are provided in this Charter. 
(b.)	He/She shall have the custody, and be accountable for, all monies, bonds, mortgages, notes, leases and evidences of value belonging to the City; and shall deposit all monies received, in a bank designated by Common Council. 
(c.)	He/She shall keep an accurate account of, and be charged with all taxes and monies appropriated, raised and received for each fund of the City. 
(d.)	He/She shall pay no money out of the treasury except in pursuance of an order of the Common Council and by authority of law, and on a warrant drafted and signed by the Treasurer and countersigned by the Mayor, which shall specify the purpose for which the amount thereof is to be paid. 
(e.)	He/She may present to the Common Council quarterly, and as often and for such period as may be required, a full and detailed account of all receipts and disbursements since the date of his/her last quarterly report, classifying them by funds to which such receipts are credited, and out of which such disbursements are made, which account shall show the exact condition of the treasury; and he/she shall file a copy of such account in the office of the City Clerk. 
(f.)	There shall be [a] system of accounts that conforms to a uniform system of accounts as required by law. 
State law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(n). 
(g.)	He/She shall perform such other duties as required by State Law.
Section 3.15. - Deputy treasurer. 
    The Common Council may create the position of Deputy Treasurer, appoint treasury support staff, and set compensation and duties. 
Section 3.16. - City assessor: Powers and duties. 
    The City Assessor shall possess all powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by State Law. In addition, he/she shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter, ordinances of the City and by State Law. 
Section 3.17. - City attorney: Creation of office, qualifications and term of office. 
    There shall be a City Attorney, who shall be nominated for appointment to such office by the Mayor pursuant to a competitive hiring process and confirmed as such by the Common Council under the provisions of this Charter. He/She shall be a practicing attorney of the State of Michigan. 
Section 3.18. - City attorney: Power and duties. 
    He/She shall superintend and conduct all of the legal business of the City for its various departments. He/She shall draft proposed resolutions and ordinances, or approve of same as to form. He/She shall draft all leases, deeds, contracts and other documents that may be required by any department of the City. He/She shall furnish upon request written opinions when subjects are submitted to him/her by the Common Council, the Mayor or any department head. He/She shall have such other powers and duties as shall be prescribed by resolution or ordinance. 
Section 3.19. - Counsel for state in city cases. 
    The City Attorney, when required by the Court or any City department, shall appear and act for the People of the State of Michigan in all cases involving violations or ordinances of the City. 
Section 3.20. - Procedure for all city cases. 
    Any officer, upon whom any process or other paper may be served in any case commenced or pending against the City, shall at once transmit such process or paper to the City Attorney, who shall thereupon inform the Common Council of the status of such suit or proceedings. Unless otherwise directed by the Common Council, the City Attorney shall appear in such suit or proceeding in behalf of the City. If a judgement or decree be entered therein, he/she may cause an appeal or other appropriate proceedings to be taken to remove the case to the appellate court, if, in his/her judgement, the interests of the City require it. 
Section 3.21. - Assistants to the city attorney and special legal counsel. 
    Upon the City Attorney's recommendation or upon it's own initiative, the Council may provide for one or more assistants to the City Attorney and may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the City has an interest or to assist the City Attorney. Each appointment made as herein authorized shall be made by the Common Council with consideration given to recommendations made by the City Attorney. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC SERVICES 

Section 4.1. - Police department: Creation of office of the police chief. 
    There shall be a Police Chief who shall be hired pursuant to a competitive hiring process as determined by Common Council. Such appointment shall be pursuant to other Charter provisions. 
Section 4.2. - General powers and duties of the police chief. 
    It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to enforce the laws of the State of Michigan and the ordinances of the City of Utica, to prevent crime, apprehend criminals, promote traffic safety through enforcement of traffic laws, protect life and property, conduct criminal investigations, and work with the public to provide a safe and secure community in which to live and work. 
Section 4.3. - Members of the police department. 
    Common Council may hire such support staff as necessary to undertake the duties of the Police Department. In the absence of the Police Chief, the Police Chief shall appoint an assistant who shall perform all of the duties of the Police Chief. 
Section 4.4. - Fire department: Creation of the office of the fire chief. 
    There shall be a Fire Chief who shall be hired pursuant to a competitive hiring process as determined by Common Council. Such appointment shall be pursuant to other Charter provisions. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor and Common Council for the functions of the Fire Department. 
Section 4.5. - General power and duties of the fire chief. 
    The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all fire apparatus, equipment, and property used by the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall have the general supervision and control of all officers and employees of the department, including such training as necessary. 
Section 4.6. - Creation of the fire department. 
    Common Council may hire such support staff as necessary to undertake the duties of the Fire Department. 
Section 4.7. - Office of assistant fire chief. 
    The Common Council shall create the position of Assistant Fire Chief who shall be hired pursuant to a competitive hiring process as determined by Common Council. Such appointment shall be pursuant to other Charter provisions. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the assistant shall perform all the duties of the Fire Chief. 
Section 4.8. - Duties of members of the fire department. 
    It shall be the duty of members of the Fire Department to prevent and extinguish fires, protect life and property against fire, the removal of fire hazards, provide a variety of emergency services and rescue operations, provide fire inspections and investigations, and educate the public in fire safety and prevention. 
Section 4.9. - Public works: Office of public works superintendent. 
    There shall be a Public Works Superintendent, who shall be hired pursuant to the competitive hiring process as determined by Common Council. Such appointment shall be pursuant to other Charter provisions. The Public Works Superintendent shall be compensated and hold office as the Common Council shall direct. 
Section 4.10. - General powers and duties of the public works superintendent. 
    The Public Works Superintendent shall be responsible for certain matters relating to the construction, management, maintenance, and operation of the physical properties and services of the City. The Public Works Superintendent shall have the general supervision and control of all officers and employees of the department, including such training as necessary. The Public Works Superintendent shall perform such other duties as the Common Council may direct. 
Section 4.11. - Creation of the department of public works. 
    Common Council may hire such support staff as necessary to undertake the duties of the Department of Public Works. 
Section 4.12. - Duties of members of the department of public works. 
    It shall be the duty of members of the Department of Public Works to maintain and operate the streets, parks, water and sewers of the City. 
Section 4.13. - Additional department, agencies and officials. 
    The Council may create and maintain such additional administrative agencies, boards, commissions and officials as it shall deem necessary for the conduct of the administrative affairs of the City, provided, that no such administrative agencies, boards, commissions or officials shall be given any powers and duties which overlap or interfere with the powers and duties imposed upon any office or department created by this Charter. Each such administrative agency, board, commission or official shall be created by ordinance which ordinance shall conform to the provisions of this Charter relating thereto and shall clearly set forth the powers and duties thereof and the standards for the acts to be performed. Each such administrative agency, board, commission or official shall be responsible to the Mayor for the conduct of the affairs of the City entrusted to it and to the Council for the carrying out of its general policies pertaining thereto. 
ARTICLE V. - COMPENSATION AND SELF-INTEREST 

Section 5.1. - Employees and departments: Employees of department. 
    The Common Council shall designate the number of employees for each department of the City, and shall fix their respective compensations. 
Section 5.2. - Local officers compensation commission. 
    The Commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the Common Council for a term of five (5) years. Members shall be appointed before October 1, of the year [of] appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. Commission members shall be registered electors of the City of Utica. The Commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15) session days in every odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within forty-five (45) calendar days of its first meeting. The Commission shall determine salaries for elective offices no later than forty-five (45) days prior to filing deadline. The Commission shall determine the salaries of all elected officials of the City of Utica, which determination shall be the salary unless the legislative body of the City of Utica, by resolution, adopted by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of elected, reject same. The determination of the Commission shall be effective thirty (30) days following the filing thereof with the City Clerk unless rejected by the Common Council. A majority of the members of the Commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d); local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUDGET AND APPROPRIATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq. (Back)
Section 6.1. - Budget: Departmental estimates. 
    The various officers and departments of the City, created by law and under provisions of this Charter, or which may be hereafter created, shall respectively transmit to the City Clerk or whomever the Mayor and Common Council shall otherwise designate, their estimates of the amount of money necessary for each activity within their respective departments for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Section 6.2. - Budget prepared. 
    The City Clerk or whomever the Mayor and Common Council shall otherwise designate shall make up and transmit to the Common Council a tabulation of such estimates by such time as shall be determined by the Mayor and Common Council to ensure that the budget process will be completed in accordance with State Law. Said person shall also furnish a comparative statement showing the appropriations and expenditures for each department for the current and next proceeding fiscal year; a statement of the financial condition of the City; an inventory of all property owned by the City and the estimated revenue of the City for the next ensuing fiscal year, including the amount of taxes required. Said person shall also furnish such other information as the Common Council may require. 
Section 6.3. - Consideration and adoption by common council. 
    The Common Council shall consider the budget and may revise or alter the same in accordance with State Law. In no event shall the Common Council adopt a deficit budget. 
Section 6.4. - Appropriations and taxation. 
    Common Council shall adopt the budget no later than the last working day of the current fiscal year in accordance with State Law. Concurrent with the formal adoption of the budget, the Common Council shall adopt an annual appropriation ordinance for municipal purposes which shall be based on the budget as approved by the Common Council. Said ordinance shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes as allowed by State Law. Said ordinance shall provide for an annual levying and collecting of taxes in a sum, except as otherwise provided by law, not to exceed two (2) percent of the assessed value of the real and personal property in the City, subject to the Municipal Finance Act. 
Editor's note- 
The reference in Municipal Finance Act has been repealed and replaced by the Revised Municipal Finance Act (MCL 141.2101 et seq.). 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for an annual appropriation of money for municipal purposes, MCL 117.3(h); mandatory that charter provide for an annual levying and collection of taxes, MCL 117.3(g). 
Section 6.5. - Budget controls and amendments. 
    The adoption of a budget shall not be construed as authority to any officer of the City to spend the money set forth in such budget unless expenditure has been authorized by the proper warrant. 
Section 6.6. - Appropriations: When exhausted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any expenditures to be made for any municipal activity after the budget appropriation has been exhausted unless and until funds therefor shall have been duly and legally provided. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS AND LOANS 

Section 7.1. - Borrowing money in Anticipation of the Collection of Taxes. 
    The City shall have all of the mandatory and permissive powers of borrowing under the Home Rule Cities Act, including but not limited to: 
(a.)	The City may provide for the borrowing of money on the credit of the City and issuing bonds for the borrowing of money, for any purpose within the scope of the powers of the City consistent with State Law. In case of fire, flood, or other calamity, the Common Council may borrow for the relief of the inhabitants of the City and for the preservation of municipal property, a sum not to exceed 3/8 of 1% of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the City, due in not more than five (5) years. 
(b.)	The City may borrow money and issue bonds for the borrowing of money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, which bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of the City. 
(c.)	Common Council shall have the power for the installation and connection of sewers and waterworks on and to property within the City, for assessing the cost thereof to the several properties and making the same a lien thereon, and for the borrowing of money and issuing bonds in anticipation of the collection of such special assessments. 
State law reference- Borrowing money, MCL 117.4a et seq.; Revenue Bond Act of 1933, MCL 141.101 et seq. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAXATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for annual levying and collecting of taxes, MCL 117.3(g). (Back)
Section 8.1. - Taxes: Property subject to taxation. 
    All real and personal property within the City of Utica shall be subject to taxation in accordance with the provisions of the general tax laws of the State of Michigan. The City of Utica shall levy, collect, and return state, county, and school taxes in conformance with the general laws of the state. The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. 
State law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(f); assessments, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 8.2. - Description of properly assessed. 
    In all assessments, the lands, tenements and subdivisions assessed shall be described by referring to the county property identification number, and of the name of the owner or occupant thereof, and if it said cannot be ascertained, then by such other sufficient description as the Assessor may deem proper. If by mistake or otherwise any person may be improperly designated as the owner of any lot, tenement or premises, such assessment or tax shall not for the cause be vitiated, but the same shall be a lien on such lot, tenement or premises and collected as in other cases under general tax laws of the State of Michigan. 
State law reference- Assessments, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 8.3. - Notice, complaints, assessor review and delivery of rolls. 
    Notice shall be given that the assessment roll will be completed as mandated by State Law, and shall be published in accordance with State Law. Any person considering himself aggrieved by reason of any assessment, may make complaint either verbally or in writing to the Assessor, and upon sufficient cause being shown, the Assessor may alter or correct the same as to the person charged thereby, the property described therein and the estimated value thereof. The Assessor, having completed the review and correction of said assessment roll, shall present the same to the Board of Review as pursuant to State Law. 
Section 8.4. - Review of assessment roll. 
    Such assessment roll shall be reviewed by the Board of Review in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and State Law, and shall thereupon be certified by such Board and shall become the assessment of the City of Utica. 
Section 8.5. - Tax rolls. 
    Upon receipt of the assessment rolls, as confirmed, the Assessor shall prepare a tax roll upon which shall be placed the amount of taxes authorized to be assessed and collected in each year. There shall be an annual levying and collecting of taxes in a sum, except as otherwise provided by law, not to exceed two (2) percent of the assessed value of the real and personal property in the City, subject to the Municipal Finance Act. Upon completion of the tax rolls, the Assessor shall deliver the rolls together with the proper warrant issued to the City Treasurer two weeks prior to the tax due date directing him/her to collect taxes assessed. 
Section 8.6. - Special assessment taxes placed upon general roll. 
    The Common Council shall certify to the Assessor all special assessments and other special taxes which shall be placed upon the general tax roll for the current year. 
Section 8.7. - Funds. 
    All revenues raised by the general tax in the City shall be placed in the following general funds: 
(a.)	General fund to defray general expenses and liabilities of the City and carry into effect the powers herein granted in this Charter. 
(b.)	Interest and Sinking Fund to pay the bonded indebtedness of the City, if any, and the interest thereon. The Common Council shall have authority to provide two (2) separate and distinct funds for each of these items if it shall see fit to do so. 
(c.)	Contingency Fund to pay additional and unforseen expenses.
(d.)	Such other funds as the Common Council may from time to time establish.
Section 8.8. - Date payable and liability for payment. 
    All City taxes shall be due and payable on the first (1st) day in July in each year, or on such other day as required by State Law, and on that date shall become a lien on the property taxed. The owners or parties in interest to any real estate assessed hereunder shall be liable to pay such taxes and all assessments levied in accordance herewith. Owners or persons in possession of any personal property shall pay all taxes assessed thereon. 
Section 8.9. - Taxes due and notification thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due pursuant to State Law on the first (1st) day in July in each year, or such other day as required by State Law. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the City tax rolls, nor to make personal demands for payment of taxes. He/She shall publish in a paper in general circulation in the City two (2) weeks prior to tax due date notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and penalties for late payment of the same. He/She shall mail a bill to each person named in said rolls, but in case of multiple ownership of property, only one bill need be mailed. The City Treasurer shall have the authority to assess penalties and/or fees for late or nonpayment of taxes as determined by Common Council in accordance with applicable State Law. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to publish said notice or of the owner to receive such bills shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax rolls nor release to persons or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this Charter in case of late payment or nonpayment of the same. 
Section 8.10. - Board of review: Creation of office and qualifications. 
    There shall be a Board of Review, consisting of three (3) members, who shall be nominated for appointment to such office by the Mayor and confirmed therein by the Common Council under the provisions of this Charter. No person shall be appointed to such office unless he shall be a qualified registered elector of the City. 
State law reference- Charter to provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a); board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq., 211.107. 
Section 8.11. - Term of office and compensation. 
    The term of office of the members of the Board of Review shall commence on appointment for a period of three (3) years. The members of the Board of Review shall receive such compensation as determined by Common Council. 
Section 8.12. - Members of board of review not to be holders of other public office. 
    No member of the Board of Review shall hold any other public office or employment, except that of Notary Public. 
Section 8.13. - Meetings of board of review. 
    The Board of Review shall meet in accordance with State Law, including the Open Meetings Act. 
Section 8.14. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the Board of Review shall be in accordance with State Law and as the Common Council may by resolution or Ordinance direct. 
State law reference- Powers of board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq., 211.107. 
Section 8.15. - Bonds of the city may be accepted in payments of taxes. 
    Bonds and obligations of the City maybe accepted in the payment of either special assessment taxes or general City taxes in the manner and form prescribed by the Common Council. 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Section 9.1. - Purposes of special assessments. 
    The Common Council may raise by special assessments in improvement districts established by it for the purpose of defraying the cost and expense of grading, graveling, paving and curbing all streets; for the construction of sidewalks and crosswalks; for the construction of sewers, drains, water distributing pipes and mains; house connection for sewers, drains or water distributing pipes; for the opening, widening, extending, straightening or altering of highways, streets or alleys; for installing lighting systems and all other improvements in any public highway, place or space. 
Section 9.2. - Necessity determined and special assessments collected. 
    City Council shall adopt by ordinance procedures for special assessments. 
Section 9.3. - Cost of Improvements. 
    The amount of money required to complete any public improvement shall be established by competitive bidding under the direction of the Common Council and a contract shall be entered into with the lowest responsible bidder on furnishing a bond to the City for the full performance thereof, provided nothing herein contained shall prevent the Common Council from rejection of any or all bids. 
Section 9.4. - Miscellaneous. 
    The Common Council shall cause all proceedings to be taken that are required by law, to institute any public improvement permitted under the provisions of the Charter and complete the same under its control and direction. 
ARTICLE X. - ELECTIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for time, manner and means of holding elections and the registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq. (Back)
Section 10.1. - Elections. 
    The general Election laws of the State of Michigan and the similar or comparable, provisions of any future laws of the State and the applicable federal laws shall apply to and control all procedures relating to City elections including but not limited to qualifications of electors, establishment of precincts, verification of petitions, registration of voters and voting hours. The Clerk shall give public notice of each City election in the same manner as is referred by law for the giving of public notice of general election in the State. The City shall not be required to hold a primary election. City elections shall be nonpartisan and shall be held in November in odd-calendar years. 
State law reference- Notice of elections, MCL 168.653a; odd year municipal elections, MCL 168.641 et seq. 
Section 10.2. - Nominating petitions. 
    Each candidate for any elective office shall at the time that the statement of candidacy is filed with the City Clerk also file therewith a petition placing in nomination the name of such candidate which petition shall be signed by not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than fifty (50) qualified and registered electors of the City. Said petition shall be filed by 4 P.M. on the 12th Tuesday prior to the general election. 
State law reference- Mandatory that charter provided for nomination of elective officers by partisan or nonpartisan primary, by petition, or by convention, MCL 117.3(b); nominating petitions, MCL 168.322, 168.644f. 
Section 10.3. - Special elections. 
    Special Elections may be called by the Common Council for the submission of any question or proposition, said election to be held in compliance with State Election Laws, similar or comparable provisions with any future general law of the State and applicable federal laws. 
Section 10.4. - Recall: Who may be recalled. 
    Any elective officer of the City of Utica shall be subject to recall by the legal voters of the City. Such recall elections shall be conducted in accordance with State Law. 
State law reference- Recall, MCL 168.951 et seq. 
ARTICLE XI. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

Section 11.1. - Ordinance initiated by petition. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or electors may petition for a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the Council where the expenditure of the general funds of the City is in amount in excess of that which it would cost to hold said referendum. 
Section 11.2. - Initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by registered electors of the City. The minimum number of valid signatures shall be ten percent (10%) of the number of active voters registered at the last City or general election preceding the filing date of said petition. 
(a.)	The petition shall be filed with the Clerk not more than ninety (90) days after the date of the earliest signature. 
(b.)	Before circulation, all such petitions may be approved as to form by the Clerk. Petitions may be on more than one page. 
(c.)	Each signer of a petition shall sign in ink or indelible pencil and shall include the date and place of residence by street and number or by description sufficient to identify it. 
(d.)	On each petition, there shall be a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof stating the number of signers thereto, attesting that each signature is that of the person filing, and attesting that each signature was signed in the presence of the circulator. 
(e.)	If the petition is found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the City or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this Charter, the person filing such petition shall be allowed ten (10) days from notification of noncompliance for the filing of supplemental petition papers. The ten (10) days shall not be part of the ninety (90) day limitation. Only one supplemental filing shall be allowed. 
(f.)	When the petition is found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall present it [to] the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 11.3. - Petition procedure. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall within thirty (30) days either: 
(a.)	If it is an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the City, or 
(b.)	If it is a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the City. 
Section 11.4. - Submission to the electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election in the City for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election. The result shall be determined by the majority vote of the electors voting, except in the cases where otherwise required by the Constitution or laws of the State. The Council shall approve the form of any question submitted to the electors. 
Section 11.5. - Ordinance suspended-amended. 
    The certification of the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition, which was filed with the Clerk not more than thirty (30) days after the passage of the ordinance to which the petition refers, shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors as the case may be. An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of two (2) years after the date of the election at which it was adopted and then only by the affirmative vote of not fewer than five (5) Council Members. Should two (2) or more ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
ARTICLE XII. - CONDEMNATION 

Section 12.1. - Condemnation, appropriation and purchase of private property. 
    Private property whether within or without the City limits, may be condemned, appropriated or purchased for public use for the purpose of opening, widening, altering or extending streets, alleys and avenues; for the construction of bridges, viaducts, grade separation, public buildings, parks, parkways, markets and marketplaces, sewers, drains and watercourses; public and detention hospitals; sewage disposal; water supply, water mains, water works; and for the protection thereof, or any lawful public use not specifically enumerated herein. 
State law reference- The Uniform Condemnation Procedures Act, MCL 213.51 et seq. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL POWERS 

Section 13.1. - General powers. 
    Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the City and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the Constitution and statutes of the State, including Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as fully and completely as those powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this Charter. In no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities herein be held to be exclusive. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ORDINANCES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for adopting, amending, repealing and continuing city ordinances, MCL 117.3(k). (Back)
Section 14.1. - Adopting clause. 
    The adopting clause of all ordinances shall take effect upon publication, unless a later date is prescribed therein. 
Section 14.2. - Continuance of ordinances. 
    All valid ordinances of the City of Utica which are not inconsistent with this Charter, and which are in full force and effect at the time of the effective date of this Charter, shall be ordinances of the City. If any such ordinance provides for the appointment of any officers or members of any boards or commissions, such officers or members of any boards or commissions shall, after the effective date of this Charter, be appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Provisions of any ordinance which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Section 14.3. - Repeal of ordinances. 
    Any ordinance of the City of Utica may be repealed by subsequent ordinance by reference to that particular ordinance. 
Section 14.4. - Amendment of ordinances. 
    Any ordinance or section thereof may be amended by subsequent ordinance. 
Section 14.5. - Recording of ordinances. 
    The City Clerk shall provide a book to be called "The Ordinance Book of the City of Utica", wherein properly authenticated copies of the ordinances shall be contained, and it shall be the duty of the Mayor to authenticate all ordinances adopted by the Common Council. 
Section 14.6. - Publication. 
    Ordinances shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
Editor's note- 
The provisions of charter  14.6 are superseded by MCL 117.3(k) in that such statute allows publication of a summary of an ordinance in lieu of the text of the ordinance, notwithstanding any charter provision. 
Section 14.7. - Judicial notice. 
    Whenever it shall be necessary to prove any of the laws, regulations or ordinances of the City of Utica or any resolution adopted by the Common Council of the City of Utica the same may read in all courts of justice and in all proceedings; first, from a record thereof kept by the City Clerk; second, from a copy of the ordinance, regulation or resolution or the record thereof certified by the City Clerk under the corporate seal of the City of Utica; third, from a volume of ordinances, regulations or resolutions purporting to have been written or printed by the authority of the Common Council. 
Editor's note- 
The provisions of Charter  14.7 are superseded by MCL 117.3(k) in that such statute allows a city to adopt an ordinance punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days. 
Section 14.8. - Penalties. 
    When by the provisions of this Charter, the Common Council has authority to pass ordinances for any purpose, it may prescribe fines, penalties, forfeitures, or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the Court, together with court costs, for each violation of any such ordinance and may provide that the offender, on failing to pay such fine, penalty, forfeiture or court costs, may be imprisoned for any time not exceeding ninety (90) days, unless payment thereof be sooner made. Such fine, penalty or forfeiture and imprisonment for the violation of any ordinance, shall be prescribed in the ordinance and if imprisonment be adjudged in any case, the Court may, in its discretion, direct that such imprisonment shall be in the City or County jail, or in such other place of imprisonment provided by the City or general or special laws of the State of Michigan for such purpose. The Common Council may authorize the institution of a civil suit to recover fines and costs assessed for the violation of any City ordinance and recovery thereon may be had in the same manner as the collection of a debt, under the civil practice in the State of Michigan. 
Section 14.9. - Ordinance enforcement. 
    In the absence of authority for the enforcement of a particular ordinance, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to ensure that the terms of the ordinance are enforced. 
Section 14.10. - City jail. 
    The Common Council shall have the power to provide and maintain a City jail, and such watch or station houses as may be necessary and may provide for the confinement therein of all persons liable to imprisonment or detention under the ordinances of the City. 
ARTICLE XV. - OPERATION OF CHARTER 

Section 15.1. - Effective date of Charter. 
    The effective date of this Charter shall be January 1, 1998. 
Section 15.2. - Officials elected under former charter. 
    The Mayor, Common Council, Treasurer and Assessor under this Charter will be elected officials under the former Charter for the term of office elected under the former Charter. 
Section 15.3. - Construction of Charter. 
    This Charter shall be constructed in a manner so as to give full consideration to every section thereof, and if there shall be inconsistencies, the Common Council shall be authorized to interpret the Charter so as to give reasonable effect thereto, and if any section of this Charter shall be declared void, illegal or unconstitutional, such finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this Charter. 
Section 15.4. - Revision or amendment. 
    The procedure for revising or amending this Charter shall be in accordance with State Law. 
Section 15.5. - Vacation of the incorporation of the charter. 
    The City maybe vacated in accordance with State Law. 
ARTICLE XVI. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 16.1. - When certain days are Sundays or Holidays. 
    Whenever the day upon which a transaction is required to take place under the provisions of the Charter falls upon a Sunday or holiday, then such Sunday or holiday shall be excluded in computing time, and such transaction shall take place on the next business day. 
Section 16.2. - Service of process. 
    The service of any process against the City in any action pending shall be made upon the Mayor or the City Clerk. 
Section 16.3. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall commence July 1st and end June 30th. 
Section 16.4. - New powers. 
    Any new and additional powers that may be hereafter granted to cities by either the general laws of the State of Michigan or by the constitution of the State of Michigan shall be conferred upon and exercised by the City of Utica. 
Section 16.5. - Open Meetings Act. 
    All business of the Common Council shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). 
State law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(l). 
Section 16.6. - Freedom of Information Act. 
    All records of the municipality shall be made available to the general public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act. 
ARTICLE XVII. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 17.1. - Definitions. 
    All words indicating the present tense are not limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the time of happening of any event or requirement to which a charter provision is applied. 
(a.)	City. The City of Utica. 
(b.)	Council/Common Council. The City Council of the City of Utica. 
(c.)	Freedom of Information Act. Act No. 442 of the Public Acts 1976, as amended, being sections 15.231 to 15.246 of the Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
(d.)	He/She. An individual, male or female. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context. 
(e.)	Law. Applicable federal law, the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Michigan, applicable common law, and this Charter. 
(f.)	Officer. The Mayor, the members of the Council, and, as herein provided, the administrative officers, deputy administrative officers, members of city boards and commissions created by and pursuant to this Charter. 
(g.)	Open Meetings Act. Act No. 267 of Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being sections 15.261 to 15.275 of the Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL 15.261 et seq.). 
(h.)	Person. An individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local government entities. 
(i.)	Printed or Printing. Reproductions by typewriting, electronic reproduction, printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, photostating, or any similar method of reproducing or recording language. 
(j.)	Publication, Publish, or Publishing. Publication of any matter provided by law, or, where there is no applicable law, in one or more newspaper[s] of general circulation within the City and which is qualified to publish legal advertisements. 
(k.)	Reconsideration. Moving that a question shall come before Common Council again as if it had not previously been considered or acted upon. 
(l.)	Written or In Writing. Handwritten script, printing, typewriting, electronic reproduction, teletype and telegraphic communications, except in reference to signatures. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of amendments to the city charter. The charter was approved by the voters on November 4, 1997. 
Referendum DateSection Section
this Charter11- 4-1992arts. I-XVIIArts. I-XVII 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Utica, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "City of Utica Code." 
State law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city commission may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the city. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Utica, Michigan. 
    City council, common council. The terms "city council," "common council," and "council" mean the common council of the City of Utica, Michigan. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Utica, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to included the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Macomb County, Michigan. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. Terms of one gender include all other genders. 
    Includes, including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation" in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person that appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
    Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 168 of 1959 is a reference to Act No. 168 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1959.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to such act as amended. 
    Real property, real estate, land, lands. The terms "real property" "real estate," "land" and "lands" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Road, street, highway and alley. The terms "road," "street" and "highway" mean the entire width subject to an easement for a public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from property. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes affirm. 
    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
    Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
State law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
State law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)	The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4, 8.4a. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)	Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the City of Utica Code is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." 
(c)	If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the City of Utica Code is hereby created to read as follows: ...." 
(d)	All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Charter reference- Repeal of ordinances,  14.3; amendment of ordinances,  14.4. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)	Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units.
(2)	Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in this Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in this Code. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)	Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)	Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ;daterule; to ;daterule;" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" includes causing, securing, aiding or abetting a violation of this Code as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both; provided, however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Code that substantially correspond to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be responsible for costs. This subsection does not apply to any municipal civil infraction. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance:
(1)	As to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)	As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense.
(f)	The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasijudicial enforcement. 
Charter reference- Penalties for ordinance violations,  14.8. 
State law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.3(k), 117.4i(k); municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l, 600.8701 et seq. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect other provisions or application of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable. 
State law reference- Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject mater, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed as follows: 
(1)	Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits.
(2)	Deannexing property or excluding property from the city.
(3)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)	Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement.
(5)	Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
(6)	Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code.
(7)	Granting any right or franchise.
(8)	Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan.
(9)	Levying or imposing any special assessment.
(10)	Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley. 
(11)	Establishing the grade of any road, street or sidewalk.
(12)	Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat.
(13)	Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code.
(14)	Granting a tax exemption for specific property.
(15)	Not codified in this Code:
a.	Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations; or
b.	Ordering, requiring or authorizing the erection or installation of traffic control signs, signals, devices or markings. 
(16)	Rezoning property or amending the zoning map or otherwise relating to zoning.
(17)	That is temporary, although general in effect.
(18)	That is special, although permanent in effect.
(19)	The purpose of which has been accomplished.
(b)	All such ordinances or portions of ordinances in subsection (a) of this section shall continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(4); administration of massage parlors,  14-104; community development, ch. 18; administration and enforcement of flood damage prevention,  34-61 et seq.; administration and enforcement of historic preservation,  38-31 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 70; administration and enforcement of traffic and vehicles,  78-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; administration and enforcement of HP, historic preservation overlay district, app. A,  1703; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, app. A,  2100 et seq.; amending the zoning ordinance, app. A., art. XXII. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Appearance tickets and municipal ordinance violation notices. 
    City officers and city employees may issue appearance tickets and municipal ordinance violation notices for violations of ordinances that they are authorized to enforce. 
(Ord. No. 117,  1, 2, 10-8-1985) 
State law reference- Appearance tickets, MCL 764.9b et seq.; municipal ordinance violation notices, MCL 600.8707(6). 
Sec. 2-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 156 has been treated by the editor as superseding former  2-2 in its entirety which pertained to the establishment of a municipal ordinance violations bureau and derived from the 2003 publication of this Code. 
Sec. 2-3. - Requests for city records; fees. 
    Whenever any person shall request any copies of the city Charter, ordinances, or parts thereof, or any papers, documents, records or other items subject to disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.), the appropriate city official or employee shall charge the fee established by resolution for the following: 
(1)	Fire reports, accident reports, and incident reports.
(2)	Zoning map and ordinance.
(3)	Copies of all other records.
(4)	Record searchings and duplication time.
(Ord. No. 108,  3, 2-12-1980) 
State law reference- Fees for public records, MCL 15.234. 
Secs. 2-4-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMON COUNCIL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Common council,  2.4 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 2-31. - Public hearings for variances, special exceptions, etc.; fee. 
    Whenever any person shall petition common council for the granting of a variance, special exception permit, interpretation or any other type of relief where the granting of such relief requires as a condition thereto the holding of a public hearing, such person shall pay at the time of filing of the petition or request a fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 108,  1, 2-12-1980) 
Sec. 2-32. - Public hearing for granting of permission or relief; fee. 
(a)	Whenever any person shall petition common council for the granting of permission, approval or any other similar type of relief where the granting of such relief does not require as a condition thereto the holding of a public hearing, such person shall pay at the time of filing of the petition or request a fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(b)	This section shall not operate to impose any fees or otherwise restrict any person from addressing common council in accordance with the Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 108,  2, 2-12-1980) 
Secs. 2-33-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Appointed officers,  4.1 et seq.; departmental employees,  4.1 et seq., 5.2. (Back)
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(6); emergency services coordinator,  22-33; deputy emergency services coordinators,  22-36; enforcement officer for flood damage prevention,  34-61. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-61-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Contracts with public servants, MCL 15.321 et seq.; act preemptive, MCL 15.328. (Back)
Sec. 2-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business entity means a business entity which includes a corporation, general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated association, real estate investment trust or other business trust. 
    Interest means any interest, either personal, financial, legal or equitable, whether or not subject to an encumbrance or a condition, which is owned or held, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly, at any time during the calendar year. The term "interest" shall also include any stock or similar security, investment contract, voting trust certificate, limited or general partnership or joint venture, business trust, or certificate of interest or participation in a profit sharing agreement or in oil, gas or other mineral royalty or lease, or any other equity interest, however evidenced, which entitled the owner or holder thereof, directly or indirectly, to receive or direct any part of the profit fund, or to exercise any part of the control over, a business entity, as well as any interest which, conditionally or unconditionally, with or without consideration, is convertible thereto and interest in a note, bond, debenture or any other evidence of a creditor interest. 
    Official and employee mean any person elected or appointed to or employed by, any public office or public body of the city. 
    Public bond means an agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the city. 
(Ord. No. 118,  2, 10-14-1986) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 2-77. - Violations of ordinance. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. The penalty or penalties imposed are not exclusive remedies under this division and any and all statutory and Charter penalties or forfeitures may also be enforced. Any person convicted under the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of misconduct. 
(Ord. No. 118,  9, 10-14-1986) 
Sec. 2-78. - Fair and equal treatment. 
    No official or employee of the city shall request, use or permit the use of any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. All officials or employees of the city shall treat all citizens of the city with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law. 
(Ord. No. 118,  3, 10-14-1986) 
Sec. 2-79. - Use of public property. 
    No official or employee of the city shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or of any other person. This section shall not be deemed to prevent any official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly supplied property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which is made available by general practice, to the public at large or which is provided, as a matter of stated public policy, for the use of officials and employees in the conduct of official business. 
(Ord. No. 118,  4, 10-14-1986) 
Sec. 2-80. - Conflict of interest; confidential information. 
    The following regulations are hereby established to avoid both actual and potential conflict between the private self-interest and the public interest of officials and employees of the city: 
(1)	Disclosure and disqualification. Whenever the performance or of his official duties shall require any official or employee or the city to deliberate and vote on any matter involving his financial or personal interest, he shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and disqualify himself from participating in the deliberations as well as in the voting. 
(2)	Representation or private persons. No official or employee of the city shall use or attempt to use his official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others, except as may be otherwise provided by law. 
(3)	Confidential information. No official or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or employee of the city, or any other person or any property or governmental affairs of the city. Whether or not it shall involve disclosure, no official or employee shall use or permit the use of any such confidential information to advance a financial or personal interest of himself or any other person. 
(Ord. No. 118,  5, 10-14-1986) 
Sec. 2-81. - Contents of financial disclosure statement. 
    Whenever a disclosure is required by this division, the following information shall be included in each financial disclosure statement: 
(1)	The identity of all persons involved in the outside interest; and
(2)	The source and amount of income derived from the outside interest that may be considered as resulting from employment, investment or gift. 
(Ord. No. 118,  6, 10-14-1986) 
Sec. 2-82. - Verification of financial disclosure statement. 
    Any person required to file a financial disclosure statement in accordance with the provisions of this division must verify, in writing, under penalty of perjury, that the information in the statement is true and complete as far as he knows. 
(Ord. No. 118,  7, 10-14-1986) 
Sec. 2-83. - Duties of city clerk under division. 
    The city clerk shall develop the forms necessary for the implementation of this division in conjunction and with the advice of the city attorney. The city clerk shall furnish written instructions explaining the duties of persons required to file under this division. The city clerk shall examine all financial statements filed pursuant to this division and report irregularities immediately to the person filing the statement and to the city attorney. Acceptance of the statement by the city clerk shall not constitute approval of such statement. The city clerk shall maintain a current list of all financial statements required to be available for public disclosure on file in his office. The city clerk shall preserve all financial statements for at least three years after the date on which they are filed. The city clerk shall make the statement required to be publicly available for inspection during regular business hours. The city clerk shall supply appropriate forms to anyone required under this division to file a financial disclosure statement. 
(Ord. No. 118,  8, 10-14-1986) 
Secs. 2-84-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CIVIL SERVICE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appointing power means every person or group of persons who, acting singly or in conjunction, as a mayor, common council or otherwise, is or are vested by law with power and authority to select, appoint, or employ any person to hold any office, place, position, or employment subject to civil service. 
    Appointment means all means of selection, promotion, appointing or employing any person to hold any office, place or position of employment subject to civil service. 
    Commission means the civil service commission created in subdivision II of this division, and the term "commissioner" means any one of the three commissioners of the civil service commission. 
    Covered employment means all regular employment by the city except those positions of employment made appointive under the Charter of the city. 
    Member means both the male and female sex. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  17; Ord. No. 51, 6-13-1961) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 2-102. - Covered employees; continuation in office. 
    For the benefit of the public service and to prevent delay, injury, or interruption therein by reason of the enactment of this division, all persons holding a covered position when this division takes effect, who shall have served in such position for a period of at least six months last past continuously, are hereby declared eligible for permanent appointment under civil service to the offices, places, positions or employments which they shall then hold, respectively, without examination or other act on their part, and not on probation; and every such person is hereby automatically adopted and inducted permanently into civil service, into such office, place, position or employment which such person then holds as completely and effectually to all intents and purposes as if such person had been permanently appointed thereto under civil service after examination and investigation. Provided, however, that any employee with less than six months' service shall be classed as probationary under this division. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  6) 
Secs. 2-103-2-120. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Civil Service Commission 

Sec. 2-121. - Civil service commission created. 
    There shall be created a civil service commission in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  1) 
Sec. 2-122. - Members; selection; terms; president. 
(a)	The civil service commission shall consist of three members, one of whom shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the common council; and he shall serve for a period of six years from the date of his appointment. The second member of the civil service commission shall be selected by the covered employees, and he shall serve for a period of four years from the date of his appointment; a majority vote of the covered employees shall be necessary to select such member. The third member of the civil service commission shall be selected by the aforesaid members of the commission and shall serve for a period of two years from the date of his appointment. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for a period of six years each; each civil service commissioner to serve until his successor is appointed and qualified by the appointing power designated in this section. The three members of the civil service commission shall together, elect one of their number to act as president of the commission, who shall serve for one year. Each year thereafter, the civil service commissioners shall elect one of their number, president, the member so elected to serve one year. The chair of the civil service commission shall be paid $35.00 per meeting with an annual city fiscal year limitation of $700.00 and the other members of the commission shall be paid $25.00 per meeting with an annual city fiscal year limitation of $500.00 common council may authorize such other expenditures or expenses necessary for the civil service commission to carry out its duties. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  2; Ord. No. 50-1,  A, B, 2-3-1953) 
Sec. 2-123. - Qualifications; eligibility for other office or position. 
    No person shall be appointed a member of the civil service commission who is not a citizen of the United States and who has not been a resident of the city for a period of one year and an elector of the county for a period of at least three years immediately preceding such appointment. No civil service commissioner shall hold any other elective office, place or position under the United States, state, or any city, county or other political subdivision thereof; nor shall any commissioner serve on any political committee or take any active part in the management of any political campaign. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  3) 
Sec. 2-124. - Vacancies; removal. 
    In event that any commissioner of the civil service commission shall cease to be a member thereof by virtue of death, removal or other cause, a new commissioner shall be appointed to fill out the unexpired term of such commissioner within ten days after such commissioner shall have ceased to be a member of the civil service commission. Such appointment shall be made by the officer or body who in the first instance appointed the commissioner who is no longer a member of the civil service commission. The mayor with the approval of the common council, shall at any time, remove any civil service commissioner for incompetency, dereliction of duty, malfeasance of office or any other good cause, which shall be stated in writing and made part of the records of the civil service commission, and a copy of the removal shall be served on such commissioner forthwith. Provided, however, that once the mayor and common council has to remove any civil service commissioner, such removal shall be temporary only and shall be in effect for a period of ten days. If at the end of such period of ten days the civil service commissioner shall fail to make, answer thereto, he shall be deemed removed, otherwise the mayor and common council shall file in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county a petition setting forth in full, the reason for such removal and praying for the confirmation by the circuit court of the action of the mayor in so removing the commissioner. A copy of the petition, in writing, shall be served upon the civil service commission so removed simultaneously with its filing in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and shall have precedence on the docket of such court and shall be heard by such court as soon as the removed commissioner shall demand. All rights hereby vested in the circuit court may be exercised by the judge thereof during a vacation. In event that no term of court is being held at the time of filing of such petition, and the judge thereof cannot be reached in the county wherein the petition was filed, such petition shall be heard at the next succeeding term of the circuit court, whether regular or special, and the commissioner so suspended shall remain suspended until a hearing is had upon the petition of the mayor. The court, or the judge thereof, in vacation, shall hear and decide upon such petition. The contestant, against whom the decision of the court or judge thereof, in vacation, shall be rendered, shall have the right of appearing in person and by counsel and presenting his defense and to petition the supreme court for a review of the decision of the circuit court, or the judge thereof, in vacation, as in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, as provided in this section, within ten days after the removal of the civil service commission, such commissioner shall immediately resume his position as a member of the civil service commission. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  4) 
Sec. 2-125. - Clerk. 
    The city clerk, under the terms of this division, shall be "ex officio," shall be clerk of the civil service commission and shall supply to the commission without extra compensation all necessary clerical and stenographic services for the work of the civil service commission. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  5) 
Sec. 2-126. - Assistance by executive officers; supplies and printing. 
    It shall be the duty of the mayor and heads of departments of the city to aid the civil service commission in all proper ways in carrying out the provisions of this division, and to allow the reasonable use of public buildings and to cause suitable and convenient rooms and accommodations to be assigned and provided, and to be furnished heated and lighted for carrying on the work and examinations of the civil service commission and in all proper ways to facilitate such use. The civil service commission may order from the proper authorities the necessary stationery, postage stamps, official seal and other articles to be supplied, and the necessary printing to be done, for its official use. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  8) 
Sec. 2-127. - Rules and regulations; records; investigations; reports. 
    The civil service commission in the city, within the terms of this division, shall: 
(1)	Prescribe, amend and enforce rules and regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this division. All rules so prepared may, from time to time, be added, amended or rescinded. 
(2)	Keep minutes of its own proceedings and records of its examinations and other official actions. All recommendations of applicants for office, received by the civil service commission or by any officer having authority to make appointments to office, shall be kept and preserved for a period of ten years, and all such records, recommendations of former employers accepted, and all written causes of removal filed with it shall subject to reasonable regulation be open to public inspection. The civil service commission shall keep a roster of the employees of the city together with a record of service military or naval experience file statements on all matters relating to the character and quality of the work done and the attitude of the individual to his work, and such other matters as may have a bearing on promotion, transfer or discharge. 
(3)	Make investigations, either sitting in a body or through a single commissioner, concerning all matters touching the enforcement and effect of the provisions of this division, and the rules and regulations prescribed thereunder concerning the action of any examiner or subordinate of the commission, or any person in the public service in respect to the execution of this division; and in the course of such investigations, each commissioner shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations, and to take testimony. 
(4)	Have power to subpoena and require the attendance on witnesses, and the production thereby of books and papers pertinent to the investigations and inquiries hereby authorized and to examine them and such public records as it shall require in relation to any matter which it has the authority to investigate. The fees of such witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as for witness before the circuit courts, and shall be paid from the appropriations for the incidental expenses of the commission. All officers in the public service, and their deputies, clerks, subordinates and employees shall attend and testify when required to do so by the civil service commission. Any disobedience to, or neglect of, any subpoena issued by the civil service commission commissioners, or any one of them, to any person shall be held in contempt of court. 
(5)	Make an annual report to the mayor showing its own action, and rules and regulations, and all exceptions thereto in force, and the practical effects thereof, and any suggestions it may approve for the more effectual accomplishments of the purpose of this division. Such reports shall be available for public inspection five days after the reports shall have been delivered to the mayor. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  9) 
Secs. 2-128-2-145. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Appointments 

Sec. 2-146. - Manner of appointments, promotions and discharges. 
    Appointments to and promotions in all covered positions in the city shall be made only according to qualifications and fitness to be ascertained by examinations, which shall be competitive, and no person shall be appointed, reinstated, promoted or discharged in any manner or by any means other than those prescribed in this division. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  7) 
Sec. 2-147. - Application for employment; form; qualifications, physical examination. 
(a)	The civil service commission shall require persons applying for admission to any examination provided for under this division or under the rules and regulations of the commission, to file in its office, within a reasonable time prior to the proposed examination, a formal application in which the applicant shall state under oath or affirmation: 
(1)	His full name, residence and post office address.
(2)	His citizenship, age and the place and date of his birth.
(3)	His business and employments and residence for at least three years previous; he must have at least an eighth grade education. 
(4)	Such other information as may reasonably be required, touching the applicant's qualifications and fitness for the public service. 
(b)	Blank forms for such applications shall be furnished by the civil service commission, without charge to all persons requesting such forms. The civil service commission may require in connection with such application such certificate of citizens, or others having knowledge of the applicant as the good of the service may require. The civil service commission may refuse to examine an applicant or after examination to certify as eligible, one who is found to lack any of the established preliminary requirements for the examination of position or employment for which he applied; or who is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors or drugs; or who may have been guilty of any crime, or infamous or notoriously disgraceful conduct; or who has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his application, in his examination, or in securing his eligibility; or who refused to comply with the rules and regulations of the commission. If any applicant feels himself aggrieved by the action of the civil service commission in refusing to examine him, or after an examination, to certify him as an eligible, as provided in this section, the commission shall, at the request of such applicant, appoint a time and a place for a public hearing; at which time such applicant may appear, by himself or counsel, or both and the commission shall then review its refusal to make such examination or certifications, and testimony shall be taken. The commission shall subpoena, at the expense of the applicant any competent witnesses requested by him. After such review, the commission shall file the testimony taken, in its records and shall again make a decision, which decision shall be final. 
(c)	No applications will be received if the person applying is less than 21 years of age or more than 51 years of age at the date of his application. Provided, however, that in event any applicant has formerly served as an employee of the city for a period of more than ten years, and has resigned at a time when there were no charges of misconduct or other misfeasance pending against such applicant within a period of two years next preceding the date of his application, then such person shall be eligible for reinstatement in the discretion of a civil service commission, even though such applicant shall be over the age of 51 years. Such applicant, providing his former term of service so justifies, may be reappointed without examination, if such person shall be reinstated he shall be the lowest in rank next above the probationers. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  10) 
Sec. 2-148. - Civil service examinations; probationary appointments; filling of positions; temporary war-emergency appointments. 
(a)	The civil service commission shall make rules and regulations providing for examinations of positions in the city under this division, for appointments, and for such other matters as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. Due notice of the contents of such rules and regulations, and of any modifications thereof shall be given, by mail, in due season, to appointing officers affected thereby, and such rules and regulations and modifications thereof shall also be printed for public distribution. All original appointments to any positions, within the terms of this division, shall be for a probationary period of six months. Provided, however, that at any time during the probationary period the appointee may be dismissed for such cause, in the manner provided in this division. If at the close of this probationary term, the conduct or capacity of the probationer has not been satisfactory to the appointing officer, the probationer shall be notified, in writing, that he will not receive permanent appointment, whereupon his employment shall cease; otherwise his retention in the service shall be equivalent to his final appointment. Provided, however, that the probationer shall be entitled to a hearing before the civil service commission as provided in section 2-172 
(b)	Every position, unless filled by reinstatement, shall be filled only in the following manner: The appointing officer shall notify the civil service commission of any vacancy in the service which he desires to fill, and shall request the certification of eligibles. The civil service commission shall forthwith certify from the eligible list, the name of the person who received the highest average at preceding examinations held under the provisions of this division within a period of two years next preceding the date of such appointment. The appointing officer shall, thereupon, with sole reference to the relative merit and fitness of the candidate, make the appointment so certified. As each subsequent vacancy occurs, precisely the same procedure shall be followed. When an appointment is made under the provisions of the section it shall be, in the first instance for the probationary period of six months as provided in this division. The term "appointing officer," as used in this division, shall be construed to mean the mayor. 
(c)	Whenever there are urgent reasons for filling a vacancy in any position in the city, and there is no list of persons eligible for appointment, the appointing officer may nominate a person to the civil service commission for a noncompetitive examination; and if such nominee shall be certified by the commission as qualified, after such noncompetitive examination, he may be appointed temporarily, to fill such vacancy until a selection and appointment can be made after a competitive examination, and in the manner prescribed in this division; but such temporary appointment shall not continue for a longer period than three months, nor shall successive temporary appointments be made to the same position, under this subsection. In the event of an emergency, due to a war in which our country is involved, the civil service commission may make temporary appointments to fill vacancies when appointments cannot be made under the provisions of this division, such appointments to be temporary and only during hostilities and six months thereafter. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  11) 
Sec. 2-149. - Content of examinations; notice. 
    All examinations for positions shall be practical in their character and shall relate to such matters, and include such inquiries, as will fairly and fully test the comparative merit and fitness of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the employment sought by them. All examinations shall be open to all applicants who have fulfilled the preliminary requirements, stated in other sections of this division. Notice of the time and place and purpose of every examination shall be given by the civil service commission by publication for two weeks preceding such examination in the official paper of the city and such notice shall be posted by the commission in a conspicuous place in the office and on the bulletin boards of the city, for two weeks before such examination. Such further notice of examinations may be given as the civil service commission shall prescribe. Provided, however, that in an examination for a promotion, no newspaper advertisement shall be required. The civil service commission shall adopt reasonable regulations for permitting the presence of representatives of the press at the examination. The civil service commission shall post, in a public place at its office, the eligible list, containing the names and grades of those who have passed examinations for positions or promotions under this division, and shall indicate thereon such appointments as may be made from such list. No question in any form of application or in any examination shall be so framed as to elicit information concerning the political or religious opinions or affiliations of any applicant; nor shall inquiries be made concerning such opinions or affiliations; and all disclosures thereof shall be discontinued. No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened, or premised by any person in the city against, or in favor of an eligible applicant or employee under this ordinance because of his political or religious opinions or affiliations. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  12) 
Sec. 2-150. - Physical examination. 
    Appointments shall be contingent upon the appointee undergoing a physical examination which shall be conducted under the supervision of a commission composed of one doctor of medicine or doctor of osteopathy for the commission by the mayor, with the consent of the common council. If the civil service commission shall certify that an applicant is free from any bodily or mental defects, deformity or diseases that might incapacitate him from the performance of the duties of the position desired, the appointment shall become final. If the civil service commission cannot so certify, the appointment shall be void. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  10(c)) 
Sec. 2-151. - Obstruction or falsification of examination and registration. 
    Any civil service commission or examiner, or, any other person, who shall willfully, by himself or in cooperation with one or more persons, defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in respect to his right of examination or registration according to this division or to any rules or regulations prescribed pursuant to this division, or who shall willfully or corruptly, falsely, mark, grade, estimate or report upon the examination or proper standing of any person examined, registered or certified, pursuant to the provisions of this division or aid in doing so, or who shall willfully or corruptly furnish to any person any special or secret information, for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects or chances of appointment of any person so examined, registered, or certified, or to be examined, registered or certified, or who shall impersonate any other person, or permit or aid in any manner any other person to impersonate him in connection with any examination or registration, or application or request to be examined or registered shall, for each offense be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  15) 
Sec. 2-152. - Wrongful appointments; other violations: penalty. 
    Whoever makes an appointment to office, or who selects a person for employment contrary to the provisions of this division or willfully refuses or neglects otherwise to comply with, or conform to, any of the provisions of this division, or violates any of such provisions, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  16) 
Secs. 2-153-2-170. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Reductions in Force or Pay and Employee Discipline 

Sec. 2-171. - Reduction of pay suspensions and discharges. 
    No person shall be reduced in pay or position, laid off, suspended, discharged or otherwise discriminated against by any appointing officer for religious or political reasons or affiliations. In all cases of reductions, layoff or suspension of an employee or subordinate, whether appointed for a definite term or otherwise, the appointing authority shall furnish such employees or subordinates with a copy of reasons for layoff, reduction, or suspension and his reasons for the layoff, reduction, or suspension, and give such employee or subordinate a reasonable time in which to mark and file an explanation. Such order together with the explanation, if any, of the subordinate shall be filed with the commission. Provided, however, that the employee or subordinate shall be entitled to a hearing before the civil service commission as provided in section 2-172. Nothing contained in this division shall limit the power of an appointing officer to suspend without pay, for purposes of discipline, an employee or subordinate for a reasonable period, not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that successive suspensions shall not be allowed, and after such suspension, employees shall be entitled to a hearing as provided for in this section and in section 2-172; and provided, further, that the provisions of this division shall not apply to temporary and exceptional appointments made under the authority of this division. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  13) 
Sec. 2-172. - Tenure dependent on good behavior, efficient service; right to public hearing before discharge, suspension, loss of privileges; burden of proof; appeal; right to counsel; suspension for sake of economy. 
(a)	The tenure of every one holding an office, place, position, or employment under the provisions of this division shall be only during good behavior and efficient service; and any such person may be removed or discharged, suspended without pay, deprived of vacation privileges or other special privileges, by the civil service commission, for incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment to the public, neglect of duty, violation of the provisions or the rules of the commission, or any other failure of good behavior, or any other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for membership in any organization fostering the overthrow of the government. Provided, however, no employee within the terms of this division shall be removed, discharged, reduced in rank or pay, suspended or otherwise punished except for cause, and in no event until he shall have been furnished with a written statement of the charges and the reasons for such actions and all charges shall be void unless filed within 90 days of the date of the violation, except in the case of a probationer, whose violations may accumulate for the probationary period. In every case of charges having been made, a copy of the statement of reasons therefor and answer thereto, if the person sought to be removed desires to file such written answer, shall be furnished to the civil service commission and entered upon its records. Such answer shall be filed by the member within five days after service of the charges upon him. If the person sought to be removed or reduced shall demand it, the civil service commission shall grant him a public hearing, which hearing shall be held within a period of ten days from the filing of the charges in writing and a written answer thereto. Pending the period between the making of the charges as a basis for removal and the decision thereon by the civil service commission, the member shall remain in office. At such hearing, the burden shall be upon the removing officer to justify his action. In the event that the removing officer fails to make charges to the satisfaction of an employee, such member may present the information to the civil service commission. In event that the civil service commission fails to justify the action of the removing officer, then the person sought to be removed shall be reinstated with full pay for the entire period during which he may have been prevented from performing his usual employment, and no charges shall be officially recorded against his record. A written record of all testimony taken at such hearing shall be kept and preserved by the civil service commission, which record shall be sealed and not be available for public inspection, in event that no appeal shall be taken from the action of the commission. In event that the civil service commission shall sustain the action of the removing officer, the person removed shall have an immediate right of appeal to the circuit court of the county. Such appeal shall be taken within 90 days from the entry from the civil service commission of its final order; upon such an appeal being taken and docketed with the clerk of the circuit court of the county, the circuit court shall proceed to hear the appeal upon the original record taken and no additional proof shall be permitted to be introduced. The circuit court's decision shall be final, saving the employee, however, the right to petition the supreme court for a review of the court's decision. The removing officer and the person sought to be removed shall at all times, both before the civil service commission and upon appeal, be given the right to employ counsel to represent either of them before the civil service commission and upon appeal, should the person removed elect to appeal to the circuit court, as provided in this section. 
(b)	If for any reason of economy it shall be deemed necessary by the city to reduce the number of employees, then the city shall follow the following procedure: Such removals shall be accomplished by suspending in numerical order commencing with the last man appointed, all recent appointees until such reductions shall have been accomplished. Provided further, however, that in event the employees shall again be increased in numbers to the strength existing prior to such reductions of members the employees suspended last under the terms of this division shall be first reinstated before any new appointments shall be made. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1953,  14) 
Secs. 2-173-2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Budgets and appropriation,  6.1 et seq. (Back)
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(3); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(5); taxation, ch. 70. (Back)
State Law reference- Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq. (Back)
Secs. 2-201-2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Boards authorized,  4.13; local officers compensation commission,  5.2; board of review,  8.10 et seq. (Back)
Cross reference- Construction board of appeals,  10-32; downtown development authority,  18-31 et seq.; board of directors,  18-35; historic district commission,  38-51 et seq.; cable commission,  74-34. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-231-2-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, app. A,  2300 et seq. (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 2-246. - Generally. 
    That a city planning commission be appointed with the powers and duties as provided for in Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.). The city planning commission shall consist of nine members as provided for in such act. 
(Ord. No. 56, 2-13-1962) 
State law reference- Planning commission authorized, MCL 125.32; planning commission membership, MCL 125.33. 
Secs. 2-247-2-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-266. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created the senior citizens advisory commission, an advisory commission of the city. The senior citizens advisory commission shall consist of three members. 
(Ord. No. 122,  1, 3-14-1989) 
Sec. 2-267. - Appointment and terms. 
    Members of the senior citizens advisory commission shall serve for three years, provided that the first members shall be appointed to staggered terms so as to provide for the rotational expiration of terms. Members of the senior citizens advisory commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 122,  2, 3-14-1989) 
Sec. 2-268. - Duties. 
    The commission shall study and recommend such programs for senior citizens as may in the judgment of the commission be necessary or helpful to senior citizens. 
(Ord. No. 122,  3, 3-14-1989) 
Sec. 2-269. - Bylaws. 
    The senior citizens advisory commission shall adopt, subject to approval by common council, bylaws to carry out the objectives of this division. 
(Ord. No. 122,  4, 3-14-1989) 
Sec. 2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 2-271. - Establishment, location and personnel of municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)	Establishment. The City of Utica Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau is established pursuant to section 8396 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8396) for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for ordinance violations designated as municipal civil infractions, and to collect and retain civil fines/costs for such violations as prescribed in this article. 
(b)	Location. The bureau shall be located at the city's treasurer's office or such other location as may be designated by the city council. 
(c)	Personnel. All personnel of the bureau shall be city employees. The city council may by resolution designate a bureau clerk with the duties prescribed in this division and as otherwise may be delegated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 156,  1, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-272. - Bureau authority. 
    The municipal ordinance violations bureau shall only have authority to accept admissions of responsibility (without explanation) for municipal civil infractions for which a municipal ordinance violations notice (as compared to a citation) has been issued and served, and to collect and retain the scheduled civil fines/costs for such violations specified pursuant to this division or other applicable ordinance. The bureau shall not accept payment of fines/costs from any person who denies having committed the alleged violation or who admits responsibility only with explanation. The bureau shall not determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 156,  2, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-273. - Ordinance violation notice requirements. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as provided by law. A municipal ordinance violation notice shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1)	The violation;
(2)	The time within which the person must contact the municipal ordinance violations bureau for purposes of admitting or denying responsibility for the violation; 
(3)	The amount of the scheduled fines/costs for the violation;
(4)	The methods by which the violations may be admitted or denied;
(5)	The consequences of failing to pay the required fines/costs or contact the bureau within the required time; 
(6)	The address and telephone number of the bureau; and
(7)	The days and hours that the bureau is open.
(Ord. No. 156,  3, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-274. - Denial of responsibility. 
    Where a person fails to admit responsibility (without explanation) for a violation within the jurisdiction of the municipal ordinance violations bureau and pay the required civil fines/costs within the designated time period, the bureau clerk or other designated city employee shall advise the complainant to issue and file a municipal civil infraction citation for such violation with the court having jurisdiction of the matter. The citation filed with the court shall consist of a sworn complaint containing, at a minimum, the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. A copy of the citation may be served personally or by mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation shall thereafter be processed in the manner required by law. 
(Ord. No. 156,  4, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-275. - Records and accounting. 
    The municipal ordinance violations bureau clerk or other designated city official/employee shall retain a copy of all municipal ordinance violation notices, and make a report available to the city council yearly concerning the number of admissions and denials of responsibility for ordinance violations within the jurisdiction of the bureau and the amount of fines/costs collected with respect to such violations. The civil fines/costs collected shall be delivered to the city treasurer and shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 156,  5, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-276. - Availability of other enforcement options. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to require the city to initiate its municipal civil infraction ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of an ordinance violation notice. As to each ordinance violation designated as a municipal civil infraction, the city may at its sole discretion proceed directly with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation or take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 156,  6, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-277. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized city official means a police officer, fire department officer or fire inspector, building inspector, code enforcement officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this division or any other city ordinance to issue ordinance violations or municipal civil infraction notices or citations. 
    Municipal civil infraction means an act or omission that is prohibited by any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under the ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including without limitations fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.). 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official in the format provided in section 2-279, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction notice means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official in the format provide in section 2-273, directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance bureau regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal violation by the person cited. 
    Owner, as applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, land contract vendee, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person, includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs, congregations and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, however operating or named and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
    Property, includes real and personal property. 
    Repeat offense, is a second (or subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this [Code or an] ordinance committed by a person within a one-week period after which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
(Ord. No. 156,  7, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-278. - Municipal civil infraction action. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court. 
(Ord. No. 156,  8, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-279. - Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service. 
    A municipal civil infraction citation shall be issued and served by an authorized city official as follows: 
(1)	The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)	The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court.
(3)	Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. 
(4)	The first copy of the citation (the original citation) shall be filed with the district court. The second copy of the citation shall be retained by the city. The third copy (and any duplicate copies as needed) shall be issued to the alleged violator. 
(5)	A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief." 
(6)	An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and any required copies of a citation. 
(7)	An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
a.	Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.	Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.	Except as provided by subsection (8)b. of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator or serve the violator by certified mail at the violator's last known address as indicated by city records. 
b.	If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use of occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting a copy on the land or attaching a copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address as indicated by the city's property tax records. 
(Ord. No. 156,  9, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-280. - Municipal civil infraction citations; contents 
(a)	A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)	Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, with explanation, by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)	Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following:
a.	Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city; or 
b.	Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)	The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1)	That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility, with explanation, in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)	That if the alleged violator desired to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)	That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)	That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)	That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)	The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure to the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 156,  10, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-281. - Sanctions for municipal civil infractions; repeat offenses; continuing violations; injunctive relief. 
(a)	The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this ordinance or the ordinance violated, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.) and the exercise of equitable jurisdiction and authority as authorized by Act 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8302 (4)) and other applicable laws. The court may order that the city be paid directly for unpaid civil fines/costs for any municipal civil infraction violations and costs damages and expenses incurred by the city to enforce city ordinances giving rise to the civil infraction citation. 
(b)	Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeat offenses by a person of any requirement or provision of any ordinance. 
(c)	Each day on which any violation designated as a municipal civil infraction continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to sanctions as a separate violation. 
(d)	A violation of any regulation contained in this ordinance is determined to be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents, property owners and other persons within the city, and is deemed a public nuisance per se. Any violation of this ordinance shall constitute a basis for the district court, pursuant to Act 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8302 (4)), to order injunctive relief against the violator or landowner to restrain and prohibit the violator or owner from continuing the violation, in addition to any other relief or penalty provided by this article or allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 156,  11, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-282. - Designation of certain ordinance/code provisions as municipal civil infraction. 
(a)	The ordinances of the City of Utica and the City of Utica Code are hereby amended to reclassify as municipal civil infractions certain ordinance and code provisions that provide for a criminal misdemeanor penalty for violations 
(b)	The following Utica code provisions and applicable ordinances are designated as municipal civil infractions (ordinances/statutes cited include any amendments): 
Article/Sections
Utica CodeCode DesignationReference Ord. #/State LawArt/10/1-6Buildings/RegulationsOrd. 29, 148, 149, 40, 45Art 10/31-32Construction CodeMCL 125.1501Art 10/61-64Swimming Pools59Art 14/31-46Business RegistrationOrd. 136Art 14/71-74Landlord LicensesOrd. 75Art 14/101-239Massage ParlorsOrd. 120Art 14/271-306Mechanical/Amusement DevisesOrd. 100 Art 26/1-2Environment/Generally5, 85Art 26/21-34Blight74 Art 30/31-39Fire Safety/Generally147,151Art 30/55-57Fire Prevention Code147, 151Art 30/81-84Open Burning123, 104, MCL 399.20 et seqArt 38/1-83Historic Preservation107Art 54/31-40Solid Waste12Art 62/1Streets/Sidewalks/Public Places25Art 62/31-42Sidewalk Construction17Art 62/71-76Sidewalk Maintenance18 Art 86/1Vegetation Restrictions 30, 112 Entire Appendix AZoning 129 
(c)	Those Utica Code provisions and ordinances not specified in this article shall be punishable as provided in the applicable Code provision and/or ordinance. 
(d)	This article shall not effect any proceedings instituted prior to the effective date of this article and any such prior proceedings shall be enforced as originally provided and any applicable sanction for a violation is preserved. 
(e)	The civil fines for a municipal civil infraction violation notice, as provided in section 2-273, payable to the city municipal ordinance violation bureau, as provided in section 2-271 and 2-272 shall be as follows: 
(1)	$100.00 for said violation.
(2)	$250.00 for the first repeat first offense.
(3)	$500.00 for a second or subsequent repeat offense.
(f)	The civil fines for a municipal civil infraction citation directing the violator to appear in court, per section 2-278, shall be as follows: 
(1)	Schedule:
a.	$100.00 for each violation, unless a higher amount was payable through the city municipal ordinance violations bureau, in which case the higher amount is payable. 
b.	$250.00 for the first repeat first offense.
c.	$500.00 for the second or subsequent repeat offense.
(2)	The court in its discretion may waive all or a portion of any civil fine for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 156,  12, 5-8-2007) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26; dead animals,  26-2; hunting wild game or birds,  46-141; animals in parks,  50-42. (Back)
State Law reference- Crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; authority to adopt animal control ordinances, MCL 287.290. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this chapter, violations of this chapter are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 6-2. - Possession of certain animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the city any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, reptile, or insects, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities, including but not limited to: 
(1)	All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes.
(2)	Apes; Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus). 
(3)	Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus).
(4)	Bears (Ursidae).
(5)	Bison (Bison).
(6)	Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
(7)	Crocodilians (Crocodilia), 30 inches in length or more.
(8)	Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more.
(9)	Coyotes (Ganis latrans).
(10)	Deer (Cervidae); includes all members of the deer family, for example, white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose. 
(11)	Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta).
(12)	Game cocks and other fighting birds.
(13)	Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae).
(14)	Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
(15)	Jaguars (Panthera onca).
(16)	Leopards (Panthera pardus).
(17)	Lions (Panthera leo).
(18)	Lynxes (Lynx).
(19)	Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae).
(20)	Ostriches (Struthio).
(21)	Piranha fish (Characidae).
(22)	Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers.
(23)	Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae).
(24)	Sharks (class Chondrichthyes).
(25)	Snow leopards (Panthera uncia).
(26)	Swine (Suidae).
(27)	Tigers (Panthera tigris).
(28)	Wolves (Canis lupus).
(29)	Bees (kept or housed as a colony or in a beehive).
(30)	Poisonous spiders.
(Ord. No. 104,  1, 6-12-1979) 
Secs. 6-3-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287.261 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 6-31. - Licensing. 
    No person shall keep, possess, harbor or have the care or charge of any dog, male or female, of the age of four months or over, within the city, unless such dog shall wear a collar to which is attached the license tag provided for by the Dog Law of 1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq.), provided this article shall not apply to any person transporting a dog through the city if such dog is taxed at the residence of the owner. Every person in possession of any dog or who shall permit any dog to remain on or about his premises for a period of five days or more shall, for the purposes of this article be deemed to be the owner of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 37,  1, 9-8-1959) 
State law reference- License tags, MCL 287.265 et seq. 
Sec. 6-32. - Running at large. 
(a)	No dog shall be allowed to run at large in the city unless such dog is under reasonable control and properly leashed and restrained by the person that accompanies such dog. A dog shall be deemed not to be under reasonable control when such dog commits damage to the person or property of the one other than the owner, except in defense of the owner, his family or property. Running at large is being outside of the fenced (or other means of restraint) area of the owner's property or motor vehicle. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a female dog to permit such female dog to go beyond the premises of such owner when she is in heat, unless such female dog is properly leashed. 
(c)	The common council, on receipt of notice from the city health officer or the county health department that dogs should be prohibited from running at large because of the possible presence of rabies in the city or adjacent thereto, shall order the clerk to publish a notice in the official newspaper entitled "Notice of Quarantine" providing for a period during which all dogs within the corporate limits of the city shall be confined to the premises of the owner. 
(d)	Twenty-four hours after the publication of such "Notice of Quarantine," it shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to shoot or otherwise kill or destroy all dogs found running at large within the limits of the city during the period named in such quarantine notice, and the common council shall make provisions for the sale, burying, carrying away, or other disposal of the bodies of all dogs that have been so destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 37,  2, 9-8-1959; Ord. No. 37B, 11-9-2005) 
Sec. 6-33. - Noise disturbances. 
    No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog, which by loud or frequent barking, yelping or howling shall cause annoyance to any of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 37,  3(A), 9-8-1959) 
Sec. 6-34. - Destruction of property. 
    No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, which by destruction of property, trespassing on others property or by attacking persons becomes a nuisance in the neighborhood in which such dog is kept. 
(Ord. No. 37,  3(B), 9-8-1959) 
Sec. 6-35. - Fierce or vicious dogs; dogs afflicted with rabies. 
    No person shall own or harbor a fierce or vicious dog or a dog which has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies. 
(Ord. No. 37,  3(C), 9-8-1959) 
State law reference- Dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq. 
Sec. 6-36. - Investigation of rabies. 
(a)	Any person who shall have possession of a dog which has contracted rabies or which has been subjected to rabies, or which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person, upon demand of any member of the police department, shall surrender up such dog to the police department to be held for observation, or confine such dog to the owner's premises at the discretion of such officer. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing the symptoms of rabies to immediately notify the police department that such person has such a dog in his possession. 
(Ord. No. 37,  4, 9-8-1959) 
Sec. 6-37. - Removal of tags. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any license tag, immunization tag or the collar bearing the license or immunization tag from any dog without the consent of the owner thereof, who shall be deemed responsible for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 37,  5, 9-8-1959) 
Sec. 6-38. - Kennels prohibited. 
    No person shall keep, operate or maintain a dog kennel within the limits of the city. The term "dog kennel," as used in this article, means any establishment, wherein or whereon, more than one dog is owned, kept, or harbored, for the purpose of breeding, sale, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 37,  6, 9-8-1959) 
Sec. 6-39. - Containment of dog manure and offal. 
(a)	Every person lawfully keeping or harboring any dog shall keep or cause to be kept all manure or offal therefrom, which shall be deposited by or which accumulated from such dog, securely and closely confined to or buried upon his premises and in such manner as will prevent it from being scattered from such place of deposit into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or gutter of the city, and shall so cover and care for it as to prevent any malodorous or offensive condition to exist and to prevent any nuisance to arise therefrom. 
(b)	A person having custody of any dog shall not permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, such dog to commit any nuisance by defecating or urinating upon the sidewalk of any public highway or upon any building, fence or wall immediately abutting on a public sidewalk, or without the consent of the owner or person in lawful occupation thereof, any lawn, yard, or any other private property whatever, which is either improved or occupied. 
(c)	A person in possession or control of any dog shall immediately package and remove any fecal droppings of the dog deposited during this time of that person's possession or control. 
(d)	The owner of any dog, upon being notified, shall immediately package and remove any fecal droppings of the dog deposited upon any private or public property. The person listed in the dog's license application as owner shall be presumed to be the lawful owner of that dog. If no dog permit exists, the occupant or occupants of the property where the dog is kept or maintained shall be presumed to be the owner of said dog. 
(Ord. No. 37, 1-13-2004) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; fire prevention code,  30-56 et seq.; floods, ch. 34; historic preservation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; building sewers and connections,  82-186 et seq.; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, app. A; zoning districts and maps, app. A,  300 et seq.; building regulations, app. A,  1401; building appearance, structure completion, and personal construction authority, app. A,  1402; nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconfoming structures, and nonconforming uses of structures and premises, app. A,  1403. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this chapter, violations of this chapter are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 10-2. - Property maintenance code. 
    The 2000 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code as promulgated by the International Code Council, which code as previously been made a public record of the city, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Mo. of 9-9-1998) 
State law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.4(k). 
Sec. 10-3. - Registration of persons in electrical industry. 
    No person shall do any act in the city for which a license is required under the Electrical Administrative Act (MCL 338.881 et seq.) without registering with the city clerk. No such registration shall be granted unless the person holds the appropriate license under such act. 
(Ord. No. 148,  6, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 10-4. - Changing of property grades. 
(a)	The general objective of this section is to ensure land improvements, which provide for: 
(1)	An appropriate setting for buildings;
(2)	Immediate diversion of water away from buildings and disposal of water from lot;
(3)	Suitable access from abutting streets to dwellings;
(4)	Proper grade and location with regard to existing and future public utilities and structures; 
(5)	Minimum nuisance and possible danger to the health and welfare of the city residents from unregulated fill operations. 
(b)	No person shall change, modify, create, or establish the grade of any property or building line grade of any property within the city without first obtaining a permit as required in this section. 
(c)	Prior to the issuance of any building permit or of any permit as is required in this section, each applicant shall submit to the city clerk: 
(1)	A satisfactory plot plan, in duplicate, indicating and describing the proposed work.
(2)	The plot plan shall be on a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet or 1/16-inch equals one foot and shall be placed on an 81/2-inch by 11-inch sheet or other standard size sheet. 
(3)	The plot plan shall provide the following information: lot and block number; street number, if any; dimension of front, rear and side yards; location of walks, driveways, and approaches; and sufficient information to establish the elevation of the proposed buildings and lot grading relative to existing sidewalks and streets, neighboring lots, and other pertinent structures, and ground elevations. 
(d)	Building elevations and lot grading shall be such that the following requirements are adhered to: 
(1)	The grading of the lot shall be such that surface runoff is away from buildings and towards swales, ditches or drainage structures. Grades shall provide for safe and convenient access and maintenance of the buildings and lot. Minimum grade for: 
a.	Concrete or other impervious surface shall be 1/16-inch per foot (one-half percent);
b.	Pervious surface shall be one-quarter inch per foot (two percent).
(2)	Where finished grades indicate a substantial amount of drainage across adjoining lots, drainage swale or enclosed drain of sufficient size, depth and slope shall be provided on or near the lot line to intercept this drainage. 
(3)	Lots that lie within a floodplain shall be filled to a sufficient elevation to conform to the adjacent area which is not subject to flooding. In no case will the filling of a lot be permitted if the floodplain is so restricted as to cause possible flooding or backing up of the stream. 
(e)	No landfill, involving more than 50 yards of material, shall be permitted until the property owner obtains a landfill permit under this section. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit to the city clerk, in writing, an application containing the following information: 
(1)	The type of fill and the location and extent of the filling operation.
(2)	If the fill operation will result in blocking existing drainage or damage to existing structures, the applicant shall submit information to the city indicating a satisfactory means of providing for existing drainage or protecting existing structures. 
(3)	No fill shall be such that it will in any way endanger the health and welfare of adjacent properties or residents, nor shall filling of land within the floodplain of a stream be permitted if the filling results in possible flooding or backing up of a stream. 
(4)	No fill shall contain putrescible material, nor oils, paints, sludges, thinners or other similar materials and the use of such materials for fill will be sufficient grounds for cancelling permit. All materials used in any fill shall be satisfactorily leveled as the work progresses and on completion of the filling operations, the land shall be left in a reasonably level condition. 
(f)	In the case of landfill exceeding 50 cubic yards, no permit shall be granted until not less than two weeks' notice has been given to all adjacent landowners and a hearing held before the common council on the advisability of such fill. 
(g)	The city clerk shall collect a permit fee in the amount established by a resolution prior to the issuance of a permit under this section. 
(h)	Violations of this section are a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 40,  1-7, 9-13-1960) 
Sec. 10-5. - Driveways from parking lots. 
(a)	Any person conducting a business or maintaining a parking lot on any premises in the city, where vehicular access to such premises is granted, shall provide and maintain a paved driveway between the paved portion of the street and the sidewalk abutting such premises. 
(b)	Any person conducting a business on any premises in the city and permitting the parking of motor vehicles on such premises shall provide and maintain a paved driveway between the paved portion of the street and such parking area. Such parking area shall be paved. 
(c)	The paving required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be constructed of either an asphaltic mix or concrete and shall be constructed to the grades established or approved by the city engineer and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(d)	Before commencing the construction of any such driveway or parking area, a permit therefor shall be obtained from the city clerk. Prior to the issuance of such permit, each applicant shall submit to the city clerk: 
(1)	A satisfactory plot plan in duplicate indicating and describing the proposed work.
(2)	The plot plan shall provide the following information: lot and block number, street number, if any, dimensions of front, rear, and side yards, location of driveway or parking area, and proposed construction area and material to be used; elevation of land, if known, and provisions for drainage and shall show the location of any public utility facilities. 
(e)	The city clerk shall collect a permit fee as established by resolution for the issuance of any permit issued under this section, provided that if such application is made in connection with a building permit, the permit required in this section shall be issued without charge. When required by the city clerk, an applicant for a construction permit under this section shall place with the city clerk a deposit as established by resolution against the cost to the city of any engineering services performed by the city engineer to establish building grades and other pertinent grade lines. When the exact cost of the engineering services has been determined, the applicant shall pay the city the balance due or receive a refund prior to receiving the permit under this section. 
(Ord. No. 45,  1-5, 10-11-1960) 
Sec. 10-6. - Construction debris containment and devices. 
(a)	For the purpose of construction and application of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Construction debris means miscellaneous materials commonly discarded during the construction, renovation, or destruction of a dwelling or structure, including but not limited to shingles, scrap wood, packaging materials, nails, tarps, insulation, drywall, paint and stain containers, roofing material, pipes, wires, hoses, tubing, electrical supplies, trash, paper products and junk. 
    Construction site means each and every lot upon which a building, dwelling or structure is being or is intended to be constructed. 
    Containment device means a mobile container designed for containment and or disposal of construction debris, rubbish, trash, junk, and scrap materials. The containment device shall be a minimum of eight feet in length, eight feet in width and four feet deep. The containment device shall be constructed in such a manner as to effectively contain construction debris and shall have an attached lid capable of preventing the escape of debris. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied, by a building and its accessory building, or by group dwellings and their accessory buildings, together with any open spaces. 
(b)	A construction debris containment device shall be required for each and every construction site for the purpose of disposing of all construction debris. The construction debris containment device shall remain on the construction site until such time as the city has issued a certificate of occupancy. The construction debris containment device shall be regularly emptied and continually maintained in a neat and orderly condition. The construction debris containment device shall be located 15 feet from all buildings. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a construction site without providing, at the construction site, a construction debris containment device. It shall be unlawful to maintain a construction debris containment device, which is not regularly emptied and continually maintained in a neat and orderly condition. It shall be unlawful for any person to use land within the city for the dumping or disposal of scrap, iron, junk, garbage, rubbish, or other construction debris. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize a construction debris containment device for burning purposes. 
(d)	The builder or contractor, as well as the landowner shall be responsible for properly disposing of debris, etc., and preventing the accumulation of debris, etc., prohibited by this section. 
(e)	The building inspector, upon determining there has been a violation of this section, may order the stoppage of work, withholding of inspections and/or staying or revocation of the building permit until the violation ceases. 
(Ord. No. 149,  4-7, 9-8-1959) 
Secs. 10-7-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State construction code, MCL 125.1501 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 10-31. - Enforcement. 
    The city enforces the state construction code. 
Sec. 10-32. - Construction board of appeals. 
    There is hereby established a construction board of appeals consisting of three members. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions,  2-231 et seq. 
State law reference- Construction board of appeals, MCL 125.1514. 
Secs. 10-33-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 10-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonportable pool means any pool in or above ground measuring more than 30 square feet in its surface, and having a depth in excess of 11/2 feet. 
    Swimming pool means any artificially constructed, nonportable pool, to be used in connection with a single-family residence by the occupant thereof and his guests. A swimming pool is hereby declared to be a structure for accessory use within the meaning of the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 59,  2, 7-5-1961; Ord. No. 59-1,  1, 4-11-1972) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 10-62. - Illuminating lights. 
    Illuminating lights shall be so created, installed and shielded so as to eliminate direct rays and minimize reflected rays upon adjoining premises. 
(Ord. No. 59,  4(d), 7-5-1961) 
Sec. 10-63. - Connection of drainline. 
    The drainline for the pool may be connected to the sewer and be large enough to empty a pool in eight hours or less. Wastewater must be pumped into the sewer under pressure and provisions must be made to prevent sewage backflow. 
(Ord. No. 59,  4(h), 7-5-1961) 
Sec. 10-64. - Draining during periods of excessive rainfall. 
    No swimming pool shall be drained during periods of excessive rainfall so as to overload the city's sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 59,  4(m), 7-5-1961) 
Secs. 10-65-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 10-91. - Adoption of county design criteria and guidelines. 
    The City of Utica shall adopt by reference the Design Criteria and Guidelines for Stormwater Management as adopted by the Macomb County Public Works Commissioner's Office in November 2006. 
(Ord. No. 164,  1, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 10-92. - Violations. 
(a)	Civil infractions. A violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.00, plus and costs, damages, and expenses. 
(b)	If stormwater management has not been adequately maintained, the city may notify the applicant(s) in writing and require the necessary maintenance or repairs within 90 days of the written notice. Should the applicant fail to comply with the provisions of this article, the city may, after giving reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done and the applicant shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all such costs incurred. if said costs are not paid by the applicant, the city may pursue the collection of same through appropriate court actions or as a lien on the property. 
(c)	When emergency measures are necessary to mediate a nuisance, to protect public safety, health, welfare, or to prevent loss of life, injury or damage to property, the city is authorized to, but not required to, carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a violation of this article and shall promptly reimburse the city for all such costs. If said costs are not paid by the applicant, the city may pursue the collection of same through appropriate court actions or as a lien on the property. 
(Ord. No. 164,  1, 5-20-2013) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Community development, ch. 18; emergency services and emergency management, ch. 22; taxation, ch. 70; telecommunications, ch. 74; franchise,  74-56 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; home occupations, app. A,  1415; bed and breakfast operations, app. A,  1416; O-1, office districts, app. A,  700 et seq.; C-1, central business district, app. A,  800 et seq.; C-2, general business district, app. A,  900 et seq.; MXD, mixed-use district, app. A,  1000 et seq.; industrial district, app. A,  1100 et seq.; P-1, vehicular parking district, app. A,  1200 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-31. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Business means any trade, occupation, work, commerce or other activity owned or operated for profit by any person within the city, except the term "business" shall not include home occupations, as defined in section 201 and section 1415 of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 136,  3.01, 3-12-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Purpose. 
    All businesses shall be registered annually within the city: 
(1)	To assist the city with information to help provide:
a.	More adequate police and fire protection;
b.	More equal and equitable real and personal property taxation;
c.	Better efficiency and economy in furnishing public utility services; and
d.	More comprehensive and informed planning and zoning uses of land and structures.
(2)	To establish a registry of businesses operating within the city for the general information of the public and for the promotion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 136,  2.01, 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-33. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 14-34. - Requirement established. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business within the city without having first obtained a certificate of registration. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(A), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-35. - Registration form. 
    In order to register, the owner or operator of a business shall submit registration information on a form prepared by the city clerk. The information on the registration form shall be true and accurate. The business and the person signing the form shall be responsible for the accuracy of the information. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(B), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-36. - Fees. 
    The owner or operator of a business in operation and legally existing at the time of the adoption of this article shall not be charged a fee for registration. An applicant for a certificate of registration issued for a new business or change of business ownership shall be charged a fee as provided by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(C), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-37. - Illegal businesses. 
    No certificate of registration shall be issued by the city clerk where upon written recommendation of any city department or official, the existing or proposed business would be illegal under any law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(D), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-38. - Issuance of a certificate. 
    Upon receipt of the form and upon determining compliance with the requirements of this article, the city clerk shall issue a certificate of registration for the current year. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(E), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-39. - Duration. 
    The certificate of registration shall be effective until the business ceases to operate or a change of ownership or use occurs. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(F), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-40. - Renewals. 
    Every owner or operator of a business shall apply for a renewal certificate if the use or ownership is partially changed. There is no fee for a partial change. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(G), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-41. - Issuance of a new certificate. 
    If there is a necessity for the issuance of a new certificate due to a name change, or other reason, the city clerk shall issue a new certificate of registration. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(H), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-42. - Inspection. 
    No certificate of registration for a new business shall be issued by the city until the place of business has been inspected. The city shall have the right of inspection of the premises to ensure compliance with this chapter, either before or after the issuance of a certificate of registration. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(J), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-43. - Transfer. 
    No certificate of registration may be transferred by the holder to any other person. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(I), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-44. - Display. 
    The certificate of registration shall be prominently displayed in the place of business. 
(Ord. No. 136,  4.01(K), 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-45. - Discontinuance or termination of business. 
    Any business covered by this article which is discontinued or terminated shall notify the city clerk to such effect personally or by certified mail, and when the discontinuance or termination is voluntary, such notice shall precede the discontinuance or termination by 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 136,  6.01, 3-12-1996) 
Sec. 14-46. - Revocation and/or suspension. 
(a)	Noncompliance. In the event of any noncompliance with the provisions of this article after a certificate of registration has been issued, the certificate may be revoked or suspended by order of the city until the noncompliance has been corrected as determined by the city. 
(b)	Written notice. Upon any revocation and/or suspension, the city shall notify in writing the business of the action taken and shall specify the nature of any violations. 
(c)	Hearing. Any business aggrieved of the action taken by the city may request a hearing before the mayor, or the mayor's designate, to be held within 21 calendar days of the request. 
(d)	Final determination. The common council shall determine whether or not a violation has occurred, and if so, shall determine whether the revocation and/or suspension should be continued and, if so, under what conditions. 
(Ord. No. 136,  5.01, 3-12-1996) 
Secs. 14-47-14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDLORDS 

Sec. 14-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business of leasing means the actual leasing or offering to let or to hire by a person, owner, landlord, firm or corporation, or any combination thereof, of property for residential use for any period of time in excess of six months successively or for a period of time amounting to six months within a period of one year. 
    Landlord means any person, owner, landlord, individual, firm, or corporation, or any combination thereof, engaged in the business of leasing an apartment building, multiple dwellings, rooming house, dwelling or dwellings to another person for residential use. 
    Year means July 1 to June 30 for inspection period. 
(Ord. No. 75,  1, 7-9-1968; Ord. of 3-10-2008) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-72. - Violations declared a civil infraction. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a civil infraction enforced pursuant the City of Utica Civil Infraction Ordinance [Chapter 2, Article VI of this Code]. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 14-73. - License procedure; duration, license fee and late penalties. 
(a)	Every person, individual, firm, owner, corporation or landlord, or combination thereof, engaged in the business of leasing or renting any apartment building, multiple unit, multiple dwelling, dwelling or dwelling units is hereby required to make application to and receive an annual license from the city clerk before engaging in the business of leasing. The application shall be accompanied by the applicable license fee payable to the city. The applicant shall state his name and address and identify the number of tenants occupying the property. The city clerk shall issue the license if: 
(1)	The applicant's property is not in violation of any ordinance of the city; and
(2)	The applicant provides a full legal description of all parcels of property being rented.
(3)	The building department has inspected the premises and has certified that the property is in compliance with all city codes. 
(b)	A fee in the amount established by this ordinance or by resolution shall be assessed and paid at the time the application is submitted. 
(c)	The city clerk is hereby empowered to revoke the license if it is discovered that the applicant either: 
(1)	Has misrepresented himself or the state of his property;
(2)	Has refused access to premises for inspection as required in this article; or
(3)	The rental property is or becomes violative of any of the ordinances of the city and/or statutes of the state; or 
(4)	Has not paid an inspection fee by September 1 of the year in which an inspection is scheduled or within 45 days of an inspection, whichever is sooner. 
(d)	The city clerk shall cause notice of the revocation of the license to be served on the licensee either personally or by United States Mail, and the reason or reasons therefor, and such licensee may within ten days of the date of such notice, petition the common council of the city for restoration of license under such conditions as the common council may deem necessary for the correction of conditions set forth in revocation notice. 
(Ord. No. 75,  2, 5, 7-9-1968; Ord. No. 75A, 12-14-1982; Ord. No. 75B, 8-14-1990; Ord. of 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 14-74. - Periodic inspections. 
(a)	The city clerk shall cause the health officer, building inspector or such other appropriate public official as he or she may designate to make periodic inspections to which an applicant for a license or licenses shall consent, to determine the health and safety condition of the apartment building, multiple dwellings, rooming house, dwelling or dwelling units, within the city. For the purpose of making such inspections, the health officer, building inspector or the appointed public official is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all apartment buildings, multiple dwellings, rooming houses, dwelling or dwelling units. The tenant or person in charge of an apartment building, multiple dwelling, rooming house, dwelling or dwelling unit shall at all reasonable times give the health officer, building inspector, and/or designated official access to the leased portion of an apartment building, multiple dwelling, rooming house, dwelling or dwelling unit and central facilities and common areas serving such places for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. 
(b)	Periodic inspections:
(1)	All residential dwellings subject to this article shall be inspected every two years. An inspection fee shall be paid on or before July 31 of the year in which an inspection is scheduled. 
(2)	Complaint(s) relevant to the condition or the property shall cause an immediate inspection. An inspection fee is payable if the inspection confirms the complaint. 
(c)	Inspection fees: An inspection fee is due and payable by July 31 of the year in which an inspection is scheduled. The Council for the City of Utica finds and determines that the following inspection fees shall be charges and that the charges do no exceed the actual, reasonable cost of providing the inspection: 
(1)	Single family dwellings: $75.00.
(2)	Duplex units: $125.00.
(3)	Multiple units (three or more): $75.00 for the first unit, and $50.00 for each additional unit. 
(4)	Reinspection: $25.00 for each dwelling unit.
(d)	No person may occupy any premises for which a landlord license is required unless a valid landlord license for the premises has been issued by the city and is currently in good standing. 
(Ord. No. 75,  3, 7-9-1968; Ord. of 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 14-75. - Applicable law 
(a)	Pursuant to Section 1 of the Housing Law of Michigan (MCL 125.401), the Act, the City of Utica acknowledges that it is subject to the provisions of the Act as being on the border and within 2&half miles of a city having a population in excess of 100,000. 
(b)	The more stringent requirements of the Act, the Michigan Construction/Building Code, and the International Property Maintenance Code and/or this article (Landlords - Codified Ordinance section 14-71 through 14-75) shall apply without waiving any other provision of said Act, ordinance and/or codes. 
(c)	The provisions of the Act, relevant to residential requirements for rental property, MCL 125.523 through 125.537, are implemented by this article with the following meaning of terms used in the Act: 
(1)	Registration is an application for a landlord license and registry shall be the list of landlord licenses. 
(2)	Enforcing agency is the building department or police department with concurrent jurisdiction. The building department shall maintain all routine records such as checklists or the likes. 
(3)	Court of competent jurisdiction is understood to be the 41A District Court for the issuance and enforcement of civil infractions and the issuance of any inspection warrant. This does not exclude concurrent enforcement through any circuit court in Michigan. 
(4)	Certificate and certificate of compliance is a landlord license. 
(5)	Escrow account for suspended rent shall be such account or depository as may be approved by a judge or magistrate of the 41A District Court or a circuit court judge. Disbursements from an escrow account must be approved by court order. 
(6)	Appropriate county register of deeds is the Macomb County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2008) 
Secs. 14-76-14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE PARLORS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any individual who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage establishment and receives compensation therefor including but not limited to massagers. 
    Establishment means a massage parlor or school of massage. 
    Instructor means a person who is a licensed myomassologist and teaches in a school of massage. 
    Massage means the rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction, or percussion of the human body or parts of it by hand or with an instrument or apparatus. 
    Massager, masseur and myomassologist mean an individual who administers massages. 
    Massage parlor means a business establishment where massagers practice massage; a building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital or dispensary, in which body massage is practiced on the human body, for other than cosmetic or beautifying purposes, with or without the use of nonpowered mechanical or bathing devices. The term "massage parlor" includes a health club, health spa or any physical fitness club or business that offers massages on occasion or incidental to its regular operation. The term "massage parlor" and the term "massage establishment" are synonymous and are used interchangeably in this article. 
    Owner means a person who conducts or owns a massage establishment or school of massage with his respective duly licensed myomassologists. 
    Patron means any individual who receives a massage. 
    School of massage means a building, room, place, or establishment which satisfies the requirements of the state department of education, if any, and/or of the administrators of this article and is accredited under this article; which requires for admission students with a tenth grade education or its equivalent; which employs one or more competent, certified and/or licensed myomassologists as instructors; and which has minimum requirements of a continuous course of study and training consisting of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics, and practical massage, which courses of study and training are approved by the state department of education and the state exam licensing board, if so required, or are promulgated by a myomassologist duly certified by the American Massage Therapy Association or International Myomassitic Federation. 
    Student means a person who is 16 years of age or older and is engaged in the study of myomassology. 
(Ord. No. 120,  3, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  I(2), 8-9-1988) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-102. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 14-103. - Licensed physical therapist and similar professions excepted. 
(a)	This article does not apply to a licensed physical therapist, a licensed athletic trainer, a licensed cosmetologist, or a licensed barber performing functions authorized under the license held, nor does this article apply to a licensed medical doctor, osteopath, nurse or chiropractor, or any individual working under the direct supervision of a licensed medical doctor, osteopath, nurse or chiropractor, while engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
(b)	This article does not apply to the administration of massage for therapeutic purposes in a hospital, nursing home, or other medical care facility. 
(Ord. No. 120,  4, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-104. - Administration. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of this article, the police chief is designated as the inspection officer and the city clerk is designated as licensing officer. 
(Ord. No. 120,  2, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  I(1), 8-9-1988) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 14-105. - Responsibility of employer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating an establishment to permit or allow an employee, student, agent or massager thereof, or any person whatsoever, to violate this article on the premises of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 120,  8, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-106. - Compliance by students and instructors. 
(a)	Students and instructors must also fully comply with the terms of this article except that the credit requirements defined in subsection 14-147(c)(3) are not applicable to a student unless the student has already satisfied these requirements while taking instruction for these requirements in a course of study which includes this subject matter and satisfies the definition of myomassology. 
(b)	The student shall make application for student license with the city clerk and shall be bound by the terms of section 14-147 in the same manner as though he were applying for a myomassologist license under such section except that to satisfy subsection 14-147(b)(2)c he shall include his student history, if any, in the field of myomassology, physical therapy and/or like fields of endeavor wherein the scientific art form of massage is performed, including but not limited to nursing, athletic trainer, barbers, beauticians, chiropractic medicine, osteopathic medicine or medical doctor. 
(c)	The instructor in a school of massage shall make application for a license with the city clerk and shall satisfy the requirements for licensing of a myomassologist under this article. 
(Ord. No. 120,  23, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  I(7), 8-9-1988) 
Secs. 14-107-14-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-126. - Required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an establishment without a valid establishment license therefor issued by the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an establishment unless each and every massager thereof has a valid massager's or student's license issued by the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to work as a massager without having a valid massager's or student's license issued by the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an establishment unless each and every employee thereof has a valid health certificate card in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to work in an establishment without having a valid health certificate card issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 120,  5, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  I(3), 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-127. - Duty of city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall: 
(1)	Accept all applications and fees required to be filed under this article.
(2)	Keep a record of all applications made.
(3)	Ensure that fees in the proper amount accompany each application and submit the fees to the city treasurer. 
(4)	After completion of the applications, turn the applications into the police chief.
(5)	Grant, refuse, suspend or revoke licenses or applications upon the investigation, recommendation or approval or nonapproval of the police chief or his representative; the police chief shall record such disposition including the results of any court actions or appeals taken under this article and advise the city clerk thereof. 
(Ord. No. 120,  5, 25, 33, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-128. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the city clerk or police chief or his duly authorized representative regarding the issuance, suspension or revocation of a license required under this article or the cancellation of a health certificate card required under this article may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal to a hearing examiner appointed by the common council. The appeal of a revocation of a license or the cancellation of a health certificate card shall be accompanied by the posting of $1,000.00 cash bond. If the revocation or cancellation is set aside, then the bond is to be refunded in full. If the revocation or cancellation is upheld, then the bond is forfeited to the city as a reasonable estimate of the expenses associated with the appeal process. 
(b)	The appeal to the hearing examiner shall be initiated by filing a written objection with the hearing examiner. The written objection shall state what the action or decision of the city clerk or police chief should have been and why. A copy of the document containing the notice of the action or decision complained of shall be attached to the written objection. Upon receipt of the written objection and attachment, the hearing examiner shall set the objection down for a hearing to be held within the next 15 days and advise all parties of the date, time and place of hearing. The person aggrieved shall bring to the hearing all licenses issued to him pursuant to this article. The city attorney may appear and represent the interests of the city clerk or police chief. 
(c)	At hearings before the hearing examiner, all witnesses will be sworn. The hearing examiner will hear the testimony of the city clerk or police chief or his duly authorized representative and/or each individual as will be called by him, the hearing examiner will hear the testimony of the persons aggrieved along with any witnesses the person aggrieved may call. Additionally, the hearing examiner will review all documents and exhibits submitted to him by the parties. The hearing examiner will not be bound by formal rules of evidence and will control the evidence, reserving to himself the power to exclude testimony or exhibits he does not consider relevant. 
(d)	The hearing examiner will maintain an accurate record of the evidence adduced at the hearing. 
(e)	Within 48 hours of the close of the hearing, the hearing examiner will notify the parties of his decision. Within three days of the close of the hearing, the hearing examiner will reduce to writing his report, which will consist of a finding of facts and his decision. The hearing examiner will file the original of his report with the city clerk, will keep one copy for himself, will send one copy to the person aggrieved and will send one copy to the police chief. 
(f)	If the city clerk or police chief or the person aggrieved is dissatisfied with the hearing examiner's decision, he may, within five days from the date the hearing examiner filed his report, file a written objection with the common council. When such an objection is filed, the common council will place the matter on the agenda of the common council for review at the next meeting of the common council which is at least five days after the date of the filing of the objection. If the objection is filed by the city clerk or police chief, notice that the matter is on the agenda will be sent to the applicant by mail. The person aggrieved shall bring to the common council hearing all licenses issued to him pursuant to this article. When the matter comes before common council, the common council will review the matter, considering such information as is in the hearing examiner's file and report and will either affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the hearing examiner. 
(g)	As to an appeal taken to common council by the city clerk or police chief, the decision of the common council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 120,  67, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  6, 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-129. - Licenses and certificates required. 
(a)	The city clerk shall issue licenses and certificates upon investigation, recommendation and approval of the police chief or his representative. 
(b)	As to an appeal taken to common council by a licensee, the decision or decisions of which the licensee objects, the licensee may thereafter pursue his remedy by appealing the decision of the common council to the county circuit court. The time and procedure used for filing such appeal shall comply with chapter 6 of the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969 (MCL 24.301 et seq.) and the Michigan Court Rules. 
(Ord. No. 120,  5, 67, 3-10-1987) 
Secs. 14-130-14-145. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Licenses 

Sec. 14-146. - Application for establishment license. 
(a)	Any person desiring an establishment license shall file a written application, in triplicate, with the city clerk on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(b)	The application shall set forth the following:
(1)	The name of the applicant and whether it is an individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise, and if a corporation, the state of incorporation; 
(2)	The name, style, and designation under which the establishment is to be operated;
(3)	The business address where the establishment is to be operated;
(4)	The name, residence addresses and telephone numbers of the manager or other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of the establishment; 
(5)	The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the establishment and/or the equipment used therein; and concerning the manager or other individual principally in charge of the operation of the establishment: 
a.	Name, complete residence address.
b.	All addresses used during the five-year period immediately prior to the date of the application, and the period of time each was used. 
c.	Written proof of age. Birth certificate or affidavit that applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
d.	Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex.
e.	The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such individual is previously operating in this or another county, city or state or any other state, city or county of these United States under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason thereof, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. 
f.	All criminal arrests and convictions therefor other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdictions in which convicted, the offense on which arrested initially and the offense for which he was ultimately convicted, and the dates of conviction and penalty suffered therefor. 
(6)	A schedule of days and times to accommodate a use of the establishment by male or female patrons. 
(7)	Release and authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. 
(8)	The names and addresses of three registered voters of the state who will serve as character references for each individual listed in subsection (b)(5) of this section. These references must be individuals other than relatives and business associates. 
(9)	Written declaration by the applicant, given under oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in and attached to the application is true and correct, such declaration being duly dated and signed. 
(c)	The application shall be accompanied by the following:
(1)	A tender of the correct license fee as provided in this article.
(2)	Proof that an assumed name certificate has been filed with the county clerk, or secretary of state, corporation division if the applicant is to operate the establishment under an assumed name. 
(3)	Articles of incorporation or proof that applicant is authorized to do business in the state, if the applicant is a foreign corporation. 
(4)	Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size, for each individual listed in subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(5)	Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(d)	The applicant shall cooperate with the police department for purposes of supplying fingerprints and shall likewise cooperate to supply a blood sample to a doctor designated by the police chief, the costs thereof to be paid by the applicant. 
(e)	It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the license for the establishment, or the employer of any persons purporting to act as masseur to ensure that each person employed as a masseur or student shall first have obtained a valid license pursuant to the provisions of this article. All other employees who work closely with the massage activities shall provide annually the medical certificate required under subsection 14-147(c)(4). 
(Ord. No. 120,  31, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-147. - Application for massager's or student's license. 
(a)	Any individual desiring a massager's or student's license shall file a written application, in triplicate, with the city clerk on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(b)	The application, or information sheet for a nonlicensee employee, shall set forth the following: 
(1)	The business name, address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced, if known. If not known, the applicant shall so state. 
(2)	The following personal information concerning the applicant:
a.	The name, complete residence address and residence telephone number;
b.	All addresses used during the five-year period immediately prior to the date of the application, and the period of time each was used; 
c.	Written proof of being 18 years of age or older;
d.	Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex;
e.	The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such individual is previously operating in this city, county or state or another city, county or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
f.	All criminal arrests and the convictions therefor other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense on which originally arrested and the offense for which he was finally convicted; and the date of conviction and penalty suffered. 
(3)	Release and authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. 
(4)	Written declaration by the applicant, given under oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury; that the information contained in and attached to the application is true and correct, such declaration being duly dated and signed. 
(c)	The application shall be accompanied by the following:
(1)	A tender of the correct license fee as provided in this article.
(2)	Two front-face portrait photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(3)	For a massager's license, any one of the following:
a.	A photocopy of the applicant's grade record, reflecting successful completion of three semester hours each of human anatomy and physiology at an institution of higher education which is accredited by a recognized accrediting agency of this state or any state of the United States; or certified statement by a myomassologist instructor who is duly certified and in good standing with the American Massage Therapy Association or International Myomassitic Federation that the applicant has successfully completed 100 myomassitic classroom and/or actual therapy practice hours under instruction taught by and utilizing course materials and curriculum arranged by such instructor; or Certificate by the American Massage Therapy Association or the International Myomassitic Federation that the applicant is duly certified and in good standing on the date application is made or renewed; or certificate of myomassology from this state, or any other state of these United States, approved school of massage therapy. 
b.	For a massager student's license, any one of the following:
1.	A photocopy of the registration record or transcript from an accredited institution of higher learning that the applicant is enrolled in and/or has successfully completed three semester hours of a course in human anatomy and three semester hours of physiology; 
2.	A certified and sworn statement that he has been accepted and will commence or complete or be in the process toward completing studies in the above-mentioned course material at an institution of higher learning naming such institution; 
3.	A sworn statement by a myomassologist instructor, together with:
i.	A copy of the instructors certification of good standing (on the date application is made by applicant) in the American Massage Therapy Association or International Myomassitic Federation; 
ii.	Instructors syllabus of curriculum, that student license applicant is enrolled in his course; and 
iii.	The number of hours the applicant has successfully completed under such instruction; or 
4.	Certified statement under oath by student licensee applicant that he will, within six months after receiving a temporary license as defined in subsections 14-151(6)b.1 and 2, commence enrollment in a course of study for at least 100 hours under a duly certified and in good standing myomassologist instructor as stated in the subsection (c)(3)b.3 of this section; and shall further certify under oath that upon commencing in such course of study shall obtain and present to the city clerk the documentation as set forth in subsection (c)(3)b.3 of this section. 
(4)	A valid health certificate card issued to the applicant pursuant to these regulations.
(5)	Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(d)	The applicant shall cooperate with the police department for purposes of supplying fingerprints and shall likewise cooperate to supply a blood sample to a doctor designated by the police chief, the costs thereof to be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 120,  32, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  8, 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-148. - Investigation. 
(a)	Upon receiving the application for a massage parlor or massager's license or school, instructor's or student's license, the police chief shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, if an individual, or of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, and of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the establishment and/or the equipment used therein or of the manager or other individual principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment, and personal and criminal history, the police chief may, in his discretion, require a personal interview of the applicant, and such further information, identification and physical examination of the applicant as shall bear on the investigation. 
(b)	In the case of applications for massage parlors or school of massage licenses, the police chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the establishment is to be carried on, for the purposes of ensuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as set forth in this article and with the regulations of public health, safety and welfare of the city including but not limited to zoning, building and fire codes. 
(Ord. No. 120,  33, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-149. - Issuance of massage parlor license. 
    The police chief shall present his findings to the city clerk for issuance of a massage parlor license within 60 days of receipt of the application unless the police chief finds that: 
(1)	The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)	The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws. 
(3)	The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the massage establishment and/or the equipment used therein the manager or other individual principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment, has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving a violation of laws relating to massages or health codes prior to the date of the application. 
(4)	The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith. 
(5)	The applicant has had a massage establishment, massager's, instructor's, student's or similar license or permit revoked or suspended by the city, county or state or any other city, county or state or local agency prior to the date of the application. 
(6)	The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other individual principally in charge of the operation of the establishment, is not over the age of 18 years. 
(7)	The applicant did not designate the days and times that the establishment would accommodate male and/or female patrons. 
(8)	The applicant has an infectious or contagious disease.
(9)	The applicant and/or application does not meet all other requirements of this article or other ordinances of the city pertaining to business establishments included but not limited to fire, health, building and zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 120,  34, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-150. - Issuance of massager's license. 
    The city clerk shall issue a massager's license within 60 days of receipt of the application unless the police chief finds that: 
(1)	The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)	The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving a violation of laws relating to massages or health codes prior to the date of the application. 
(3)	The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of fact in the license application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith. 
(4)	The applicant has had a massage establishment, massager's, or other similar license or permit revoked or suspended by this city, county or state, or any other city, county or state or local agency of these United States prior to the date of application. 
(5)	The applicant is not over the age of 18 years (or 16 years of age if a student applicant).
(6)	The massager's license applicant does not satisfy any one of the following requirements:
a.	Successful completion of three semester hours each of human anatomy and physiology at an institution of higher education which is accredited by a recognized accrediting agency of this state or any other state of these United States; 
b.	Successful completion of at least 100 myomassitic classroom and/or actual therapy practice hours of instruction taught by and utilizing course materials and curriculum arranged by an instructor duly certified by and in good standing with the American Massage Therapy Association or International Myomassitic Federation; 
c.	The applicant is currently certified by and in good standing with the American Massage Therapy Association; 
d.	The applicant is currently certified by and in good standing with the International Myomassitic Federation; or 
e.	Possess a current certificate of myomassology from this state or any other state of these United States, or any school of massage. 
(7)	The applicant does not have a valid health certificate card issued pursuant to this article. 
(8)	The applicant and/or application does not meet all other requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 120,  35, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  8, 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-151. - Massager student's license. 
    The city clerk shall issue a massager student's license, or a temporary student's license as the case may be, within 60 days of receipt of the application unless the police chief finds that: 
(1)	The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)	The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving a violation of laws relating to massages or health codes prior to the date of the application. 
(3)	The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of fact in the license application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith. 
(4)	The applicant has had a massage establishment, massager's, massager student's license, or other similar license or permit revoked or suspended by this city, county or state, or any other city, county or state or local agency of these United States prior to the date of application. 
(5)	The applicant is not over the age of 18 years.
(6)	The massager student's license applicant does not satisfy any one of the following requirements: 
a.	Student enrolled in college curriculum:
1.	Applicant is enrolled in and is attending or shall register and attend at the next semester or term of a duly accredited institution of higher learning in a curriculum and be in the process of successfully completing with passing grades three semester hours each of human anatomy and physiology; such accreditation of the institution being by a recognized accrediting agency of this state or any other state of these United States; 
2.	As to subsection (6)a.1 of this section, the applicant shall submit written or documented proof of enrollment with the application for student's license or in the event that application for student's license under this article is made while semester is in progress then such proof shall be submitted within 30 days after the next registration opens at the institution of higher learning whereat the curriculum is being taught and student enrolled; further, proof of successful completion by way of transcript from the institution shall be submitted for the licensee's file within ten days after licensee's receipt thereof at the end of the semester; or 
b.	Student enrolled in other than college curriculum:
1.	Applicant is enrolled in and is attending, or shall enroll in within six months of making application for student's license under this article, and shall complete successfully at least 100 myomassitic classroom and/or actual massage therapy practice hours of institution utilizing course materials and curriculum arranged and taught by a myomassologist instructor duly certified by and in good standing with the American Massage Therapy Association or International Myomassitic Federation. 
2.	As to subsection (6)b.1 of this section, written proof and documentation of enrollment together with the teacher's name, address, phone number and certification, as defined in subsection (6)b.1 of this section together with syllabus of curriculum being taught by such teacher, shall be submitted with the application of the applicant; in the event application for student's license is made and the applicant is not enrolled in any such curriculum given by a teacher certified as required in this section, then a temporary student's license may be issued provided that the requirements of subsections (1) through (5), (7) and (8) of this section are satisfied and the requirements of this subsection (6)b. are satisfied within six months after making application under this article. If, at the end of the six-month period, the enrollment, teacher and syllabus requirements as defined in this subsection (6)b. are not satisfied, then the temporary student's license shall expire and shall not be renewed until the applicant can submit an application satisfying all requirements. However, the temporary student's license shall become a regular student's license which is renewable yearly (a student's license being renewable only twice) upon the applicant's submitting the required materials as to enrollment, teacher and syllabus within the six-month period; under this circumstance, the anniversary date for student's license renewal shall be the date when final documentation requirements under this section are submitted to the city clerk and time stamped into the applicant's file. 
(7)	The applicant does not have a valid health certificate card issued pursuant to this article. 
(8)	The applicant and/or application does not meet all other requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 120A,  8, 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-152. - Fees. 
    The fee for a massage parlor or massage school license shall be established by resolution. The fee for a massager's license shall be established by resolution. The fee for a student's license shall be established by resolution. The fee for a nonlicensee employee shall be established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 120,  36, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-153. - Return of fee. 
    No portion of any fee collected under this article shall be returned after application for license has been made. 
(Ord. No. 120,  37, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-154. - Term. 
    Each license issued under this article, unless otherwise specifically stated in this article, shall be valid for no more than one year from the date of its issuance as shown thereon. 
(Ord. No. 120,  39(1), 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  9, 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-155. - Renewal of licenses. 
    Any time after the expiration of 11 months of the term of a license required by this article, the licensee thereof may file with the city clerk a written application to renew such license on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. Such application shall contain the information required in this article for an original license to the extent that such information would not be duplicative and such application shall be accompanied by a tender of the correct fee as provided in this article. The city clerk shall renew such license unless the police chief finds that the requirements of this article for the reissuance of a license are not met. A student's license shall be renewed only twice. 
(Ord. No. 120,  40, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-156. - Obtaining license by fraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact, or to give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing a license required by this article and any such license so secured shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 120,  41, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-157. - Fraudulent use of license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently make use of, in any manner to his own or another's benefit, a massage parlor license, school of massage, student's or a massager's license which has not been duly issued to him in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 120,  42, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-158. - Display generally. 
(a)	A massage parlor or massage school license issued under this article shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place in the lobby of the massage parlor or school for which it was issued. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any massager or student to work in, on or about any establishment, unless there shall be displayed in an open and conspicuous place in the lobby of such establishment, a massager's or student's license issued to such massager or student respectively pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 120,  6, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-159. - Counterfeiting, changing, defacing license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or forge, or to change, deface or alter a license required or issued under the provisions of this article. A photograph of the licensee massager shall be attached to his license on display. 
(Ord. No. 120,  39(2), 43, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-160. - Transfer prohibited. 
    Massage parlor licenses, school of massage, massager's or student's licenses are not transferable, separable or divisible, and such authority as a license confers shall be conferred only on the licensee named therein. 
(Ord. No. 120,  38, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-161. - Sale or transfer. 
(a)	Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, the license shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the massage parlor, massage school or similar business. The provisions of 14-146 and 14-147 shall apply to any person, firm or entity applying for a massage establishment license for premises previously used as such establishment. 
(b)	Any sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment shall require inspection and shall require compliance with this article. A fee in an amount as established by resolution of the common council shall be payable for each application involving extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 120,  57, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-162. - Name of business. 
    No person licensed under this article shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation not specified in the license. 
(Ord. No. 120,  59, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-163. - Suspension. 
(a)	Any license issued under this article may be suspended for a period not to exceed 90 days by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the police chief for a minor violation of this article by the licensee thereof. 
(b)	Any massage establishment license issued under this article may be suspended for a period not to exceed 90 days by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the police chief for a violation of this article by an agent or employee of the massage establishment provided such violation occurred on the massage establishment premises. 
(c)	Such suspension shall be effective ten days after written notice thereof is given to the licensee. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the reason for such suspension, the duration of such suspension, the beginning of such suspension, and the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. 
(d)	Such notice may be given by delivering the notice to the licensee, by delivering the notice to the establishment, or by depositing the notice in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the address stated on the license application and such notice shall be deemed given upon deposit of the notice in the United States Mail as provided in this subsection. 
(e)	This section is cumulative of all other rules, regulations and laws. An appeal, as provided in this article, from any suspension under this article, shall automatically stay such suspension pending such appeal: 
(1)	After the effective date of the suspension and if an appeal is not made; or
(2)	If an appeal is made and the suspension is upheld in whole or in part, then and in either of those events, the police chief shall have the authority to take possession of the license wheresoever it may be found and hold the license until the suspension period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 120,  44, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-164. - Revocation. 
    Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the police chief for a significant violation of this article or should the licensee no longer qualify for a license as an original applicant, or the licensee's license has been suspended three times within a ten-year period, or has misrepresented or withheld information on his original or renewal application. Any establishment license issued under this article may be revoked by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the police chief for a significant violation of this article by an agent or employee of the establishment provided such violation occurred on the establishment premises. 
(a)	Such revocation shall be effective immediately after written notice thereof is given to the licensee. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the reason for such revocation and the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Such notice may be given by delivering the notice to the licensee, by delivering the notice to the establishment, or by depositing the notice in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the address stated on the license application and such notice shall be deemed given upon deposit of the notice in the United States Mail as provided in this subsection. 
(b)	This section is cumulative of all other rules, regulations and laws. An appeal, as provided in this article, from any revocation under this article, shall automatically stay such revocation pending such appeal: 
(1)	After the effective date of the revocation and if an appeal is not made; or
(2)	If an appeal is made and the revocation is upheld, then and in either of those events, the police chief shall have the authority to take possession of the license wheresoever it may be found. 
(Ord. No. 120,  45, 3-10-1987) 
Secs. 14-165-14-180. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Health Certificate 

Sec. 14-181. - Health certificate card. 
    The health certificate card required by this article shall be issued by a legally licensed physician, designated by the police chief. The health certificate card shall attest the fact that the bearer has been actually and thoroughly examined by such physician and that such examination disclosed the fact that such person was free from any infectious or contagious disease in a transmissible condition. The examination so required shall specifically include a chest X-ray and blood tests for syphilis, gonorrhea, herpes and aids and any other infectious or contagious diseases. All of the information and test and results thereof and the dates and other information required to be shown on the health certificate card, except the employee's signature, shall be placed thereon by the physician issuing the health certificate card or under the direction and no such health certificate card shall be valid unless it contains all of the information shown to be required thereon. 
(Ord. No. 120,  46, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-182. - Signatures; form. 
    A health certificate card required by this article shall bear the signature of the individual named thereon, the signature of the physician executing the examination and tests upon which such certificate is based and shall be in the following form, which forms will be furnished to the physician by the city clerk upon request: 
CITY OF UTICA HEALTH CERTIFICATE CARD 
ISSUED ____________ 20 ____________. 
    This certificate is Valid for One Year Only-Post conspicuously for inspection. 
    This certifies that _____. 
Address _____ 
Occupation _____ 
Employed at _____ 
Address _____ 
    Was actually and thoroughly examined for Skin, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat, Mouth, Lungs and Genitals. 
And Serological Test was made (date) ____________ 
Chest X-ray (date) ____________ Result ____________ 
Others: _____ 
    And found free from any infectious or contagious diseases in a transmissible condition, including syphilis, gonorrhea, herpes and aids. 
Color of Eyes _____Color of Hair _____Height _____Weight _____Race _____Sex _____Age _____ 
Doctor _____Address _____ 
Doctor's Signature _____ 
License No. _____ 
Employee's Signature _____ 
(Ord. No. 120,  47, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-183. - Health certificate card valid for one year. 
    Each health certificate card issued under this article shall be valid for one year only from the date of its issuance as shown thereon. 
(Ord. No. 120,  48, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-184. - Obtaining health certificate card by fraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, to any examining physician, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact from such physician, or to give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing a health certificate card required by this article, and any such health certificate card so secured shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 120,  49, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-185. - Fraudulent use of health certificate card. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual to fraudulently make use of, in any manner to his own or another's benefit or advantage, a health certificate card which has not been duly issued to him in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 120,  50, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-186. - Unlawful issuance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensed physician to issue a health certificate card required under the provisions of this article knowing the health certificate card to be false. 
(Ord. No. 120,  51, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-187. - Counterfeiting, changing, defacing health certificate card. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or forge, or to change, deface or alter a health certificate card required by or issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 120,  52, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-188. - Obtaining new health certificate card upon request of employer. 
(a)	Every individual required by this article to have a health certificate card shall, for good cause shown, upon the request of an employer or the police chief or his duly authorized representative secure, for good cause shown, an adequate physical examination of himself by a duly licensed physician and secure, in evidence thereof, a valid health certificate card meeting the requirements of this article. The fact that an individual who is requested to secure such an examination has, at the time of such request a valid health certificate card, will not relieve such individual of the duty to secure another such card before commencing or continuing in such employment or working in any such capacities. 
(b)	Upon the refusal or failure of any such individual to comply with the request of his employer or the police chief, or his duly authorized representative, to secure an examination and health certificate card, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, if the individual so refusing has, at the time of such refusal or failure to comply with such request, a valid health certificate card, the health certificate card shall immediately be surrendered to the police chief, or his duly authorized representative for cancellation, and it shall be unlawful for any such individual to fail or refuse to so surrender such license to the police chief or his duly authorized representative for cancellation. If the health certificate card of an individual so refusing to secure another examination and health certificate card is in the custody of the individual's employer or the agent or representative of such employer, such custodian of such health certificate card shall, upon such failure or refusal by such individual, immediately forward the health certificate card to the police chief or his duly authorized representative for cancellation, and thereafter such individual shall not be allowed or permitted to work or continue working in any of the capacities for which a health certificate card is required by this article until such time as such individual shall present to his employer a valid health certificate card bearing a date of issue subsequent to the cancellation date of such individual's canceled health certificate card. 
(Ord. No. 120,  53, 3-10-1987) 
Secs. 14-189-14-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 14-206. - Supervision. 
    An establishment licensee shall have the premises supervised at all times when open for business. The massage parlor or school licensee shall personally supervise the establishment, and shall not violate, or permit others to violate, any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 120,  21, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-207. - Massage establishment as a school of massage. 
    A massage parlor licensed under this article shall not act as a school of massage nor may it in any way train or instruct persons in myomassology unless it makes a request for and notes such designation in its application and complies with section 14-106. 
(Ord. No. 120,  22, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-208. - Accommodating patrons of both sexes prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any establishment to accommodate both male and female patrons at the same time, or to advertise that it accommodates both male and female patrons together. 
(Ord. No. 120,  7, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-209. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage or controlled substances on the premises of any establishment. 
(Ord. No. 120,  9, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-210. - Closing hours. 
    No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 120A,  4, 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-211. - Cleanliness and health of employees generally; diseased patrons not to be accommodated. 
    All massagers or students in an establishment shall clean their hands thoroughly with an antiseptic before administering a massage to each patron accommodated. No individual suffering from a communicable disease shall work or be employed in an establishment. No individual suffering from a communicable disease to the knowledge of the owner, custodian, or employees of an establishment shall be accommodated as a patron therein. 
(Ord. No. 120,  14, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-212. - List of employees. 
(a)	The establishment shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all employees, or persons working in the establishment both on duty and off duty, and such list shall be shown to the police chief or his duly authorized police officer upon request. 
(b)	If an employee is not a licensed myomassologist, owner or student, he shall submit the information required in subsections 14-147(b), (c) and (d) to the city clerk except that subsection 14-147(c)(3) shall not apply to him if he is not an owner, myomassologist or student working or studying at the establishment or school. 
(Ord. No. 120,  16, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 120A,  5, 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-213. - Keeping of records; records are proprietary in nature. 
(a)	Every person who operates an establishment shall maintain an accurate record in a well bound book of all patrons accommodated. Such record shall include the patron's name, proof of identity, age and current address together with the time, date and place of service, the nature of the service provided, and the name of the massager so providing the service. Every patron shall furnish proof of identity by showing a valid driver's license, voter registration certificate or similar identification, to the person that operates the establishment for the purpose of maintaining the accuracy of the establishment's record book. Such record book shall be available at all times at the establishment for inspection in accordance with the ordinances of the city and/or the laws of the state and by order of a court. 
(b)	Because the records required to be kept by the establishment may be proprietary in nature, it shall be unlawful for anyone except the city or its duly authorized representatives in the performance of its duties granted it by the police powers of the state, or in its duties to protect the health, education and welfare of the citizens of the city or state to utilize and/or divulge the contents of such records. 
(Ord. No. 120A,  I(17), 8-9-1988) 
Sec. 14-214. - Clothing of massagers. 
    The male massagers or students shall wear all white slacks and all white shirts and the female massagers or students shall wear an all white dress or all white slacks and all white blouses while engaged in the treatment of a patron. An all white surgical gown or smock may be substituted. Such clothing shall at least cover the massager's or student's pubic area, perineum, buttocks, natal cleft and entire chest to four inches below the collarbone and legs not exposed more than two inches above the knees. Sleeves shall not reach below the elbow. The clothing shall be kept clean at all times, and soiled clothing shall not be worn during the treatment of a patron. The clothing shall be opaque. No massager or student shall massage a patron whose genitals are exposed during the treatment; and no patron of a massage establishment shall knowingly expose his genitals during a massage to a massager or student. 
(Ord. No. 120,  18, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-215. - Doors, openings, locks. 
    No massage shall be performed within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within an establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Exterior doors may have locks, but such exterior doors shall not be locked while the establishment is open for business or while any massage is being performed therein. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by the police chief or his duly authorized police officers or any other department inspector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 120,  19, 3-10-1987) 
Secs. 14-216-14-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FACILITY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-231. - Location of massage establishment or school of massage. 
    No massage establishment shall be located within 500 feet of another establishment, public or private grade, junior or high school, park, school playground, church, synagogue or place of worship, or adult bookstore. 
(Ord. No. 120,  24, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-232. - Facilities necessary. 
    No license to conduct a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage parlor or school provided that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city. 
(2)	Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building and electrical codes. 
(3)	Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the building code.
(4)	Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(5)	Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.
(6)	Closed cabinets shall be provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
(7)	Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker with lock for each patron to be served, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin, shall be provided by every massage parlor. 
(8)	All walls, ceiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, whirlpools, steam rooms, saunas, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(9)	Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(10)	A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment. The basin shall provide antiseptic soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(Ord. No. 120,  20, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-233. - Entrances and exits. 
    No establishment shall have an entrance or exit way providing a direct passageway to any other type of business, residence or living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 120,  10, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-234. - Access and inspections. 
(a)	All establishments subject to this article are declared to be public places, and shall not, during business hours, have the doors to the exits and entrances of such establishments locked or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress and egress of persons; provided, however, such doors may be closed. 
(b)	Every establishment subject to this article shall be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of any city department concerned with the licensing and supervision of such establishment during operating hours for the purpose of enforcing any of the provisions of this article or other ordinances of regulations of the city relating to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry to premises in which a massage parlor or massage school is ostensibly being operated, by city representatives for the purpose of making lawful inspections. 
(Ord. No. 120,  11, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-235. - Maintenance of premises; sterilization and cleaning equipment. 
    It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating an establishment to keep the establishment at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic, and bathing devices or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization, before initial use, and any such instruments and devices or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron, shall be sterilized before being used upon another. Towels and linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be furnished for use of another patron until thoroughly laundered. 
(Ord. No. 120,  13, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-236. - Massage tables. 
    The massage shall be performed on a massage table or treatment table. No beds, water mattresses, cots or other equipment designed for sleeping shall be permitted at the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 120,  15, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-237. - Patronage of massage business by minors. 
    No person licensed as a masseur shall massage or treat any person under the age of 18 years upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine, or physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the masseur giving the massage or treatment. If the person under the age of 18 years is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this section shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 120,  54, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-238. - Immoral activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person, or give or administer any bath or baths, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this article for illegal purposes, or for monetary gain or profit have any contact with a person's breasts, genital area or buttocks in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desire. Any violation of this section shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 120,  55, 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 14-239. - Advertising. 
    No massage parlor, massage school or similar business or masseur granted a license under this article shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any massage services. 
(Ord. No. 120,  56, 3-10-1987) 
Secs. 14-240-14-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-271. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arcade hall means a commercial establishment where five or more mechanical games, pinball machines, music devices, movie devices, or video games or any combination thereof are available on the premises for operation by members of the public. 
    Mechanical game means a pinball machine, skee ball machine, electronic device, shuffleboard or miniature pool table, air hockey machine, or any similar machine, instrument, device or contrivance which is an object of commerce that is operated for a pecuniary obligation including, but not limited to, those machines activated by the insertion of currency, coin or any token. 
    Movie device means a device or machine which, upon the insertion or payment of currency, coin or token, may be operated for the production or reproduction of motion pictures and/or the emission of songs, music, or similar amusement. 
    Music device means a piano, phonograph, radio, or similar device or instrument which, upon the insertion or payment of a currency, coin or token, may be operated for the emission of song, music, or similar amusement. 
    Owner means any person who owns, operates or conducts any place or establishment in which any mechanical game, pinball machine, music device, movie device, video games or similar amusement devices may be operated. 
    Pinball machine means a mechanical, electrical or other device, apparatus or machine which, for pecuniary obligation, including, but not limited to, machines activated by insertion of currency, coin or any token and is available to play or operate and the play or operation of which, whether by reason of the skill of the operator or the application of an element of chance, or both, enables the person playing or operating the machine to score points as a ball or object propelled or stimulated by an electronic or mechanical impulse touches pins or targets, or entitles the person playing or operating the machine to score points as a ball or object propelled or stimulated by an electronic or mechanical impulse touches pins or targets, or entitles the person playing or operating the machine to replay it at no additional cost. 
    Video game means an electronic, computerized form of entertainment generally involving a visual message or image with which the user may interact by using manual functions to generate a signal to a central processing unit or such similar device or contrivance which is an object of commerce that is operated for a pecuniary obligation, including but not limited to those games activated by the insertion of currency, coin, token or payment of a fee. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  1, 3-25-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-272. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 14-273. - Pool tables, billiard tables, bowling alleys, shuffle boards or other licensed amusements. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the keeping and use of pool tables, billiard tables, bowling alleys, shuffle boards or other licensed amusements and their usual appurtenances in places duly licensed and operated under applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  5(E), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-274. - Admittance of minors prohibited during certain hours. 
    Any person who operates or causes to be operated an arcade hall shall not allow or permit a minor who is 16 years of age or younger to remain in or frequent such arcade hall during school hours on days that schools are in session nor during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  5(A), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-275. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as permitting the issuance of a license for any slot machine or as legalizing any coin-operated machine, game or device in which is incorporated any gambling feature, and all use thereof for gambling of any kind is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  5(B), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-276. - Obscene, indecent or pornographic games, machines or devices. 
    It is unlawful for any person licensed under this article to permit to be operated, or any person to operate, any game, machine, or device regulated by this article which would display, expose, produce or emit any motion picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing, song, recitation, speech, music or other matter that is obscene, indecent, pornographic or contrary to good morals. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  5(C), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-277. - Distance from schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to permit the operation of an arcade hall within 1,000 feet of any public or parochial school or school ground. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  5(D), 3-25-1997) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A; zoning districts and maps, app. A,  300 et seq. 
Secs. 14-278-14-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-296. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for an owner to maintain any game, machine, or device without first obtaining a license for the commercial establishment, store or place where such games, machines, and devices are being maintained or operated. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  2(A), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-297. - Application; requirements. 
(a)	License applications shall be made to the city clerk in the form and manner required by the clerk and in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the application shall state, among other things: 
(1)	The number of games, machines, and devices intended to be operated on the premises.
(2)	The type of games, machine, or device.
(3)	The name, address and location of the commercial establishment, store or place where the games, machines or devices will be located. 
(4)	The name and address of the owner of the commercial establishment, store or place wherein the games, machines, or devices are located. 
(5)	The name and address of the person responsible for operating or managing the games, machines, or devices. 
(b)	If, after the issuance of the license, the licensee desires to operate other games, machines, or devices, in addition to the number stated in the application for a license, he shall make a supplemental application to the city clerk in the same form and manner as the original application for a license. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  3(A), (B), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-298. - Issuance. 
(a)	Within ten days after receipt of the application and the related application on fees, the city clerk shall approve or disapprove the application. 
(b)	If the city clerk disapproves an application for a license relating to games, machines, and devices, the reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in writing. Further, the city clerk shall have the authority to disapprove such an application for either a new license or renewal of a previous license or to revoke an existing license for any of the following specified reasons: 
(1)	The applicant or licensee makes a false statement of material fact in the application.
(2)	Controlled substances have been used, possessed, or delivered upon the premises upon such circumstances as knowledge can be reasonably imputed to the applicant or licensee or agents thereof. 
(3)	The applicant or licensee violates this article.
(4)	The applicant or licensee is delinquent in taxes owed to the city.
(5)	That on three or more occasions in a calendar year, law enforcement action has resulted in the prosecution of individuals at the commercial establishment of criminal activity, including ordinance violations, which criminal activity the applicant or licensee could have reasonably anticipated and prevented. 
(6)	Alcoholic beverages have been used, possessed, or delivered upon the premises by minors upon such circumstances as knowledge can be reasonably imputed to the applicant or licensee or agents thereof. 
(c)	A person whose application for a license is disapproved shall not be eligible to reapply for a license until the expiration of 12 months after the date of the city clerk's disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  3(C)-(E), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-299. - Parking facilities. 
    A license shall not be issued to establish, maintain or operate an arcade hall unless the licensee provides adequate motor vehicle parking facilities for patrons of his establishment. The parking facilities shall not be considered adequate unless they meet the minimum provisions of the city zoning ordinance set forth in appendix A to this Code in addition to one motor vehicle parking space for each game, machine, and device licensed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  3(J), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-300. - Insurance. 
    The licensee shall furnish proof of liability insurance in an amount not less than $500,000.00 for bodily injury to or the death of a patron of the arcade hall. Evidence of insurance coverage in the form of a certificate or policy from the insurance carrier shall be filed with the clerk's office. The certificate shall stipulate that the insurance shall not be canceled except upon ten days prior written notice to the city clerk. Cancellation is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  3(F), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-301. - Issuance of license; fees. 
(a)	Upon meeting the requirements of this article, the city clerk is authorized to issue a license upon the payment of the annual fee established by resolution. 
(b)	The applicant must also pay for any inspections in the processing of the application.
(Ord. No. 100B,  4, 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-302. - Term. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for one year, expiring annually on December 31. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  3(G), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-303. - Renewal. 
    A license may be renewed annually upon the submission of an application provided by the city clerk and upon the licensee's payment of the annual license fees. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  3(I), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-304. - Transferability. 
    A license is not assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  3(H), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-305. - Display. 
    It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner and/or distributor to post the license or licenses permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the games, machines, and devices are to be operated and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  2(B), 3-25-1997) 
Sec. 14-306. - Hearing process. 
(a)	In the event that the city clerk refuses to grant a new, supplemental, or renewal license, or if the city clerk revokes a license, the applicant or licensee shall be permitted a hearing for such action or inaction. A request for a hearing must be submitted in writing to the city clerk within ten days of the action or inaction appealed. 
(b)	Within 30 days of the request for appeal, the person aggrieved shall be afforded a hearing before a hearing officer, appointed by the mayor for such purpose. Extensions for cause or mutual consent are permitted. 
(c)	The hearing officer will conduct an administrative hearing and upon a conclusion of the hearing shall issue a written report and order for the action appealed to be affirmed, modified or set aside. The strict rules of evidence shall not apply and the burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of evidence. The aggrieved party and city clerk may be represented by an attorney. 
(d)	The aggrieved person or city clerk may appeal within ten days of any decision of the hearing officer to common council. Such appeal shall be limited to the record presented and the report and order of the hearing officer. Unless reversed or modified by common council, the action of the hearing officer shall be final upon action, or inaction by common council. 
(e)	A licensee whose license is revoked as a consequence of a violation of this article shall be ineligible to apply for a license for a period of one year after the revocation. 
(f)	A suspended or revoked license shall be returned immediately to the office of the city clerk by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 100B,  6, 3-25-1997) 
Secs. 14-307-14-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SLAUGHTERHOUSES 

Sec. 14-331. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 14-332. - Permit. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a slaughterhouse within the limits of the city without a permit to operate such slaughterhouse. 
(b)	Permits shall be issued upon application to the city clerk upon payment of a fee in the amount established by resolution and shall be renewable on an annual basis for the same fee on June 1 of each calendar year thereafter. 
(c)	No permit shall be granted or renewed by the city clerk unless the applicant shall comply with the following: 
(1)	The permittee must have and maintain adequate sewerage and drainage for the speedy removal of all blood and other fluid refuse from such slaughtering, killing, or rendering as is required by state and/or federal laws, rules, or regulations. If the permittee will or does maintain a septic tank for the accumulation of waste disposal from the slaughtering operation such permittee shall, upon request of the city clerk, city engineer, and/or sewer inspector cause such septic tank to be pumped out and the contents thereof hauled away from the premises at such intervals as may be reasonably necessary in consideration of the quantity of waste deposited in such septic tank. 
(2)	All offal and refuse shall be removed from such slaughterhouse on the day of slaughtering and hauled away from the premises to be disposed of in a decent and sanitary manner. 
(3)	The operation of such slaughterhouse shall be such that no offensive smells, exhalations, or other obnoxious odors are emitted to the surrounding neighborhood or traveling public. 
(4)	All inspections of animals slaughtered shall be performed by the state agriculture department or the appropriate federal regulatory body, required by the applicable rules and regulations. 
(5)	A permittee must have a valid license issued by the proper authority, as the case may be. 
(6)	No truck or other commercial vehicle shall be allowed to arrive at such slaughterhouse between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day and are prohibited for all hours on Sundays and legal holidays. No truck or other commercial vehicle containing livestock, or that has any engine operating, shall be allowed to be parked, stopped, or standing on the premises of such slaughterhouse between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day and are prohibited for all hours on Sundays and legal holidays. 
(d)	The common council may revoke or cancel any permit issued under this article upon a finding that any of the provisions of subsection (c) of this section have been violated. The procedure for any such revocation or cancelation shall be as follows: 
(1)	The common council shall pass a resolution setting a hearing date for consideration of whether or not the permit should be canceled or revoked, such hearing date to be no sooner than 15 days, nor longer than 30 days subsequent to the date of such resolution. For good cause shown, common council may adjourn the hearing date. 
(2)	Notice of the hearing date shall be given to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(3)	On the date of the hearing, the city attorney, or such other person as council may appoint, shall present such evidence to the council as may be appropriate to demonstrate that a violation of subsection (c) of this section has occurred the permittee may present such evidence as he may deem appropriate to demonstrate that such permit shall not be revoked or canceled. The council may, at its option, receive comments, views or evidence from any other interested party. 
(4)	Upon conclusion of such hearing, or as soon thereafter as shall be reasonable and appropriate, council shall pass a resolution relevant to its decision. 
(Ord. No. 89,  1-4, 4-17-1973) 
Sec. 14-333. - Vehicles. 
    No person shall drive or operate a commercial vehicle related in any manner whatsoever to the operation of a slaughterhouse on any residential street of the city during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day and at no time on Sundays or legal holidays. No person shall transport livestock or other commodities related to the operation of a slaughterhouse on any residential street of the city during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, and at no time on Sundays or legal holidays. No person shall park or stop a motor vehicle related in any manner whatsoever to the operation of a slaughterhouse on any residential street of the city during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day and at no time on Sundays or legal holidays, and it shall be presumed that the driver, operator, or person in possession of any such motor vehicle was the person that parked or stopped such motor vehicle, provided, further, that as any unattended motor vehicle shall be presumed to have parked or stopped such motor vehicle. No person shall park or stop any motor vehicle related in any manner whatsoever to the operation of a slaughterhouse during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any street within the city limits of the city when such motor vehicle, or its attachments or cargo, emits any noise or odor that can be detected in a residential area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89,  5, 4-17-1973) 
Secs. 14-334-14-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TEMPORARY BUSINESSES, PEDDLERS, DIRECT SELLERS, AUCTIONEER, FARMERS' MARKETS AND GARAGE SALES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. (Back)
State Law reference- Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; home solicitation, MCL 445.111 et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq.; charitable solicitations, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitations, MCL 14.301 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-361. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auctioneer means one who sells goods of another person at public auction generally on commission, or for a recompense or one who offers the sale of items through a bidding process. 
    Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such. 
    Direct seller means any individual who, for himself, or for any other legal entity or organization, sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of such individual, partnership, association or corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
    Farmer's market means the collection of two or more persons, legal entities or organizations conducting outdoor sales at one location and which has been duly authorized by the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
    Garage sale means all sales from a residential home entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property, generally used property, which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. The term "garage sale" does not include a business for the sale of used goods operated within a building on a daily basis, nor does it include any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number. 
    Goods means personal property of any kind, and shall include goods provided incidental to services offered or sold. 
    Peddler means any person, or other legal entity or organization that sells or offers for sale, generally in a residential area, any food, beverage, goods, merchandise, services or wares from a moving vehicle such as a motor vehicle, cart, bicycle, motorbike, or other such vehicle. 
    Temporary business means the sale of goods, vegetables, flowers, plants, meat, seafood, poultry, beverages, products, foods or services sold by a person, other legal entity, or organization being operated in the city: 
(1)	Who is a "transient merchant" as defined in Public Act No. 51 of 1925 (MCL 445.371 et seq.); or 
(2)	Upon vacant land, vacant lot or other unoccupied property;
(3)	Outside of a building without the consent of the owner or lessee thereof; or
(4)	A garage sale conducted for four or more continuous days.
    Vendor means any person or other legal entity or organization that sells or offers for sale, generally at a fixed location, any food, beverage, goods, merchandise, services or wares from other than an enclosed commercial building. 
(Ord. No. 116,  1, 7-12-1983; Ord. No. 116B,  I, 7-12-1988) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-362. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 14-363. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article: 
(1)	Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products, bakery goods or similar goods or products to regular customers on established routes. 
(2)	Garage sales of less than three days of continuous operation.
(3)	Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(4)	Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within the city and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business. 
(5)	Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contract with, and specifically requested a home visit by, such person. 
(6)	Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer. 
(7)	Any person acting by law or by order of any court and any person acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(Ord. No. 116,  9, 7-12-1983) 
Sec. 14-364. - Use of public streets and rights-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other legal entity, or organization to conduct a temporary business or to act as an auctioneer or direct seller on any public walk, public street, public alley, public right-of-way, utility easement, within 50 feet of any highway or roadway, or to cause a hazard, directly or indirectly, to the normal travel of motor vehicles, except upon approval of common council for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 116,  10, 7-12-1983) 
Sec. 14-365. - Direct sellers. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to sell at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. except by appointment; to call at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; to call at the rear door of any dwelling place; or to remain on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a direct seller to misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(e)	After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell. 
(Ord. No. 116,  6(C)-(G), 7-12-1983) 
Sec. 14-366. - Peddlers. 
(a)	Any person acting as a peddler who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself or through an employee, while acting as a peddler in the city or who shall barter, sell or peddle any goods, or merchandise, or wares other than those specified in his application for a license shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any peddler to sell or offer for sale any item between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 116,  7(B), (D), 7-12-1983; Ord. No. 116C, 2-13-1996) 
Secs. 14-367-14-385. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 14-386. - Required. 
    No person or other legal entity shall conduct a temporary business or farmer's market, or act as an auctioneer, peddler or direct seller without first having secured a license to do so from the city clerk. Each license issued under this article must be prominently displayed at the location of the activity licensed or shown to each prospective customer. 
(Ord. No. 116,  2, 7-12-1983) 
Sec. 14-387. - Additional requirements and regulations for farmer's market. 
    A farmer's market is subject to the following additional requirements and regulations: 
(1)	The license application required in this article shall contain the following information:
a.	The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
b.	If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers. 
c.	The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the temporary business. 
d.	The time within which the temporary business will be operated and the location of the business in the city. 
e.	Any application for permit must also be signed by the party on whose property the temporary business shall be located, or the applicant may present evidence of a lease for such property. 
f.	The maximum number of individual vendors that will conduct sales at the farmer's market.
(2)	Individual vendors at a farmer's market need not be licensed separately under this article or any other ordinance, however, all other regulations, including but not limited to health and sanitary requirements, shall apply. 
(3)	The fee for such license shall be as established by resolution.
(4)	The city council may approve the issuance of a farmer's market license on city owned property upon such terms and conditions as it may impose. If city council approves a license, the city clerk shall issue the license upon petitioner filing a written acceptance of the terms and conditions imposed by city council. 
(Ord. No. 116,  3, 7-12-1983; Ord. of 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 14-388. - Additional requirements and regulations for temporary businesses. 
    A temporary business is subject to the additional requirements and regulations in this section. 
(1)	The license application required under this article shall contain the following information:
a.	The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit.
b.	If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers. 
c.	The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the temporary business. 
d.	The time within which the temporary business will be operated and the location of the business in the city. 
e.	Any application for permit must also be signed by the party on whose property the temporary business shall be located. 
f.	A brief description of the nature of business to be performed or goods or services to be sold. 
g.	Submission of a photograph of the applicant taken within 30 days immediately prior to the date of filing such application, which photograph shall be no less than two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders in a clear and distinguishable manner. 
The fee for such license shall be as established by resolution. 
(2)	The applicant for a license under this section shall deposit with the city treasurer cash or a surety bond in the amount of $500.00. 
a.	Deposits made with the city treasurer as required by this section shall be subject to claims in all cases where suit has been brought against the applicant and garnishment proceedings brought against the deposit. Any deposits in the hands of the city treasurer shall be returned to the applicant six months after the expiration of the license. 
b.	Any such license shall become immediately void if the deposit provided for in this section shall be reduced by garnishment suits to less than the amount required unless the applicant shall post additional deposits to cover such garnishments. 
c.	A temporary business license may be renewed only upon express approval of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 116,  9, 7-12-1983; Ord. No. 116A,  I, 1-8-1985) 
Sec. 14-389. - Requirements and regulations for auctioneer license. 
    An auctioneer license is subject to the following requirements and regulations: 
(1)	A license application similar to a temporary business license.
(2)	A designation, not to exceed two, as to employees who may assist in conducting the auction. 
(3)	The fee for such license shall be as established by resolution.
(Ord. No. 116,  5, 7-12-1983) 
Sec. 14-390. - Direct seller. 
    A direct seller is subject to the provisions of section 14-388 and to the following additional requirements and regulations: 
(1)	An application for license shall include:
a.	Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address if any;
b.	Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
c.	Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 
d.	Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any;
e.	Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered, and any services offered; 
f.	Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
g.	Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of his business; 
h.	The last three previous cities, villages, towns, where applicant conducted similar business; 
i.	Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving the city;
j.	Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years; the nature of the offense and the place of conviction; 
k.	Disclosure of any felony convictions for the applicant together with the nature and date of any such conviction; 
l.	Disclosure of any violations of article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.), or violations similar thereto, together with the nature and date of any such conviction. 
(2)	Each applicant shall present to the city clerk for examination:
a.	A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required;
b.	A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities; 
c.	A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made. 
(3)	The fee for a license shall be as established by resolution.
(Ord. No. 116,  6(A), (B), (H), 7-12-1983) 
Sec. 14-391. - Regulations and requirements for peddlers. 
    The following additional regulations and requirements apply to peddlers: 
(1)	A license application similar to temporary business license and in addition thereto:
a.	A brief description of the goods, merchandise, services or products being sold;
b.	Disclosure of any felony convictions for the applicant together with the nature and date of any such conviction; 
c.	Disclosure of any violation of article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.), or violations similar thereto, together with the nature and date of any such conviction. 
(2)	The fee for such license shall be as established by resolution.
(Ord. No. 116,  7, 7-12-1983) 
Sec. 14-392. - Examination of application. 
    The city clerk shall examine each application filed under this article for a license and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the city clerk shall deem necessary. The license shall not be issued unless the city clerk determines the following facts: 
(1)	That all of the statements made in the application are true and all information required by this article has been supplied. 
(2)	That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise, and has not previously violated this article. 
(3)	Nothing in the proposal will violate any provision of the zoning ordinance of the city set forth in appendix A to this Code, or any other law or ordinance. 
(4)	That an applicant for a peddler or direct sales license was not previously convicted of a felony or a violation of article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.), or violations similar thereto. 
(5)	That the required fee has ben paid to the city.
(Ord. No. 116,  8, 7-12-1983) 
Secs. 14-393-14-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FILMING AND FILMING PERMITS 

Sec. 14-421. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide rules governing the issuance of permits for filming motion picture, television, commercial and non-theatrical filming activities on location within the city. The intent of this article is to ensure that still photographers and motion picture, television, commercial and non-theatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations for filming activities within the city so long as those activities are consistent with the public safety and the protection of property. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1010, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-422. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Applicant means the person, organization, corporation, association or other entity applying for a permit to film in the City of Utica. 
    City means the City of Utica as a municipal corporation and existing pursuant to the laws of the State of Michigan. 
    Film development office means the office of the mayor as designated by the city council to coordinate filming and issue film permits in the City of Utica. 
    Filming activity means the staging, shooting, filming, videotaping, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television programs, video games, commercial and nontheatrical film productions. 
    Film permit means written authorization from the city's representative designated by city council to conduct the filming activity described in the permit. 
    News purposes means a filming activity conducted for the purpose of reporting on persons, events, or scenes which are in the news for newspapers, television news, and other news media. 
    Permittee means the person, organization, corporation, association or other entity issued a film permit under this policy. 
    Public street means any street or road maintained by the City and located within the city limits. 
    Still photography means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial still photographs. 
    Student filming activity means filming activity conducted to fulfill a course requirement by a student enrolled at a public or private school. 
    Studio means a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1020, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-423. - Permit required. 
(a)	It is unlawful to conduct a filming activity as defined in section 14-422 within the city without first obtaining a film permit from the film development office. 
(b)	A permit is issued by the film development office for the purpose of filming on city-owned, leased or controlled real property or city streets. This permit does not constitute or grant permission to use or occupy property not owned, leased or controlled by the city. This permit must be in the possession of the permitee at all times while on location in Utica. 
(c)	An applicant shall obtain the private property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1030, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-424. - Permit exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any of the following activities provided that the activity will not require the closure of a public street, or substantially impede vehicular traffic thereon: 
(1)	Filming activities conducted for news purposes as defined in section 14-422 
(2)	Filming activities conducted at studios as defined in section 14-422 
(3)	Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceeding; 
(4)	Noncommercial filming activities conducted on private property solely for private or family use; 
(5)	Commercial still photography or staging thereof, when conducted to the exclusion of any other filming activity as defined in section 14-422, when the following conditions apply: 
a.	The still photography, or staging thereof, will not be conducted on city property.
b.	The still photography, or staging thereof, will not require the parking of more than two motor vehicles on any public street within the city. 
(6)	Filming activities conducted by or for the city.
(Ord. No. 158,  1040, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-425. - Deadline for filing applications. 
(a)	Applications for a film permit must be filed with the film development office a minimum of two business days in advance of the date the film activity is to begin, except that of an application for a permit which includes street closures, stunts, or pyrotechnics which must be filed a minimum of five business days in advance of the first day of filming. 
(b)	No late applications will be processed by the city unless the film development office determines that special circumstances exist relative to the application which would have precluded its application on a timely basis. 
(c)	Applicants are encouraged to submit applications at the earliest advance date possible in order to facilitate coordination between city departments. 
(d)	Upon such showing of good cause, the film development office shall consider applications which are filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the application, and for city staff to prepare for the filming activity. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1050, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-426. - Application form. 
    The permit application shall be on a form furnished by the film development office signed by the applicant or agent thereof. Such form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, and telephone number of applicant;
(2)	Name, address, and telephone number of person in charge of filming on location;
(3)	Filming location(s), dates and approximate daily call times of proposed filming activity;
(4)	Description of scenes to be filmed including details of any hazardous filming activity employing firearms, explosives, the use of open flame, other pyrotechnical effects, animals, stunts, filming of moving motor vehicles, watercraft or aircraft; 
(5)	Description of the types and number of motor vehicles which will be parked on public streets, and description of any equipment to be placed on public property; 
(6)	Evidence of adequate insurance certification as stipulated by section 14-431 
(7)	Such other information as the film development office may require.
(Ord. No. 158,  1060, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-427. - Permit approval/denial. 
(a)	The application shall be approved or denied within two business days of receipt of the application unless the proposed filming activity requires extensive review by other city departments due to fire or traffic safety. The film permit shall be approved by the film development office unless determined from consideration of the application or other pertinent information, that any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	The filming activity will substantially disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles in the proposed permit area. 
(2)	The location of the filming activity will substantially interfere with street maintenance work, or a previously authorized excavation permit. 
(3)	The proposed permit location is on city property and the filming activity will substantially interfere with other previously authorized activities, contracts or safety of the public or employees while on city property. 
(4)	The proposed permit location is on city property and the filming activity will substantially interfere with municipal functions or the scheduled maintenance of city buildings or grounds. 
(5)	The filming activity creates a substantial risk of injury to persons or damage to property. 
(6)	The applicant failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
(7)	The particular filming activity would violate federal, state, or local law including licensing or permit requirements. 
(b)	When the grounds for permit denial can be corrected by imposing reasonable permit conditions, the film development office may impose such conditions rather than denying the permit. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1070, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-428. - Permit conditions. 
    The film development office may condition the issuance of a film permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place, manner and duration of filming activities as referenced on the "terms and conditions" attached to the film permit, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Requirements for the presence of employees of the city at the applicant's expense, when required for the particular filming activity; 
(2)	Requirements concerning posting of no parking signs, placement of traffic control devices, and employment of traffic and crowd control monitors at the applicant's expense; 
(3)	Requirements concerning posting of the outer boundaries of the filming activity, and providing advance notice to affected property owners/businesses; 
(4)	Requirements concerning the cleanup and restoration of public streets and city property employed in the filming activity; 
(5)	Restrictions concerning the use of city employee services, vehicles, and other equipment in the filming activity; 
(6)	Requirements that the applicant pay all fees, and obtain all permits and licenses required for the filming activity under local, state and federal law; 
(7)	Restrictions on the use of firearms, explosions, and other noise-creating or hazardous devices which disturb the peace; 
(8)	Restrictions on the use of stunts involving pyrotechnics, open flame, vehicle crashes, or other hazardous materials; 
(9)	Requirements concerning coverup of police, fire and other official uniforms worn by actors, when the actors are not on camera; 
(10)	Restrictions concerning the use of city logos, insignias, badges, or decals for filming purposes; 
(11)	Restrictions on the daily hours the filming activity may be conducted within the city;
(12)	Requirements concerning the city's receipt of proper acknowledgment for any assistance provided in making feature, television, or commercial productions; 
(13)	Requirements concerning affirmative action and nondiscriminatory practices for employment.
(Ord. No. 158,  1080, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-429. - Fees. 
(a)	A schedule of fees for city services and use of city property shall be established by resolution of the city council; 
(b)	The applicant shall pay all costs incurred by the city in providing city employees to be present during filming activity. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1090, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-430. - Change of filming activity date. 
    Upon reasonable notice by the permittee in advance of the filming activity, the film development office is authorized to change the date for which the film permit has been issued without requiring a new application or permit. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1100, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-431. - Insurance required. 
    The applicant for a film permit shall procure and maintain for the duration of the film activity insurance in the forms, types, and amounts prescribed by the city's film development office. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1110, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-432. - Liability and indemnification. 
    Prior to the issuance of the film permit the permit applicant must agree in writing to comply with the "filming permit terms and conditions." 
(Ord. No. 158,  1120, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-433. - Duties of permittee. 
    The permittee, and all agents, employees, and contractors of the permittee at the filming activity site within the city, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	The permitee shall comply in writing with all "terms and conditions" of the film permit.
(2)	The permittee shall not conduct a filming activity within the city not authorized by the film permit. 
(3)	The permittee shall comply with instructions made by the police department officer(s) assigned to police the filming activity site. 
(4)	The permittee shall comply with instructions made by city employees assigned to regulate the filming activity site. 
(5)	The permittee shall clean and restore all city-owned property utilized during the filming activity to the same condition as existed prior to the filming activity. 
(6)	The permittee shall comply with this ordinance and all other policies and ordinances of the city, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1130, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-434. - Street closures. 
    The applicant for a film permit may request that the city authorize a street closure on the film permit application. A short-term encroachment permit may be granted by the film development office or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1140, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-435. - Pyrotechnics. 
    During the filming of any special effect or stunt requiring the use of pyrotechnics or any material deemed hazardous, including but not limited to, fireworks, open flames, or explosives, the applicant must obtain a fire permit from the film development office. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1150, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-436. - Permit revocation or suspension. 
(a)	Permit revocation. The film development office may revoke the film permit if the permittee, or any agents, employees, or contractors of the permittee fail to comply with the requirements set forth in subsection 14-433(1)-(6), or if the film development office determines after the permit is issued that the permit application was false in any material detail. 
(1)	Notice of the grounds for revocation of the film permit shall be provided in writing by the film development office to the permit applicant or person in charge at the location of the filming activity. 
(2)	Appeals of the permit revocation shall be conducted in the matter specified in section 14-437 
(b)	Permit suspension. The police department officer assigned to police the filming activity site may suspend the film permit when the filming activity poses an immediate hazard to persons or property and the location manager will not, or cannot, prevent the hazard after being instructed to do so by the officer. 
(1)	The grounds for the permit suspension shall be provided in writing by the film development office to the permittee within one business day of the suspension. 
(2)	Appeals of the permit suspension shall be conducted in the manner specified in section 14-437 
(Ord. No. 158,  1160, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-437. - Appeals. 
    The permit applicant or permittee may appeal a permit denial, revocation, suspension, permit condition, insurance/fees requirement or the film development office's decision not to waive a deadline set forth in this article. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk's office not later than five business days after the date written notice of the decision is made. Failure to file timely appeal shall result in a waiver to the right to appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the city council at a special council meeting within five business days. 
    The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1170, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-438. - Violation; penalty. 
    The violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 158,  1180, 8-11-2009) 
Secs. 14-439-14-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-461. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "Pawnbroker, Secondhand Dealer and Junk Dealer Ordinance" of the City of Utica and will be referred to herein as this article. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-462. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed by this section: 
    Auto salvage dealer. Any junk dealer engaged in the business of purchasing or receiving, wrecking or dismantling, and the sale or exchange of motor vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts or materials therefrom. 
    Auto salvage yard or shop. Any place where an auto salvage dealer purchases, receives, wrecks, dismantles, sells, or exchanges used motor vehicles, or parts, or materials salvaged therefrom. 
    Certain regulated businesses exclusion of certain provisions. Any owner, person, corporation, limited liability company, member of a co-partnership, or firm which is regulated pursuant to state law and which is required to maintain and report transactions pursuant to state law on the recommendation of the police chief shall be permitted to be exempt from sections 14-491, 14-492, 14-494, 14-496, 14-498, and 14-503. 
    Collector vehicle. Any vehicle used for the collection, transportation, or handling of junk, or secondhand property, except not including a towing vehicle used to transport automobiles substantially used other than in transportation of motor vehicles as part of an auto salvage dealer business. 
    Employee. Means any person 18 years of age, or older, who renders any services in connection with the operation of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business and who receives compensation from the business, or patrons thereof. 
    Good moral character. The propensity on the part of the person to serve the public in a licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
    Goods. Any item not specifically covered by other definitions contained in this section. 
    Junk. Any personal property which is, or may be salvaged for reuse, resale, reduction, or similar disposition, or which is possessed, transported, owned, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted for any of the aforesaid purposes. Without limiting the aforesaid definition of "junk" terms shall include used, or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, wood pellets, and similar articles of property and used motor vehicles, machinery, or parts thereof which are used, owned, or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts of materials there from. Metals available or used for as scrap, shall be considered as junk. 
    Junk dealer. Any person engaged in the business of buying, exchanging, collecting, receiving, storing, accumulating, selling, or otherwise handling junk. 
    Junk yard or junk shop. Any place at which a junk dealer buys, exchanges, collects, receives, stores, accumulates, sells, or otherwise handles junk. 
    Owner or operator. Any person who owns, or controls a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business. This includes individuals, licensees, managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships, corporations, societies, organizations, associations, limited liability companies, or any combination of individuals, of whatever form or character. 
    Patron. Means any person eighteen (18) years of age, or older, who does business in any form with a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business. 
    Pawnbroker. Means any person, corporation, member of a limited liability company, member of a partnership, or firm who loans money on deposit, or pledge personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities, or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back again as stipulated price. 
    Pawn shop. Any place where a pawnbroker conducts the business of being a pawnbroker. 
    Scrap iron and metal processor or recycler. Any junk dealer engaged in the business of purchasing or receiving scrap iron and metal (except scrap motor vehicles not purchased from a licensed auto salvage dealer, or junk dealer) and the storing, processing, recycling, and sale or exchange thereof. 
    Scrap yard. Any place where a scrap iron and metal processor, or recycler engages in the business or receiving, storing, processing or recycling scrap iron or metal. 
    Secondhand dealer. Means any person, corporation, member of a co-partnership, or firm, or limited liability company engaged in the business of purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging, and receiving secondhand personal property of any kind, or description. Excluded from sections 14-491, 14-493, 14-494, 14-496, 14-497, 14-498, and 14-503 shall be any business whose primary business is the purchase and resale of clothing. 
    Secondhand store. Any place at which a second dealer buys, exchanges, collects receives, stores, or sells secondhand property. Excluded from sections 14-491, 14-493, 14-494, 14-496, 14-497, 14-498, and 14-503 shall be any business whose primary business is the purchase and resale of clothing. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 160-A,  2, 4-16-2013) 
Secs. 14-463-14-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING AND APPEALS 

Sec. 14-471. - License required. 
    No owner, or operator shall engage in or carry on the operation of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business without first obtaining and maintaining a valid business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter for each separate office, or place of business conducted by such owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-472. - License application. 
    Any owner or operator desiring a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer, or business license shall file a written application with the city on a form to be furnished by the city. The applicant shall accompany the application with the correct license fee, which fee shall not be refundable, and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)	Type of ownership of the business, i.e. whether individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise, including copies of the most recent annual statement and most recent articles of incorporation, partnership agreement, articles of organization, or other applicable document. 
(2)	The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted, including each address at which the business is to be conducted. 
(3)	A complete list of the name, resident address, birth date, and driver's license number, if applicable, of all owners and employees in the business, identifying where applicable, any employees who will manage, or be in charge of the operation of the business at any time. 
(4)	The following personal information concerning the applicant and owners, if an individual; concerning each stockholder, officer, or director if a corporation; concerning each member, if a limited liability company; concerning the partners, including general and limited partners, if a partnership and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.	Name, address and telephone number, date of birth, and driver's license number, if applicable; 
b.	Two previous addresses prior to the present address of the applicant;
c.	Written proof showing date of birth;
d.	Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and sex;
e.	Two front faced portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application, at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.	A full accurate and complete business history detailing experience, including, but not limited, whether or not such person has previously had any ownership interest in, or worked at, in this or another city or state, the same or similar business, including whether any license or permit issued, whether any such license or permit was ever denied, revoked, or suspended, the reason thereof and business activities, or occupations including the full name and address of the business and the name and phone number of any contact persons; 
g.	All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which such conviction occurred, the offense for which conviction, or such conviction and the circumstances thereof; 
h.	Complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the chief of police, or his or her authorized representative. 
(5)	Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation to the truth of the statements set forth in the application and qualifications of the applicant. 
(6)	The names and addresses of three adult residents in the county who will serve as character references, who must be persons other than relatives and business associates. 
(7)	A written declaration by the applicant under penalty of perjury that the information contained in this application is true and correct with such declaration dated and signed in the city. 
(8)	Execution of any and all necessary documents and a statement indicating that proper equipment will be installed for the direct electronic entry into the city's computerized system, transaction information, or recording by electronic transmission pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-473. - Investigations and inspections. 
(a)	Upon receipt of an application for a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business license, the city shall refer application to the chief of police or his or her designee, who shall conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character, personal and criminal history. A personal interview may be required and such further information, identification and physical examination of the person and proposed business premises and records of the applicant as shall bear on the investigation. 
(b)	Chief of police, or his or her designee, shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the business is to be carried on for the purpose of insuring that the premises comply with all requirements set forth in this article and with ordinances of the city relating to public, health, safety and welfare. Additionally, no applicant's license shall be considered as issued until all equipment is installed and demonstrated to be operating for the electronic transmission of information relating to transactions as required pursuant to this ordinance. 
(c)	An applicant shall submit to lawful inspections by the city and any of its departments, as well as the county and any other governmental agencies as necessary to insure that the proposed business and applicant comply with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the city. An application may be refused for submission for approval to the city council until a report form applicable departments is received and information furnished such that the applicant or proposed premises comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(d)	Before issuance of any license, the chief of police, or his or her designee, shall submit within 45 days of receipt of an application and report of investigations, inspections and a recommendation for approval or denial. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-474. - License issuance; conditions for denial. 
    The city upon receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter, and reports and recommendations of the chief of police, or his or her designee shall place the application upon the agenda for the next regularly scheduled council meeting, provided that such meeting date is not less than seven days from the date of receipt of such application by the city clerk. If it is less than seven days from such receipt, such application shall be placed upon the agenda for the following regular meeting of the council. The council shall determine whether or not such license shall issue, after reviewing the reports of investigation and inspection and recommendation by the chief of police, or his or her designee, and other employees of the city. The council shall direct that a license be issued within 14 days provided in addition electronic transmission is demonstrated to be capable unless it finds that: 
(1)	The correct fee has not been tendered or any fee in the form of check or draft has been dishonored. 
(2)	The operation as proposed is not compliant with the applicable laws, including but not limited to, the city's building, fire, zoning, and health ordinances. 
(3)	The applicant or any person having an ownership interest in any entity which is the applicant, or a manager, has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, including but not limited to prostitution and pandering, gambling, extortion, fraud, criminal usury, controlled substances, weapons, assault, and theft, unless such conviction occurred at least 15 years prior to the date of application. 
(4)	The applicant has knowingly made any false misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application, or in any document required by the city. 
(5)	The applicant has had a similar business license, or other similar permit, or license denied, revoked, or suspended for any of the causes set forth here and above in the ordinance, or any other state or local agency within the prior 15 years to the date of application. 
(6)	The applicant or any owner is not 18 years of age or older.
    The council, if it denies an application, shall specify the grounds for denial, notifying the applicant by regular mail, addressed to the addressed furnished in the application which notice shall specify the grounds for denial. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-475. - Hearings on appeals or variances. 
(a)	Within 20 days of the date of denial of an application, the applicant may request, in the form of a written application to the city, furnished to the city clerk, a hearing before the city's hearing officer for reconsideration of the license application denial, or for a variance of any of the provisions of this chapter, which provision constituted grounds for the original denial of the application. The city attorney's office may represent the interests of the city. such hearings shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)	The parties (the applicant and the city), may present and submit evidence on the applicant's behalf to show that the grounds for the original denial do or do not exist, or are accurate or inaccurate. 
(2)	After reviewing the evidence, city hearing officer shall determine whether to uphold the denial, or grant the application. 
(3)	The parties may present a statement and adequate evidence, demonstrating that:
a.	Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances, or conditions apply or do not apply to the business referred to in the appeal submitted which circumstances or conditions do or do not apply generally to any proposed business which warrant the issuance of the application notwithstanding conformity to the ordinance. 
b.	That the granting of such license will or will not materially affect the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood, patrons, or the public at large, and that such issuance shall or shall not be a material detriment, or injurious to public welfare. 
(b)	In all cases where a variance is granted, the hearing officer shall find:
(1)	That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article; and 
(2)	That the grant of the variance will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood or the city at large. 
(3)	The hearing officer may impose reasonable conditions, if the license is approved for issuance. 
(c)	The applicant or the city may appeal any decision of the hearing officer to city council for a decision upon the record which may result in a decision being upheld, set aside, or modified, in whole or in part. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-476. - Inspections of business premises. 
(a)	Every licensee shall permit all reasonable inspections of the business premises, including during regular business hours and otherwise after regular business hours, and shall at all times comply with all applicable laws, including after expiration of any license and during any period the license may be revoked or suspended. 
(b)	Any licensee shall display the license in an open and conspicuous place on the premises visible to the patrons of the premises. 
(c)	During the pendency of any application, or during the term of any license, if any information provided in the application changes, such change of information shall be furnished in writing to the chief of police, or his or her designee within 72 hours after such change. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-477. - License fees; expirations; transfers. 
(a)	Fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the council.
(b)	License granted shall expire on June 30th of each year and shall require payment of a renewal fee for the ensuing year. 
(c)	No license shall be deemed transferable, separable, or divisible.
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Secs. 14-478-14-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS, BONDS 

Sec. 14-491. - Procedures and forms for fingerprinting, statements and recording of transactions; inspection of records. 
(a)	The city shall furnish forms for the taking of fingerprints and furnishing additional information as required by regulations of the police department. Every person licensed to conduct, maintain, or engage in a business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer, shall maintain in a form provided by the chief of police, or his or her designee, records in the manner and form as provided herein, which shall be subject to inspection by the police department upon request. 
(b)	Every licensee, owner and employee, shall keep a record of all persons and/or entities with whom business has been transacted and all property coming into their possession. Reports must be electronically transmitted to the chief of police or his or her designee. Within 48 hours a report must be transmitted by means of electronic transmission through a modem, or similar device, in a format such that the data is capable of direct electronic entry into the city's police department's computerized system, as approved by the chief of police, or his or her designee, for identifying property coming into the possession of a licensor, including but not limited to all pawn property, all transactions in which used goods have been received the preceding day by pawn, trade, purchase, or consignment and items received by junk dealers. A transaction report by electronic transmission under this sub section shall not be reported on paper forms, unless the chief of police, or his or her designee, so requires. All secondhand dealers, junk dealers, and pawnbrokers must have the equipment installed in their place of business no later than April 15, 2012. Information must be reported electronically beginning April 15, 2012. If the volume of transactions does not exceed ten for a 90-day period, transactions taking place at that business may not be reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms approved by the chief of police, or his or her designee. 
(c)	A fee as adopted and subject to change periodically by the city council shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess the property registration fee for each transaction, the licensee reports either through batch file upload, or directly using the vendor's business interface, or on the vendor's automated reported service that involves transactions subject to the provision of this chapter. 
(d)	Transaction is defined as a single buy, or which may involve one or more items and does not include contract extensions, or claims. The per transaction registration fee is not a per item fee, included in the transaction. It is within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer whether to recover the fee from their customers for registering a transaction. 
(e)	The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The city's vendor automated reporting service, which isolates and generates a list of the billable transactions, will be used for deriving invoiced amounts. The above fees are assessed for the use of the standard vendor's automated recording service. Any custom programming completed for the secondhand dealer will be negotiated on a contract basis and may result in additional licensing arrangements between the vendor and the licensor. Sales tax will be added to the above amounts where applicable. Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-492. - Restrictions on sales. 
    No entity or person who is not a licensed pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer shall sell, offer for sale, advertise for sale, or represent any article, personal property, or other valuable thing for sale which is subject to the provisions of this article unless the proper license is in effect. No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer, shall purchase, or receive in pawn, any item, or other articles, or keep for sale any such articles, or items unless a current effective license is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-493. - Sunday operation prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this article as a pawnbroker, pursuant to state law to transact business, or to open, or keep open, the place or room where such business is conducted on any Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-494. - Sales prohibited during certain hours. 
    No licensee, employee, or agent of a licensee shall sell or purchase by sale, barter, exchange, or otherwise, any item under a license issued pursuant to this chapter from or to any person or entity between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. In addition, no person or entity shall or purchase by sale, barter, exchange, or otherwise any junk between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-495. - Prohibited sale or possession of items with serial numbers altered, removed. 
(a)	No licensee, agent, or employee shall conceal or misrepresent the identity by removing, concealing, defacing, adding to, substituting, or altering, the serial number or manufacturer's number on any motor vehicle, motor, appliance, mechanical device, watch, clock, camera, precision instrument, outboard motor, radio, shotgun, or any other article or thing where the manufacturer has placed numbers for the purpose of identification, by altering or replacing any part of such article, or thing, bearing the serial or manufacturer's number with a new or replaced part upon which the proper serial number, or manufacturer's number has not been stamped or placed. 
(b)	No person licensed under this article, or employee of such licensed person, shall deal in, or possess, any item as described herein above from which the serial numbers have been removed, concealed, defaced, added, substituted, altered, or replaced. 
(c)	In all prosecutions under this section, possession by any dealer, licensor, person, or entity of an item from which the serial numbers, or manufacturer's number, or identification number has been removed, concealed, defaced, added, substituted, altered, or replaced shall be prima facie evidence of violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-496. - Merchandise displays. 
    No licensee under this chapter shall display merchandise or articles outside of the building, or fail to change a window display at least twice monthly. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-497. - Police order to hold property. 
    Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies an auto salvage dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or owner or employee of any of the foregoing, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. If the hold was conveyed verbally, the hold shall be confirmed by the investigating agency within 72 hours either in writing, or by electronic transmission. The order to hold the item shall expire 60 days from the date it is placed, unless the holding agency seizes the item of evidence, or obtain other court order to hold the item, or determines that the hold is still necessary and notifies the business in writing, or by electronic transmission to continue to hold the item for an additional 60 days. Each licensee and owner shall be jointly and severally liable for holding such property. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-498. - Retention of articles for specified periods. 
(a)	Items, goods, articles and junk purchased or exchanged, shall be retained for not less than 15 days before disposal in an accessible place in the building where licensed activity occurs. A tag shall be attached to such item in some visible and conspicuous place with a number corresponding to the entry in the electronic record, or other record provided. For items not recorded electronically, the purchaser shall prepare and deliver on Monday of each week, to the chief of police, or his or her designee, before noon, a legible and correct copy in the English language containing a description of each item and photograph, purchased or received during the previous week, including the hour, day when purchased and a description of the person from whom it was purchased, including a copy of a photo identification. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the licensee, employee, or owner who received the item. 
(b)	Any person engaged in the business of buying, exchanging, collecting, receiving, storing, or selling any used motor vehicles for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom, shall report each such transaction to the chief of police, or his or her designee, within five business days, excluding Saturday and Sunday, from the date of the transaction. The report shall contain a description of each such motor vehicle acquired, including vehicle identification number, hour and date when purchased, a description of the person, including a copy of photo identification from whom it was acquired and a photo of the vehicle. Such reports shall be on forms approved by the chief of police, or his or her designee, and made under oath. Such vehicles shall not be disposed of, or altered in any manner for a period of five days from the time the report is received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-499. - Prohibited purchases. 
    No licensee, owner, or employee shall receive any item, goods, or junk, from any person who at the time is intoxicated, or appears to be under the influence of a controlled substance, or is known to be a thief, or receiver of stolen property, or from any person who is suspected not to be the owner of the property, or from any minor under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-500. - Premises, enclosures and restrictions. 
    No licensee shall maintain a junk yard, junk shop, auto salvage yard, or scrap metal yard, or any other business unless the business is carried on entirely inside a building, or unless the premise is conducted within an enclosed area, except for gates, or doors for ingress and egress by a suitable enclosure such as a fence, or wall as approved by the planning commission for the City of Utica. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-501. - Premises condition. 
(a)	All fences and enclosures shall be maintained in a neat and substantial manner, including but not limited to, painting, removal, or replacement of dilapidated areas and maintenance of a continuous uninterrupted even perimeter of the same materials. 
(b)	No items, goods, or junk shall be permitted to lean on or touch any such enclosure, or be in front of or suspended on any such enclosure. Items may not be piled higher than two feet below the top of such enclosure and items must be arranged so that safety aisles, driveways and uniformed passage ways are provided, allowing reasonable access to all parts of the premises by law enforcement and fire fighting operations. 
(c)	All premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and neat condition and no fire shall be permitted unless a permit from the fire chief and any other regulatory agency has been obtained and is in full force. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-502. - Storage of scrap tires. 
    Scrap tires may only be stored after special land use approval by the planning commission under the standards for special land use approval and the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-503. - Bonds. 
    Prior to any license being issued, the applicant shall furnish a corporate security bond, Best A rated or better, and the penal sum of $10,000.00, with sufficient sureties to be approved by the city, which bond shall be conditioned that the owner operator shall, during the time of the license, comply with all the laws of the state of Michigan and the city pursuant to this chapter and in regard to pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, junk dealers, precious metal and gem dealers act of the state, as set forth, and the sale of secondhand watches act of the state as set forth, including any amendments to the foregoing state laws. Any person aggrieved by the action of the licensee shall have a right of action on the bond for recovery of money damages. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of any license, or after the termination of any action upon such bond. 
    On the recommendation of the building inspector, mayor, or chief of police, or his or her designee, an additional bond may be required in order to assure that the conditions at the site of the business are maintained from which the costs of any enforcement action shall be repaid to the city in the event of any enforcement action for compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-504. - Compliance with state laws. 
    Each licensee and employee must comply with the terms of state laws, including but not limited to, MCL 445.471 through 445.476 and any amendments thereto, the state act regulating pawnbrokers where applicable MCL 446.201 through 446.219 and any amendments thereto. Full compliance with the precious metal and gem dealer act as set forth in MCL 445.481 through 445.492 and any amendments thereto is required. Compliance with the sale of secondhand watches act MCL 445.551 through 445.555 and any amendments thereto is required. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-505. - Compliance with zoning ordinances. 
    Every licensee and employee shall comply with all requirements for business location at which work, pursuant to any license issued under this article, occurs as provided in any applicable zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-506. - Minors prohibited. 
    No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come upon, or remain on the premises of any business licensed herein as an operator, employee, dealer, or patron. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-507. - Penalty. 
    Any licensee, dealer, employee, person, or entity who violates the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be responsible of a municipal civil infraction pursuant to city ordinance and/or state law. Any violation may also result in a suspension or revocation of such license as prescribed by statute and as otherwise imposed by the chief of police, or his or her designee, after notice of such proposed action at least seven days beforehand. The licensee shall be permitted a hearing before the city hearing officer, or his or her designee, and a right of appeal as prescribed for denial of the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 160,  2, 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 160-A, 4-16-2013) 
Secs. 14-508-14-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS, TRANSACTIONS, RECORDING 

Sec. 14-531. - Definitions. 
    Definitions utilized under this article shall be the same definitions as provided in the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act MCL 445.482 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-532. - Registration and transaction fee. 
    A registration fee and renewal fee shall be assessed from each licensee in a manner and amount as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. A transaction fee per transaction shall be payable in an amount as set from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-533. - Records of transactions. 
(a)	A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each transaction, on record of transaction forms, provided for in Act 95 of 1981. Such record shall be legibly written or otherwise printed in ink in the English language. Each record of transaction form shall be filled out in quadruplicate by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer. One copy of the form shall go to the police department pursuant to state law; one copy shall go to the customer; and one copy shall be retained by the dealer pursuant to state law. 
(b)	At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer or the agent or employee of the dealer shall ensure that the following information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form: 
(1)	The dealer certificate of registration number.
(2)	A general description of the precious item or precious items received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description. 
(3)	The date of the transaction.
(4)	The name of the person conducting the transaction.
(5)	The name, date of birth, driver's license number or State of Michigan personal identification card number, and street and house number of the customer, together with a legible imprint of the right thumb of the customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb or a finger of the customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or fingerprint shall be made available to a police agency during the course of a police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record of transaction. After a period of one year from the date of the record of transaction, if a police investigation concerning a precious item or items described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and any police agency or sheriff's department holding a copy of the record of transaction shall destroy, and not keep a permanent record of, the record of transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or changes his or her business address to another local jurisdiction either within or out of this state shall transmit the records of all transactions made by the dealer within one year before his or her closing or moving, to the local police agency. 
(6)	The price paid by the dealer for the precious item or precious items.
(7)	The form of payment to the customer; check, money order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft. 
(8)	The customer's signature.
(c)	The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number 1 and the calendar year (example, 01-2011). 
(d)	The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item received shall be open to an inspection by the county prosecuting attorney, the local police agency, the police agency or sheriff's department of the local governmental unit in which the customer resides, and the Michigan state police, at all times during the ordinary business hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is considered to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. The record of transaction forms of a dealer shall not be open to inspection by the general public. 
(e)	The items shall be photographed and any serial number or other markings provided, as well as any other information as required pursuant to the electronic transaction reporting processes utilized by the city. 
(f)	The form of the record of transaction shall have an 8-1/2 by 11 inch size and shall be as follows: 

(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-534. - Retention of transaction and transmittal to police department. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by state law, each record of a transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after the transaction to which the record pertains. 
(b)	Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the Utica Police Department and, if the record of transaction form indicates that the customer resides outside the jurisdiction of the City of Utica, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police agency of the city, village, or township in which the customer resides, as set forth on the record of transaction, or, if that city, village, or township does not have a police agency, to the sheriff's department of the county in which the customer resides as set forth on the record of transaction. 
(1)	Every licensee, owner and employee, shall keep a record of all persons and/or entities with whom business has been transacted and all property coming into their possession. Reports must be electronically transmitted to the chief of police, or his or her designee. Within 48 hours of receipt by purchase, or otherwise of a precious item, a report must be transmitted by means of electronic transmission through a modem, or similar device in a format that the data is capable of direct electronic entry into the the police department's computerized system, as approved by the chief of police, or his or her designee, for identifying property coming into the possession of a licensor. A transaction report by electronic transmission under this sub section shall not be reported on paper forms, unless the chief of police, or his or her designee, so requires. All dealers must have the equipment installed in their place of business no later than April 15, 2012. Information must be reported electronically beginning April 15, 2012. If the volume of transactions does not exceed ten for a 90-day period transactions taking place at that business may not be reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms approved by the chief of police, or his or her designee. 
(2)	A fee, as adopted and subject to change periodically by the city council, shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess the property registration fee for each transaction the licensee reports, either through batch file upload, or directly using the vendor's business interface, or on the vendor's automated reported service that involves transactions subject to the provision of this article. 
(3)	Transaction is defined as a single buy, or which may involve one or more items and does not include contract extension or claims. The per transaction registration fee is not a per item fee included in the transaction. It is within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer whether to recover the fee from their customers for registering a transaction. 
(4)	The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The city's vendor automated reporting service which isolates and generates a list of the billable transactions, will be used for deriving invoiced amounts. The above fees are assessed for the use of the standard vendor's automated recording service. Any custom programming completed for the second-hand dealer will be negotiated on a contract basis and may result in additional licensing arrangements between the vendor and the licensor. Sales tax will be added to the above amounts where applicable. Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a violation of this chapter. 
(c)	The record of transaction forms received by a police agency or sheriff's department shall not be open to inspection by the general public. Each police agency or sheriff's department holding record of transaction forms shall be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction forms and ensuring that the record of transaction forms are used only for the purpose for which they were received. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Secs. 14-535-14-550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-551. - Certificate of registration. 
    No person shall carry on the business of a precious metal or gem dealer in the city without first having a "certificate of registration" issued from the police department authorizing such person or entity to carry on such business subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-552. - Application; prerequisites. 
    A dealer shall apply to the city for a certificate of registration, and pay a fee of $50.00 to cover the cost of processing and issuing the certificate of registration, by disclosing the following information: 
(1)	The name, address, and thumbprint of the applicant(s).
(2)	The name and address under which the applicant does business.
(3)	The name, address, and thumbprint of all agents or employees of the dealer. Within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the dealer shall forward to the local police agency the name, address, and thumbprint of the new employee. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-553. - Police department review. 
    The chief of police, or his or her designee, shall review the application and determine whether the application complies with the provisions of this article and the "The Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act" (Act 95 Of 1981). The dealer [chief of police] shall complete his examination and issue a determination within 30 days upon receipt of the application described herein. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-554. - Review by building inspector. 
    The building inspector shall, within 15 days of the submittal of an application, review the premises in order to determine whether the precious metal and gem dealer activities are compliant with the zoning ordinance. Such determination shall be issued to the chief of police, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-555. - Certificate of registration, duration; renewal; changes. 
    Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or address under which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the Utica Police Department in writing of the change. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-556. - Display of certificate of registration. 
    Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the local police agency, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of business. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Secs. 14-557-14-570. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS, BONDS, PENALTIES, REVOCATION 

Sec. 14-571. - Precious item retention; alteration or defacing unlawful. 
    A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for nine calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other than that required for an accurate appraisal of its value. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-572. - Precious items: acceptance prohibited and unlawful. 
    A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not: 
(1)	Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another. 
(2)	Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license or a valid State of Michigan personal identification card. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-573. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than 93 days and/or a fine of $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Sec. 14-574. - License revocation. 
    Any dealer, agent, or employee of a dealer who is convicted of any misdemeanor pursuant to this act, or under section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931, Public Act 328, MCL 750.535, or of the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act MCL 445.481, shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer within this state for a period of one year after conviction. A dealer, or an agent, or employee of a dealer who is convicted of a felony under MCL 445.481 et seq. Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, or under Section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 Public Act 328, MCL 750.535, shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer within this State for a period of five years after conviction. 
(Ord. No. 161,  2, 3-13-2012) 
Chapter 18 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; historic preservation, ch. 38; special assessments, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions,  2-231 et seq. (Back)
State Law reference- Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given to them in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Authority means the downtown development authority of the city created by this article. 
    Board and board of directors mean the board of directors of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the mayor of the city. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 124,  2, 8-8-????) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-32. - Determination of necessity. 
    The common council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 124,  3, 8-8-1989) 
Sec. 18-33. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) a downtown development authority for the city. The downtown development authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Utica." The downtown development authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this article and Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). The enumeration of a power in this article or in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the downtown development authority. 
(Ord. No. 124,  4, 8-8-1989) 
State law reference- Authority to establish downtown development authority, MCL 125.1652. 
Sec. 18-34. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) shall consist of the described territory in the city, subject to this article and Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), as set forth in Exhibit A to Ordinance No. 124, attached hereto and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 124,  5, 8-8-1989) 
Sec. 18-35. - Board of directors. 
    The downtown development authority shall be under the supervision and control of the board of directors consisting of the chief executive officer of the city and not less than eight or more than 12 members as determined by the city. The members of the board of directors shall be appointed by the chief executive officer of the city, subject to the approval by the common council. Not less than a majority of the members of the board of directors shall be persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. Not less than one of the members of the board of directors shall be a resident of the downtown district, if the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing with it. Of the members of the board of directors first appointed, an equal number, as near as is practical, shall be appointed for one year, two years, three years, and four years. Members of the board of directors shall hold office until the members' successor is appointed. Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the chief executive officer of the city for the unexpired term only. Members of the board of directors shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. 
(Ord. No. 124,  6, 8-8-1989) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions,  2-231 et seq. 
State law reference- Board of directors, MCL 125.1654. 
Sec. 18-36. - Powers of authority. 
    The downtown development authority shall have all powers enumerated or implied by law in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 124,  7, 8-8-1989) 
Sec. 18-37. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a)	The fiscal year of the downtown development authority shall begin on January 1 of each year and end on December 31 of that same year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b)	The board of directors shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the common council on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is required by law to be submitted to the common council. The board of directors shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the common council. The board of directors may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)	The downtown development authority shall submit financial reports to the common council at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The downtown development authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 124,  8, 8-8-1989) 
State law reference- Budget, MCL 125.1678. 
Secs. 18-38-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 70. (Back)
Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Captured assessed value means the amount in any one year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the development area exceeds the initial assessed value, as more fully described in the development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
    Development area means the area within the boundaries of the city downtown development authority district, as described in Exhibit A to ordinance 124, and as illustrated in the downtown development authority development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
    Development plan means the development plan for the downtown development authority district, illustrated in the downtown development authority development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
    Downtown development authority means the city development authority as established by article II of this chapter. 
    Initial assessed value means the most recently assessed value, as finally equalized by the state board of equalization, of all taxable property within the boundaries of the downtown development authority district at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, as more fully described in the downtown authority development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
    Tax increment means that portion of the tax levy of all taxing jurisdictions paid each year on real and personal property in the downtown development authority district on the captured assessed value, as more fully described in the downtown development authority development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
    Tax increment financing plan means the "Tax Increment Financing Plan for the City of Utica Downtown Development Authority District," including the development plan, as transmitted to the city board of trustees by the downtown development authority for public hearing, and as confirmed by this article, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Taxing jurisdiction means each unit of government levying an ad valorem property tax on property in the downtown development authority district. 
(Ord. No. 127,  1, 5-14-1991) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-62. - Approval and adoption of plan. 
(a)	Pursuant to section 19(1) of Act 197, the common council hereby finds and determines in accordance with section 19(1) of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1669(1)) as follows: 
(1)	That the development plan and tax increment financing plan constitutes and embodies a public purpose of the city; 
(2)	That the development plan and tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set forth in sections 14(2) and 17(2) of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1664(2), 125.1667(2); 
(3)	That the proposed method of financing the development activities described in the development plan and tax increment financing plan is feasible, and that the downtown development authority has the ability to arrange the financing; 
(4)	That the development activities described in the development plan and tax increment financing plan are reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.); 
(5)	That the land to be acquired within the downtown development authority district is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the development plan and tax increment financing plan and the purposes of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.); 
(6)	That the development plan and tax increment financing plan is in reasonable accord with the approved master plan of the city; 
(7)	That public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities are, or will be, adequate to service the downtown development authority district; and 
(8)	That such changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities as are contemplated by the development plan and tax increment financing plan are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city. 
(b)	In accordance with the considerations in subsection (a) of this section, the downtown development authority development plan and tax increment financing plan are hereby approved and adopted for all purposes of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) consistent with such plans, with the following additions, modifications and/or conditions: 
(1)	Delete Ruby Street closing from the project plan list.
(2)	Amend the parking study project to include parking lot improvement program and to advance this project in years. 
(3)	Include the plan rebate amount of $22,500.00.
(c)	A copy of the development plan and tax increment financing plan, and all respective amendments thereto, shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office and cross-indexed to this article. 
(Ord. No. 127,  2, 5-14-1991) 
Sec. 18-63. - Boundaries of development area. 
    The boundaries of the development area are hereby adopted and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 127,  3, 5-14-1991) 
State law reference- Development and tax increment financing plan, MCL 125.1664 et seq. 
Sec. 18-64. - Preparation of annual assessment roll. 
    Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the development district, the city assessor shall prepare an updated annual assessment roll. The annual assessment roll shall show the information required in the base year assessment roll and, in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the same persons as the base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with this article and the development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
(Ord. No. 127,  5, 5-14-1991) 
Sec. 18-65. - Account status report. 
    Annually, the downtown development authority shall submit to the governing body of the municipality and the state tax commission a report on the status of the tax increment financing account. The report shall include: 
(1)	The amount and source of revenue in the account;
(2)	The amount and purpose of expenditures from the account;
(3)	The amount of principle and interest on any outstanding bonded indebtedness;
(4)	The initial assessed value of the project area;
(5)	The captured assessed value retained by the authority;
(6)	The tax increments received; and
(7)	Any additional information the governing body or the state tax commission considers necessary. 
The report shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 127,  6, 5-14-1991) 
Sec. 18-66. - Implementation. 
    All tax increments shall be transmitted by the city treasurer into an account of the downtown development authority at the earliest practicable date. All tax increments, so received by the downtown development authority, shall be disbursed in accordance with the provisions of the development plan and tax increment financing plan and the requisitions of the downtown development authority. Surplus funds shall revert proportionately to the respective taxing bodies. For the purpose of segregation and transfer of such funds, the city treasurer shall maintain a separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the common council, to be designated downtown development authority project fund. All amounts payable to the downtown development authority shall, subject to the foregoing, be deposited directly in the downtown development authority project fund. 
(Ord. No. 127,  7, 5-14-1991) 
Sec. 18-67. - Duration of tax increment financing plan. 
    The tax increment financing plan will continue in effect until all purposes of the development plan and tax increment financing plan have been fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 127,  8, 5-14-1991) 
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 42. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Ambulance service. 
(a)	The city, under the direction of the fire department, shall operate an ambulance for emergency service. 
(b)	All charges for emergency ambulance service shall be collected and kept in a separate account to be maintained and the funds thus collected may be used to pay costs of operation and the replacement/maintenance of fire and ambulance equipment. 
(Ord. No. 82,  1-3, 6-9-1969; Ord. No. 82A, 1-11-1971; Ord. No. 82B, 10-12-1976; Ord. No. 82C, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 82D, 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 82E, 3-11-2008) 
Secs. 22-2-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, MCL 30.401 et seq.; local emergency management, MCL 30.410. (Back)
Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means a person appointed to coordinate emergency planning and services within the city or as prescribed in this article. In the absence of an appointed person, the term "coordinator" shall mean the mayor. 
    Deputy coordinator means the person appointed to provide liaison services between the city and the county office of emergency services. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or manmade cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders. 
    District coordinator means the state police district emergency services coordinator or his authorized representative. 
    Emergency operations plan means the city emergency operations plan which has been prepared under subsection 22-35(a) to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the city. 
    Emergency services shall have a broad meaning to include preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and manmade disasters as defined in this section, and to include civil defense. 
    Emergency services forces means all disaster relief forces; all agencies of the municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees; and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this article or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this article. 
    Emergency services volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
    Emergency situation means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined in this section, to include, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and buildup activities prior to an actual disaster. 
    State of disaster means a declaration by executive order or proclamation by the governor under the provisions of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.), which activities the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local, and interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply. 
    State of emergency means a declaration by the mayor pursuant to this article which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the city emergency operations plan and authorizes the deployment and use of any municipal forces to which the plan applies. 
(Ord. No. 115, art. 2, 8-10-1982) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-32. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish the position of deputy emergency services coordinators to provide liaison between this municipality and the county and to ensure complete and efficient utilization of all resources during periods of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 115, art. 1, 8-10-1982) 
Sec. 22-33. - Emergency services coordinator. 
    The emergency services coordinator of the county, in accordance with Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.) and the county emergency services resolution, is the coordinator of emergency services activities in the political subdivisions within the county. 
(Ord. No. 115, art. 1,  2, 8-10-1982) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees,  2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 22-34. - Responsibilities of elected officials; work of volunteer agencies. 
    This article will not relieve any elected official or municipal department of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 115, art. 1,  3, 8-10-1982) 
Sec. 22-35. - Organization for emergency services. 
(a)	The mayor, with the approval of the council, is hereby authorized and directed to prepare for community disasters, utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the municipality. The mayor, as executive head of the municipal government, shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the municipality's emergency services forces, if any, working through the county emergency services coordinator and the city deputy coordinator. 
(b)	The employees, equipment, and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, agencies, and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to emergency service activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces of the county. Such designations shall be made by the chair of the county board of commissioners with the approval of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 115, art. 3,  1, 2, 8-10-1982) 
Sec. 22-36. - Deputy emergency services coordinators. 
    The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint deputy emergency services coordinators who shall be persons with the personal attributes and experience to provide liaison services to county officials and to coordinate the activities of certain designated municipal departments, boards, agencies, and commissioners to protect the public health, safety, and welfare during emergency situations or disasters. 
(Ord. No. 115, art. 4,  1, 8-10-1982) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees,  2-61 et seq. 
Secs. 22-37-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INCIDENTS INVOLVING HAZARDOUS WASTES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 54. (Back)
Sec. 22-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means any state or federal statute, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, relating to hazardous substances. 
    Costs and expenses incurred means the actual labor costs of the city for full-time, part-time, or volunteer personnel together with costs and expenses for all fringe benefits, administrative overhead, materials, disposal costs, and an allocation of a reasonable market, rental rate for equipment. 
    Hazardous incident means an occurrence involving a hazardous substance whereby either or both of the following occurs: 
(1)	Person or persons are endangered, injured or killed;
(2)	Property is endangered, damaged or destroyed.
    Hazardous substance means one or more of the following: 
(1)	A chemical or other material which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment; 
(2)	"Hazardous substance" as defined in the comprehensive environmental response, compensation, and liability act of 1980, Public Law 96-510, 94 Stat. 2767. 
(3)	"Hazardous waste" as defined in section 11103 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.11103). 
(4)	Petroleum which means a regulated substance as defined in section 21303 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.21303). 
    Hazardous substance emergency means that persons or property are in imminent danger of injury, death, or destruction from a hazardous substance. 
(Ord. No. 126,  1, 3-12-1991) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-62. - Liability. 
(a)	Any person that causes a hazardous incident shall be strictly liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the city to contain, remove, investigate and abate the hazardous incident. 
(b)	Any person that deliberately sets or causes any fire, explosion or other destructive force for the injury or destruction of property shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the city to contain, remove, investigate and abate the fire, explosion, or destructive force. 
(c)	The owner, operator, employer, contractor, or lessor of a person causing a hazardous incident is vicariously and jointly liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 126,  2, 3-12-1991) 
Sec. 22-63. - Enforcement. 
    The mayor is authorized to enforce any liability imposed by this article or by any law by the appropriate means, including civil litigation. 
(Ord. No. 126,  3, 3-12-1991) 
Secs. 22-64-22-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Alarm systems, MCL 338.1051 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device, or any assembly of equipment and devices, which when activated, signal the presence of a hazard or condition requiring urgent attention and to which police officers, fire department or EMS personnel may be summoned, directly or indirectly, and are expected to respond to. The term "alarm system" in this chapter, shall include: "hold-up alarm system," "burglar alarm system," "intrusion alarm system," "panic alarm system," "personal emergency response system," "temperature fire alarm system," "manual fire alarm system," "fire alarm system," "automatic sprinkler and/or water flow alarm system." Alarm systems on motor vehicles shall be excluded from the definition and operation of this article unless the motor vehicle alarm is connected to the alarm system at the premises owned and/or leased by the user/subscriber. Also excluded are internal alarm systems designed solely to alert or signal person(s) within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an unauthorized intrusion or the presence of a hazard within the premises. If such an internal system, however, also employs an audible or visual signal designed to signal persons outside the premises, such an alarm system is within the provision of this section. 
    Automatic telephone dialing alarm system means a device, equipment or a combination thereof that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other means initiate the automatic calling or dialing or connection to any telephone number assigned to any police department, fire department or public service utility by a public telephone company for the purpose of delivering a recorded message. 
    False alarm means any alarm condition which is registered at or reported to the city police department, fire department or elsewhere through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or negligence or mistake of the owner or user/subscriber or their agent or employee. Also included is any alarm condition registered at or reported to the police department, fire department or elsewhere not resulting from criminal activity or for which the alarm was intended, or in the case of a fire alarm, any alarm condition not resulting from a fire or potential fire condition, or for the need of medical attention. The term "false alarms" shall not include: 
(1)	Severe storm conditions;
(2)	Utility pole accidents;
(3)	Testing of the alarm system when prior notification has been received by the police and/or fire department; 
(4)	False alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of Michigan Bell lines or facilities;
(5)	Documented extenuating circumstances beyond the reasonable control of user provided no prior similar circumstances applied to the user. 
    User/subscriber means any person, firm, corporation who is the owner, jointly or severally, with any person, firm, or corporation who is a tenant or occupant of premises in which an alarm system is installed and maintained; or a person, firm or corporation who is a tenant or occupant of premises, in which an alarm system is installed and maintained, and who has complied with the registration and permit provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 134,  2.01, 4-11-1995) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-92. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. As a condition of sentence, the court may order restitution to the city of any false alarm fees or other fees provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 134,  13.01, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-93. - Exception for single-family residential structures. 
    This article shall not apply to single-family residential structures. 
(Ord. No. 134,  2.01(E), 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-94. - Effective date; liability for violations. 
    Any person using, owning, leasing, or occupying a premises in which an alarm system exists on the effective date of Ordinance No. 134 shall comply with the requirements of this article by July 1, 1995, and shall be jointly and severally liable for violations of this article. Failure to comply with this section would result in a $50.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. 134,  11.01, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-95. - Automatic telephone dialing alarm system prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, install, operate, adjust, arrange for, or contract to provide a device which upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by any other means, initiates the automatic calling or dialing of, or makes a connection directly to a telephone assigned to any police department, fire department or public service utility for the purpose of delivering a recorded message. 
(Ord. No. 134,  3.01, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-96. - Licensing of contractors required. 
(a)	No person shall engage in the business of providing for the installation, operation and/or maintenance of an alarm system and/or a combined alarm monitoring sales facility unless properly licensed by the state pursuant to Public Act No. 330 of 1968 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.) and such other statutes or regulations applicable to alarm systems. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person who is an alarm contractor, or it's agent or employee, to knowingly misrepresent any services rendered to an alarm user/subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 134,  5.01, 5.02, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-97. - Separate systems required. 
    Buildings having more than one occupant who utilize separate entrances for access to their individual units shall have separate alarm systems for each unit. This section shall not be construed to require the installation of alarm systems, but only to require separate systems for separate units when installed. 
(Ord. No. 134,  7.01, 4-11-1995) 
State law reference- Fire alarm contractors, MCL 338.883f et seq. 
Sec. 22-98. - Audible and/or visual alarms. 
(a)	No person shall maintain an alarm system which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual signal which can be heard or seen outside the premises and which is disturbing to the peace and quiet of the surrounding area, unless that person, firm or corporation has first provided the city police department and/or fire department with the following: their name, telephone number, address of the alarmed premises, and the names and telephone numbers of other persons who, having access to the alarmed premises, can be contacted at any time and can respond within 30 minutes to deactivate the audible and/or visible signal. 
(b)	No person shall use, install, or direct to be installed any audible security alarm system which emits a sound alarm for a period longer than 15 minutes from the time of the initial sounding of the device. 
(Ord. No. 134,  6.01, 6.02, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-99. - Defective alarms. 
    An alarm system signaling more than five false alarms within a calendar year is presumed to be defective. Upon written notice, the user/subscriber of the building or residence shall have the alarm system inspected by a licensed alarm system contractor within ten days and shall forward to the city police department and/or fire department the contractor's report of the probable cause of the false alarms and the measures instituted to eliminate the false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 134,  9.01, 4-11-1995) 
State law reference- Correction of systems giving false alarms, MCL 38.1085. 
Secs. 22-100-22-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-116. - Required. 
(a)	No person shall install, possess, operate or maintain or take possession of any premises equipped with an alarm system, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(b)	A permit shall be issued by the city upon the completion and approval of the alarm user registration form and payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 134,  4.01, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-117. - Registration. 
(a)	The alarm user registration form must be completed and signed by both the owner, tenant or occupant, if any, of the premises on which the alarm system is maintained. 
(b)	The alarm user registration form shall include the following:
(1)	Address and telephone number of the premises on which the alarm system is maintained;
(2)	Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises;
(3)	Name, address and telephone number of the tenant or occupant, if any, of the premises;
(4)	Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or corporation responsible for the installation and/or service of the alarm system; 
(5)	Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons responsible for the deactivation or resetting of the alarm system or device, checking the premises or responding to notices from the police department, fire department or public service utility of an activation of the alarm system; 
(6)	Description of the alarm system;
(7)	Any additional information as the police department and fire department may deem necessary.
(c)	All applicants registering an alarm system shall be furnished a copy of this article along with the registration form. Receipt of this article by the applicant shall constitute notice to such applicant of his obligations and liabilities under this article. 
(d)	The registration form shall contain a statement, signed by the alarm user/subscriber who is applying for a permit under these sections, that such applicant has read the copy of the ordinance provided and is signing the application with full knowledge and understanding of the provisions of this article and their duties and liabilities under this article. 
(e)	Upon issuance of the permit, the holder thereof shall notify the police department and/or fire department immediately of any changes to the information provided in the application for the permit. Failure to notify the department shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to the penalty provided in section 22-92 and, in the case of a nonmandatory alarm system, a revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 134,  4.02, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-118. - Fees. 
(a)	A permit fee in the amount established by resolution shall be assessed to new registrations. The permit shall be issued by the city clerk upon the recommendation of the police chief or fire chief. 
(b)	There shall be no prorating of charges or refunds for voluntary cancellation or revocation for a violation of this article. 
(c)	The tenant or occupant of the premises may obtain an alarm system permit without the owner's signature by depositing a cash bond in the amount established by resolution with the city treasurer's office. 
(1)	The cash bond may be applied against any delinquent charges, penalties, fees or costs and the use of such cash bond for such charges, penalties, fees or costs shall not affect any rights of the police department and/or fire department to revoke an alarm system permit, or otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Such cash bond shall always be maintained at the required amount. Failure of an alarm user/subscriber who has posted such bond to restore the deposit to that amount after the deduction of any penalties, charges, fees or costs within 30 days from the date of notice of such deficiency is mailed, shall, without further action, cancel and render void the alarm system permit. 
(3)	No such cash bond shall bear interest and such bond, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the tenant or occupant depositing the bond when he shall disconnect the alarm system and present satisfactory proof to the police department and/or fire department that the alarm system has been disconnected. The cash bond for a mandatory alarm system shall not be returned until such time as the new owner, tenant or occupant has posted a bond, or proof is presented to demonstrate that the future use of the structure does not require a mandatory alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 134,  4.03, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-119. - Display of permit. 
    The permit shall be kept on the premises to which it relates, and shall be available for production upon request of the police department or fire department. If the permit is damaged, lost destroyed or stolen, the permit holder shall notify the police department and/or fire department and request a replacement permit. 
(Ord. No. 134,  4.04, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-120. - Replacement. 
    In the event of loss, destruction, damage or theft of the permit, a replacement permit will be issued at a charge in the amount established by resolution, upon written request that the original permit was lost, damaged, destroyed or stolen and that the permit requested will be used as a replacement only. 
(Ord. No. 134,  4.05, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-121. - Illegal use. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to use a permit for any premises other than those identified on the application for the permit. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an alarm system permit to be bought, sold or leased, contrary to the terms of this article. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any alarm system permit, except as provided in this article. 
(d)	Upon conviction of any permit holder of a violation of subsections (b) or (c) of this section, the alarm system permit shall be void and must be surrendered to the police department and/or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 134,  4.06, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-122. - Revocation. 
    An alarm system permit issued by the city may be revoked by the police chief and/or chief of the fire department upon occurrence of any of the following conditions: 
(1)	Furnishing of false or misleading information on the alarm user registration form, or failing to notify the department of any changes to the information provided in the registration form. 
(2)	A violation of section 22-121 
(3)	Failure of the alarm system user/subscriber or the person responsible for deactivation or resetting the alarm system as identified on the alarm user registration form, to respond within 30 minutes of notification by the police department of a response by the department to an activation of the alarm system. 
(4)	Failure to repair or replace an alarm system that is defective after notification by the police department. 
(5)	Any other violation of this article, which in the determination of the police chief and/or chief of the fire department, warrants revocation. 
(Ord. No. 134,  10.01, 4-11-1995) 
Secs. 22-123-22-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FALSE ALARM FEES 

Sec. 22-141. - Generally. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any penalties provided for upon conviction for any violation of this article, and notwithstanding the fact that prosecution for violations of this article has or has not commenced, any person operating an alarm system which signals more than two false alarms as defined in section 22-91 within a one-year period, such period shall be from January 1 through December 31, and shall pay to the city a false alarm fee in order to defray a portion of the cost of response to false alarms. 
(b)	Notwithstanding any penalties provided for upon conviction for any violation of this article, and notwithstanding the fact that prosecution for violations of this article has or has not commenced, any person performing work for the owner or occupant of any property equipped with an alarm system as a contractor, licensed professional or other laborer shall take all steps necessary to properly protect any fire detection or fire suppression system from emitting any false alarm. Such steps shall include at a minimum placing the system in test mode with notification to the alarm company. Such person(s) shall use due care and caution in the performance of their work so as to not cause any false alarm. A violation of this section shall result in liabilities for a false alarm fee for the first and/or subsequent violation. 
(c)	The schedule of false alarm fees shall be as established by the fee schedule adopted by the Macomb County Fire Chief's Association. 
(d)	False alarm fees shall be credited to the applicable departmental equipment reserve.
(Ord. No. 134,  8.01, 4-11-1995; Ord. No. 134-A, 6-21-2006) 
Sec. 22-142. - Police and/or fire department procedures. 
(a)	The police and fire departments shall keep a record of the receipt of false alarms including the date and time of such alarms and the user/subscriber of such alarms. 
(b)	The chief of the respective department or his representative shall, within a reasonable time, upon receipt of a false alarm report, notify the user/subscriber of such false alarm by sending or causing to be sent, by regular mail, an alarm notification form. This form shall inform the user/subscriber of the date and time of the alarm, the results of the responding officers investigation, the applicable provisions of this article and the number of false alarms responded to in the current calendar year. 
(c)	On the occasion of the third false alarm and subsequent false alarms, the chief of the applicable department shall request the issuance of an invoice from the city treasurer's office to the user/subscriber of such alarm, in the appropriate amount, to be mailed with the alarm notification form by regular mail. The mailing of such notice will be prima facie evidence of the receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 134,  8.02, 4-11-1995) 
Sec. 22-143. - User/subscriber procedures. 
(a)	Within 21 days of receipt of the alarm notification form, the alarm system user/subscriber shall return the completed alarm notification form to the police and/or fire department. Failure by the alarm system user/subscriber to return the alarm notification form shall cause an automatic billing of the false alarm fee to be sent to the alarm system user/subscriber by the city treasurer, if indicated. 
(b)	If, upon receiving a false alarm fee invoice, the alarm system user/subscriber wishes to request a waiver of the assessment of the fee due to extenuating circumstances, they may do so in writing within ten working days of the assessment date. The waiver request to the police and/or fire department shall contain documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within ten working days of the receipt of the request for waiver by the applicable department, the chief of such department or his designee shall make a determination on the waiver request and shall notify the alarm system user/subscriber of the decision in writing. 
(c)	In the event that the alarm system user/subscriber is not satisfied with the decision rendered by the chief of the applicable department or his designee, an additional written request for waiver may be filed within ten working days with the mayor. Within ten working days of the receipt of the waiver request and documentation of the extenuating circumstances, the mayor or his designee shall review the request, make a determination on the waiver, and shall notify the alarm system user/subscriber in writing of the decision. An appeal to the common council may be taken within 30 days with council's decision being final. 
(d)	In the event the specified fees are not paid, then all such fees and penalties shall become a lien upon the land where the alarm system is located and may be collected by the addition of the lien to the tax rolls or assessments imposed by the city on the subject property. The owner of record per the tax rolls shall be personally liable in a civil action for such fees together with all costs of collection including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 134,  8.03, 4-11-1995) 
Secs. 22-144-22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY FEES RECOVERY 

Sec. 22-161. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the Emergency Fees Recovery Ordinance. 
(Ord. 155,  1, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-162. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows: 
    Assessable fees mean those fees for services incurred by the city in connection with providing emergency services at an emergency incident, including, but not limited to, the actual labor and material costs of the city (including, without limitation, employee wages, operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation, costs of equipment, costs of backup of emergency services., costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation, costs of material disposal and costs of contracted labor) whether or not the services are provided by the city or by a third party on behalf of the city; service charges and interest; attorneys' fees litigation costs and any costs, charges, fines or penalties to the city imposed by any court or state or federal governmental entities. 
    Dangerous materials mean those elements, substances, wastes or by-products, that may include, but not limited to, combustible liquid, flammable gas, explosives, flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable reactive matter, water reactive matter, petroleum products, anti-freeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, which are or are potentially harmful to the environment or human or animal life, or which pose an unreasonable or imminent risk to life, health or safety or persons or property, or to the ecological balance of the environment as determined by the fire chief or the senior fire official of the city in charge at the scene. 
    Dangerous material incident or emergency means any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of dangerous materials occurs or is reasonably imminent and where the fire chief or his or her designee has so declared such activity, accident or emergency a dangerous material incident or emergency. 
    Emergency incident means (i) motor vehicle accident, or any other event where a motor vehicle or pedestrian, requires emergency services, (ii) a dangerous material incident or emergency, (iii) an illegal fire, (iv) a structure demolition, (v) a utility line failure, or (vi) a railway crossing or line failure. 
    Emergency service means emergency police, fire, ambulance or inhalator services. 
    Hazardous materials means those elements, substances, wastes or by-products regulated by NREPA, MCL 324.20101, et seq, as amended. 
    Hazardous material incident or emergency means any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of hazardous materials occurs or is reasonably imminent and where the fire chief or his or her designee has so declared such activity, accident or emergency a hazardous material incident or emergency. 
    Illegal fire means a fire set or determined to have been set in violation of a federal, state or local law and shall include an arson fire and a fire set in violation of a "no burning" ban or order. An illegal fire does not include an unintentional fire or fire caused by an act or God, i.e., a lightning storm. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or used on the public streets, roads and highways to transport passengers or property which is required to be registered for use upon such public streets, roads and highways and for the purposes hereof all trailers or appurtenances attached to any motor vehicle. Motor vehicle also includes motorized farm or construction equipment being operated on a public right of way. 
    NREPA means the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.20101 et seq., as amended. 
    Railway crossing or line failure means the disabling of any railway crossing or railway line so as to pose a danger to the public unless police or fire personnel remain on site to eliminate such danger if the owner or party(s) responsible for the maintenance of such railway crossing or line does not respond within one hour to a request to repair or correct such failure. 
    Release means any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment, including, but not limited, the air, soil, groundwater and surface water. 
    Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any other legal entity that receives emergency services for an emergency incident or any owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of real and personal property from which, onto which or related to an emergency incident and their heirs, estates, successors and assigns. 
    Structure demolition means the tearing down of a structure damaged by fire which must in the opinion of the fire chief or his or her designee be promptly demolished following the fire to protect public safety. 
    Utility line failure means the disabling of any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect or transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals (including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable television and stereo signals or electronic impulses), water or sanitary or storm sewage if the owner or party responsible for the maintenance of such utility line does not respond within one hour to a request to repair or correct such failure. 
(Ord. 155,  2, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-163. - Cost recovery for hazardous materials, incident or emergency. 
    The city shall recover all assessable fees in connection with a hazardous material incident or emergency pursuant to the requirements of NREPA. The fire or police chief, or their designate, shall determine total assessable fees. 
(Ord. 155,  3, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-164. - Fees recovery authorization and procedure, for emergency incidents. 
(a)	The city shall recover all assessable fees in connection with an emergency incident from any and all responsible parties jointly or severally. 
(b)	The fire or police chief or his or her designee shall determine the total assessable fees. 
(Ord. 155,  4, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-165. - Billing and collection of assessable fees. 
    After determining to assess assessable fees against a responsible party, the city treasurer shall mail an itemized invoice to the responsible party at its last known address. Such invoice shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date of mailing and any amounts unpaid after such date shall bear a late payment fee equal to one percent per month or fraction thereof that the amount due and any previously imposed late payment fee remains unpaid. If a responsible party shall appeal assessable fees pursuant to section 22-166 hereof, such fees, if upheld, in whole or in part, shall be due and payable 30 days from the date of determination of the appeal and any late payment fees shall apply thereafter. 
(Ord. 155,  5, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-166. - Procedure for appealing assessable costs. 
    Any responsible party who receives an invoice for assessable fees shall have the right of an appeal to the mayor or his or her designee to request a modification of assessable fees. The responsible party shall request in writing such appeal within 14 calendar days of the date of the invoice assessing the assessable fees. Any appeal shall be in writing and shall specifically identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the assessed fees should be modified. Any reason, basis or argument for modification of assessable fees not set forth in the request to appeal shall be deemed waived by the responsible party. Failure to timely file a written request to appeal shall constitute a waiver of the responsible party's right to appeal and shall further constitute the responsible party's agreement to pay the assessable fees invoiced. Upon receipt of an appeal of assessable fees, the mayor or his or her designate will schedule a hearing no later than 21 days from receipt of the appeal. A notice of hearing will be sent to the responsible party and the official that compiled the assessable fees stating the time and place where the hearing will be held. The mayor or his or her designate may combine for hearing appeals involving the same incident. The mayor or his or her designate shall determine whether to confirm, modify or void the payment of assessable fees invoiced and notify the interested parties immediately or within seven days of the results of the appeal. 
(Ord. 155,  6, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-167. - Assessable fees a lien upon property. 
    Assessable fees assessed against a responsible party not paid when due, including late payment fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible party in the City of Utica, if the emergency incident involved such real property. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for city real property taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The city treasurer shall, prior to March 1 of each year, certify to the city assessor the fact that such assessable fees are delinquent and unpaid. The city assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. 155,  7, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-168. - Other remedies. 
    In addition to the remedy set forth in section 22-167 above, the city shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect assessable fees from a responsible party. 
(Ord. 155,  8, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-169. - No limitation of liabality. 
    The recovery of assessable costs pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. 155,  9, 9-12-2006) 
Sec. 22-170. - Fee sechedule. 
(a)	Personnel fees:Personnel fees shall be charged at the actual hourly rate paid to the employee, or, if not paid hourly then at the actual estimated effective hourly rate, which includes indirect costs (full/time 45 percent and part/time 11 percent). Personnel fees shall be based upon the time actually spent by the employee and shall be computed to the nearest one-tenth of an hour. Personnel fees shall be computed upon the applicable labor, contract, administrative resolution or the fiscal budget. Personnel fees shall include overtime or premium rates when applicable. 
(b)	Vehicles and equipment fees (computed to the nearest tenth 1/10th of an hour): 
(1)	Police vehicles at the rate of $75.00 per hour.
(2)	Fire and EMS vehicle shall be charged at the rate provided in the fire department's Macomb County Mutual Aid Pact Apparatus and Personnel Charges as updated June 4, 2006, attached hereto. 
(3)	Other vehicles and equipment shall be charged at the rate provided in MDOT Schedule "C" Report 375, Equipment Rental Rates, effective January 1 to December 31, 2006, attached hereto. 
(c)	Other fees: 
(1)	Blood tests: As charged by provider.
(2)	Breathalyzer vials: As charged by provider.
(3)	Rented equipment: As charged by provider.
(4)	Material purchases: As charged by provider.
(5)	Transportation services: As charged by provider.
(6)	Material disposal: As charged by provider.
(7)	Contracted labor: As charged by provider.
(8)	Service charges and interest: As charged by provider.
(9)	Attorney's fees: As charged by provider.
(10)	Litigation: As charged by provider.
(11)	Court/government charges/penalties: As charged by provider.
(12)	External specialists: As charged by provider.
(Ord. 155,  App. A, 9-12-2006) 
Editor's note- 
The Macomb County Mutual Aid Pact Apparatus and Personnel Charges as updated June 4, 2006, and MDOT Schedule "C" Report 375, Equipment Rental Rates, effective January 1 to December 31, 2006, are not set out herein but are available in the office of the city clerk. 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; floods, ch. 34; historic preservation, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; preservation of environmental quality, app. A,  1420; zoning, app. A; zoning districts and maps, app. A,  300 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Cleanliness of premises. 
    Every parcel of property including buildings, vacant or occupied and every part thereof, shall be kept clean and shall be kept free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or other matter in or on the property, or in the yards, courts, passages, area of alleys connected therewith or belonging to the property. The owner of every dwelling shall be responsible for keeping the entire building free from vermin. The owner shall also be responsible for complying with the provisions of this section except that the tenants shall be responsible for the cleanliness of those parts of the premises which they occupy and control. Any hazardous places that are necessary during construction must be fenced or boarded up. Property owners and or occupants shall be held responsible for the condition, cleanliness and maintenance of the areas, between their lot lines and the adjoining streets and curbs, where existing. Violations of this section are a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 85,  1, 10-15-1970) 
Sec. 26-2. - Dead animals. 
    No person shall suffer or permit any dead animal or animals to remain on the surface of the ground, or partly buried, on any lot or premises owned or occupied by him. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 5,  4) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; solid waste, ch. 54. 
Secs. 26-3-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BLIGHT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 54. (Back)
Sec. 26-31. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight or potential blight in the city by the prevention or elimination of certain environmental causes of blight or blighting factors which exist or which may in the future exist in the city. 
(Ord. No. 74,  1, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 26-32. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 26-33. - Causes of blight or blighting factors. 
    It is hereby determined that the following uses, structures and activities are causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods. On and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of these causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property in the city owned, leased, rented or occupied by such person: 
(1)	In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of junk automobiles, except in a completely enclosed building. For the purpose of this article, the term "junk automobiles" shall include any motor vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of 60 days, and shall also include, whether so licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of 60 days. 
(2)	In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon such property and such materials are intended for use in connection with such construction. Building materials shall include but not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. 
(3)	In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except domestic refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to exceed 30 days. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of woods, metal or any other material or other castoff material of any kind whether or not such material could be put to any reasonable use. 
(4)	In any area, the existence of any structure or part of any structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable, if a dwelling, nor useful or any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)	In any area zoned for residential purposes, the existence of any vacant dwelling, garage or other outbuilding unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals. 
(6)	In any area, the existence of any partially completed structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 74,  2, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 26-34. - Enforcement. 
(a)	This article shall be enforced by such persons who shall be so designated by the common council. 
(b)	The owner, if possible, and the occupant of any property upon which any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in section 26-33 is found to exist shall be notified in writing to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors from such property within ten days after service of the notice upon him. Such notice may be served personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested. Additional time may be granted by the enforcement officer where bona fide efforts to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors are in progress. 
(c)	Failure to comply with such notice within the time allowed by the owner and/or occupant shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 74,  3, 7-11-1967) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Fire department and fire chief,  4.4 et seq. (Back)
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; emergency services and emergency management, ch. 22; fireworks,  46-142; use of fire hydrants, permit,  82-67. (Back)
State Law reference- Crimes relating to fires, MCL 750.240. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE SAFETY 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-31. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 30-32. - Enforcement. 
    Enforcement of this article may be made by the city fire chief, fire inspectors, and the city police department. Such enforcement officers shall have the authority to issue appearance citations pursuant to Public Act No. 175 of 1927 (MCL 760.1 et seq.) for violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(I), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(I), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 30-33. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
(a)	Fire chief. The fire chief or his duly authorized representative, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations, or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. 
(b)	Police or fire officials. A police or fire official depending on who is in charge of a particular emergency situation: 
(1)	May prohibit any person, vehicle, or object from approaching the scene;
(2)	May remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle, or object from approaching the scene; and 
(3)	May remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle, or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. 
(c)	Fire officials. The fire official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle, or object from a hazardous area and any such person, vehicle, or object shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(A), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(A), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 30-34. - Interference with department operations. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or tamper any fire department operation. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(B), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(B), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 30-35. - Compliance with orders. 
    A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(C), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(C), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 30-36. - Fire suppression equipment. 
(a)	Maintenance of. A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code, adopted in division 2 of this article, except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. 
(b)	Immediate replacement. 
(1)	After permitted use. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as permitted in this section, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. 
(2)	Defective/nonapproved. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(H), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(H), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 30-37. - Authorized emergency vehicles/equipment. 
(a)	Defined. Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those, which are defined and authorized under the laws of the State of Michigan. 
(b)	Yielding Right-of-Way. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to the position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by a police or fire official. 
(c)	Following prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 500 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(d)	Unlawful boarding or tampering. A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, to climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell, or other sound producing device thereon, or to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, breaks, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on or a part of any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(e)	Driving over fire hoses. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alley-way, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in command of said operations. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(D)(4), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(D)(4), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 30-38. - Damage or injury to equipment/personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(E), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(E), 3-11-2003;Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
State law reference- Injury to fire department equipment, MCL 750.377b. 
Sec. 30-39. - Hydrant and department connections. 
(a)	Restriction access unlawful. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface or obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
(b)	Violations. 
(1)	Removal after notification. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove the obstructions or encroachments. 
(2)	Cost. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the fire official and with the approval of the chief administrative official and the city, shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(3)	Location and placement. At the time of development of commercial, industrial and multiple-family properties, fire hydrants shall be located not more than 300 feet apart, measured along paved streets or driveways. Hydrants shall also be located at each intersection, subject to the exception that the code official may suspend hydrant spacing requirements for premises protected by a fire suppression system. 
(4)	Use approval required. A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for the use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permission for such use from the department of public works after approval from the fire department. The code official may order the disconnection from any fire hydrant if it is necessary for firefighting purposes, or if there is any unauthorized device, vehicle or equipment connected to a fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 147,  3(G), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  3(G), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  3, 2-12-2008) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 82. 
Secs. 30-40-30-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. (Back)
Sec. 30-55. - Purpose. 
    A fire prevention code prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion is hereby adopted, and other fire regulations are established. 
(Ord. No. 151,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  1, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 30-56. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the International Fire Code, 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council thereof, copy of such code shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section, as if set out at length in this section. From the date on which the ordinance from which this section is derived shall take effect, the provisions of such code, with any modifications in this division, shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 147,  2(A), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  2(A), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  1, 2-12-2008) 
State law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.4(k). 
Sec. 30-57. - Amendments to Code. 
    The International Fire Code, 2000 edition, shall be amended as set forth in the following subsections of this section: 
Section 503 shall be amended as follows: 
    503 Where the words "Name of Jurisdiction" are used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the "City of Utica". 
Section 504 shall be amended as follows: 
    504. Where reference is made in the code to the "International Building Code," it shall be held to mean the "Michigan Building Code, 2000 edition." 
Section 505 shall be amended as follows: 
    505. Where the reference is made to the "International Mechanical Code," it shall be held to mean the "Michigan Mechanical Code, 2000 edition." 
Section 506 shall be amended as follows: 
    506. Where reference is made to the "International Plumbing Code," it shall be held to mean the "Michigan Plumbing Code, 2000 edition." 
Section 507 shall be amended as follows: 
    507. Where reference is made to the "International Residential Code," it shall be held to mean the "Michigan Residential Code, 2000 edition." 
Section 101.2.1.1 shall be added to read as follows: 
    101.2.1.1 Appendix B, C, and D shall be adopted and considered part of this code. 
Section 103.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    F-103.1. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department or his designate to enforce the provisions of the fire prevention code as herein set forth. The designated enforcement officer of this code is hereinafter referred to as the code official. 
Section 104.2.1 shall be added to read as follows: 
    104.2.1 Review fees. When, at the discretion of the code official, plans and specifications are to be reviewed by an outside consultant, the person submitting the plans and specifications shall be responsible for payment of such consulting fees or charges, plus ten percent administrative charge shall be submitted in full with the plans and specifications prior to review. 
Section 108.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    108.4 Application for appeal. Appeals may be taken to the city council by any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation made by the code official pursuant to this code. The common council is hereby constituted and granted authority to act as the fire prevention code board of appeals with full power to interpret and decide appeals as provided herein. 
Section 109.3 shall be amended as follows: 
    109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the appropriate construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code shall be guilty of a civil infraction and responsible for such fines, costs and sanctions as provided in Utica's Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance, No. 156 [Ch. 2, Art. VI of this Code]. 
Section 109.3.2 shall be added to read as follows: 
    109.3.2 Civil infraction. When in the opinion of the code official and/or his designate, there exists an apparent or actual violation of a provision of this code or other codes or ordinances under the code official's jurisdiction and the violation is of a nature that requires immediate attention or abatement, the code official and/or his designate(s) are hereby empowered to process such conduct as a civil infraction in accordance with Utica's Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance, Ordinance 156 [Ch. 2, Art. 6 of this Code]. 
Section 109.4 shall be added to read as follows: 
    F-109.4 Cost Recovery. The fire department shall itemize and process costs, fees and expenses due to the City of Utica pursuant to the Emergency Fees Recovery Ordinance, Ordinance 155 [Ch. 22, Art. V of this Code]. 
Section 110.5 shall be added to read as follows: 
    F-110.5 Open building due to fire. The fire chief or his duly authorized representative may order the securing of any fire damaged building. If the owner, lessee or occupant of the building is present, this order shall be given to that person. If no owner, lessee or occupant of the building is present, the fire chief or his duly authorized representative may take reasonable measures to have the building secured. The expense of securing the building by the city shall be charged to the owner, lessee or occupant. 
Section 503.1.4 shall be added to read as follows: 
    503.1.4 New construction. Fire apparatus access roads are required for all new or remodeled buildings. At least three sides of every building or structure shall be accessible by an approved street, driveway or fire lane of at least 20 feet in width, located a distance from the building or structure, equivalent to, or greater than 25 percent of the height of the exterior wall on the affected side of the building or structure. 
Section 503.1.5 shall be added to read as follows: 
    503.1.5 Installation. All fire apparatus access roads shall be installed before new construction of a building or structure start. Apparatus access roads must meet the requirements of [section] 503. 
Section 503.2.5.1 shall be added to read as follows: 
    503.2.5.1 Turnaround. Fire apparatus access roads that terminate or dead-end and require emergency vehicles to back up more than 50 feet shall be provided with a means for emergency vehicle turnaround. The turnaround means shall be approved by the code official. 
Section 503.3.1 shall be added to read as follows: 
    503.3.1 Posting. All fire apparatus access roads shall be conspicuously posted on both sides of the fire apparatus access roads with no parking fire lane signs, which shall conform to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and as prescribed by the code official. Signs shall be erected no further than 75 feet apart in all areas designated as fire lanes. 
Section 503.4.1 shall be added to read as follows: 
    503.4.1 Authority to remove obstructions. If any vehicle, trailer, or other object is located within a fire apparatus access road during a fire emergency or alarm or any other time when use of the fire lane is necessary, any city police department officer or member of the city fire department may move or cause the vehicle, trailer, or other object to be moved by any means reasonably available, without liability for any damages sustained to said vehicle, etc. 
Section 503.7 shall be added to read as follows: 
    503.7 Enforcement of paved fire lanes on private property. All fire lanes on private property shall be approved by the fire chief or his designate, and parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing such fire lanes or access routes shall be prohibited at all times. Permanent all-weather signs identifying fire lanes and accessways shall be posted. 
Section 511 shall be added to read as follows: 
    Section 511 Fire hydrants. 
    511.1 Maintenance. All designated fire hydrants shall have signs or markings and shall be maintained at all times. 
    511.2 Distance to hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located along public streets so that no portion of the building or structure to be protected will be over 300 feet from any hydrant. Where this may not be physically possible, additional hydrants shall be located upon the premises accessible to motorized fire apparatus. 
    511.3 Hydrants along streets. Hydrants shall be located at street intersections with intermediate hydrants provided so that the space between hydrants shall not exceed 300 feet. 
    511.4 Parking restricted. Parking is not permitted within ten feet of a fire hydrant. 
    511.5 Multiple hydrants required. At least two hydrants shall be located within 300 feet of each building. 
    511.6 Special locations. Additional fire hydrants may be required and located closer than the spacing required for high hazard classifications. 
    511.7 Water main valves. The valves shall be located so that no more than two hydrants will be out of service when a section of pipe has to be repaired. 
    511.8 Access. Access to fire hydrants shall be by any approved roadway as specified by this code. 
    511.9 Distance to roadway. Hydrants will be located approximately ten feet from all-weather roadways. 
    511.10 Distance to buildings. Hydrants shall be located no closer than 40 feet from the building to be protected unless approved by the fire chief or his designate. 
    511.11 Pumper outlet direction. Each hydrant shall have the pumper (steamer) connection facing the primary roadway and shall be accessible so that a connection can be made between the hydrant and the apparatus located in the street with 20 feet of suction hose. 
    511.12 Hydrant outlet location. Fire hydrant outlets shall be a minimum of 18 inches and no more than 36 inches above the finished grade. 
    511.13 Hydrant type. Fire hydrants used in conjunction with water supplies shall be of a type acceptable to the city fire department and public works department. Hydrants shall meet the standards of the American Water Works Association C-502. Hydrants shall include a six-inch barrel, 21/2-inch and one four-inch outlets. Outlet threads shall be American National Standard. 
Section 904.11.6.3.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    904.11.6.3.1 Cleaning schedule. When a cleaning schedule is not on file, the code official may require a cleaning schedule to be submitted indicating the method of cleaning and the time intervals between cleanings. 
Section 907.7.1 shall be added to read as follows: 
    907.7.1 Signage. All required fire alarm systems not connected to an approved central or proprietary station alarm shall display a durable sign at each manual initiating device, which reads, "THIS ALARM DOES NOT NOTIFY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT ... TO REPORT A FIRE, CALL ____________. (Fire Department to provide the number)". 
Section 912.2.3 shall be added to read as follows: 
    912.2.3 Fire department connections. In any building or structure required to be equipped with a fire department connection, the connection shall be located within 100 feet of a fire hydrant, and within 50 feet of a minimum 20-foot-wide paved driveway or street. A weatherproof strobe light with a minimum rating of 110 cd shall be connected to the sprinkler flow switch and mounted on the exterior wall above the fire department connection. 
Section 912.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    912.4 Signs. A metal sign with raised letters at least one inch in size shall be mounted on all fire department connections serving fire sprinklers, standpipes, or fire pump connections. Such signs shall read: AUTOMATIC SPRINKLERS, or STANDPIPES, or TEST CONNECTION, and include the address with street name of the hazard it protects or a combination thereof. 
Section 912.7 shall be added to read as follows: 
    912.7 Utilities. Gas meters, propane tanks, overhead electrical services, and transformers shall not be located on the same side of a building or structure as a fire department connection unless a clear distance of 150 feet can be maintained between the utilities and the fire department connection. Alternatively, a minimum eight-foot high masonry or concrete wall may be provided to separate the utilities from the fire department connection. 
Section 2204.2.6 shall be added to read as follows: 
    2204.2.6 Hold open devices prohibited. For self-servicing fueling operations open to the public, dispenser nozzles may not be equipped with a hold open device unless the canopy above the dispensers is outfitted with fire suppression equipment that is code compliant. 
Exception: 
Existing service stations may utilize hold open devices on fuel dispensing nozzles provided the following requirements are met: 
1.	One fire extinguisher must be located at each dispenser.
2.	An approved sign (as noted below) shall be permanently affixed on all dispenser hoses near the nozzle, as well as posted on the front/entry door of the establishment: 
WARNING      WARNING      WARNING 
You must remain outside your vehicle, in full view of the nozzle while dispensing fuel. Failure to remain at the nozzle may contribute to fuel overflow or spill. Spills caused by failure to attend the nozzle will result in fine and clean-up fees charged to the person dispensing fuel. 
3.	Station owner shall provide documentation to the fire department that all individuals working at their facility have been properly trained on attendant's job duties and requirements in compliance with Section 2204. "The attendants primary function shaii be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of fuel, which includes insuring that the customer does not hold open the nozzle with a makeshift device." 
4.	The documentation shall be provided on an annual basis and when a new employee is hired. 
Section 2701.4.1.1 shall be added to read as follows: 
    2701.4.1.1 Information. The following information shall be furnished to the code official and shall include the following information for emergency response personnel: 
1.	A current list of key facility personnel knowledgeable about safety procedures of materials on site, complete with telephone numbers for such personnel in the event of an incident after normal hours of facility operation. 
2.	A current emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form and a binder containing the material safety data sheets (MSDS). 
3.	A facility site plan to include the following:
a.	The location of storage and use of hazardous materials on site.
b.	The location of on-site emergency firefighting and spill cleanup equipment.
c.	A diagram of the complete sewer system and water system, showing fire hydrant and water main locations and size. 
d.	Any building floor plans deemed necessary by the code official.
Section 2701.4.3 shall be added to read as follows: 
    2701.4.3 Update and notification. The owner or operator of a facility shall update the appropriate documents on an annual basis or more frequently when deemed necessary by the code official and shall send the code official all of the updated material, including an updated copy of the emergency and hazardous chemical inventory. 
(Ord. No. 147,  2(B), 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 151,  2(B), 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 157,  2, 2-12-2008) 
Secs. 30-58-30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 30-81. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 30-82. - Open fires prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to burn any garbage, gasoline products (excluding charcoal lighter), tires, treated wood products, plastic products, clothing products, papers, leaves, grass or refuse outside of any building at any time. Leaves only incidental to branches or twigs being lawfully burned are excluded. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to maintain a fire outside of any building or other structure that: 
(1)	Is so close to any building or other structure as to endanger such building or structure or on any street, sidewalk, or public right-of-way utility easement; 
(2)	Is within 15 feet of a fence or property line; or
(3)	Can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered, cause excessive clouds of dust or particles, or permit the escape of excessive soot, ashes or other solid products or results of combustion. 
(Ord. No. 123,  1, 7-18-1989) 
Sec. 30-83. - Open fire permitted. 
    Open fires shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)	Barbecues.
(2)	Fireplaces.
(3)	Firepits burning charcoal, twigs, branches or logs, and maintained so as to prevent the escape of ignited particles. Firepits shall not exceed four feet in diameter, be no deeper than two feet, and to the extent that the fire containment area is above ground, be surrounded by a solid fire retardant barrier no higher than six inches above ground level. 
(4)	Controlled fires for training firefighters.
(5)	Personal use of smoking materials.
(6)	Use of matches for lighting authorized fires.
(7)	The burning of charcoal, kiln-dried lumber scraps or nonash producing fuel for the heating of building materials at construction sites or for the warmth of workers when such burning occurs in metal containers located not less than 15 feet from other combustible material. 
(8)	The burning of charcoal in a container when used for the exclusive preparation of food for human consumption. 
(9)	In accordance with a permit as provided in section 30-84 
(Ord. No. 123,  2, 7-18-1989; Ord. No. 123A,  2, 9-12-1999) 
Sec. 30-84. - Permits. 
(a)	No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any public street, alley, road or other public ground or any private ground without a permit or other proper authorization from the common council. 
(b)	The common council may issue a permit for a bonfire or rubbish fire only after making a finding that: 
(1)	The fire is not likely to cause substantial amounts of air pollution;
(2)	The benefits of the fire outweigh the overall detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the city; and 
(3)	Atmospheric conditions or local circumstances do not make such fire hazardous.
(Ord. No. 123,  3, 7-18-1989; Ord. No. 123A,  3, 9-12-1999) 
Chapter 34 - FLOODS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, app. A; zoning districts and maps, app. A,  300 et seq.; FP, floodplain protection overlay district, app. A,  1600 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater change of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete or the construction of streets). 
    Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inlands or tidal waters; and/or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth of a foot. 
    Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor." 
    Mobile home means a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    New mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure, other than a mobile home, on a site such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure, other than a mobile home, without a basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, the "start of construction" means the affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home subdivision, the "start of construction" is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, a mobile home, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    Structure improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alternation affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)	Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specification which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)	Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 110,  5, 1-13-1981; Ord. No. 110A,  2, 7-18-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the common council does ordain as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 110,  1, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-33. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditure for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increases flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 110,  2, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-34. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health;
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)	Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)	Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 110,  3, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-35. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)	Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)	Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)	Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 110,  4, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-36. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 110,  6, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-37. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled Macomb County Flood Insurance Study and dated September 29, 2006 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 2609900218G, 0219G, 0238G, 0306G, 0307G and dated September 29, 2006 are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 110,  7, 1-13-1981; Ord. No. 110A,  3, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 34-38. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 110,  8, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-39. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 110,  9, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-40. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements;
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the common council; and
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 110,  10, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-41. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 110,  11, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-42. - Appendix G of Michigan Building Code. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Utica. 
(Ord. No. 110A,  2, 7-18-2006) 
Secs. 34-43-34-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. (Back)
Sec. 34-61. - Enforcement officer. 
(a)	The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(b)	Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to:
(1)	Permit review. 
a.	Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
b.	Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
c.	Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, ensure that the encroachment provisions of subsection 34-83(1) are met. 
(2)	Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 34-37, basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer subsection 34-82(1), specific standards for residential construction and subsection 34-82(2), specific standards for nonresidential construction. 
(3)	Information to be obtained and maintained. 
a.	Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structure and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
b.	For all new substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1.	Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and
2.	Maintain the floodproofing certification pertaining to the provisions of this article.
c.	Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(4)	Alteration of watercourses. 
a.	Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
b.	Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)	Interpretation of firm boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection 34-63(a). 
(Ord. No. 110,  13-18, 1-13-1981;Ord. No. 110A,  1, 7-18-2006) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees,  2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 34-62. - Development permit. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before the construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in section 34-37. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building official and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
(3)	Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meets the floodproofing criteria in subsection 34-82(2); and 
(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 110,  12, 1-13-1981; Ord. No. 110A,  1, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 34-63. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)	Appeal board. 
(1)	The appeal board as established by the common council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)	The appeal board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)	Those aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
a.	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b.	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c.	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e.	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
f.	The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h.	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area; 
i.	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwater and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(4)	Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (a)(3) of this section and the purpose of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of the variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(5)	The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(b)	Conditions for variances. 
(1)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (a)(3)a-k of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(3)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)	Variances shall only be issued upon:
a.	A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection (a)(3) of this section, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. No. 110,  19, 20, 1-13-1981) 
Secs. 34-64-34-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-81. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required: 
(1)	Anchoring. 
a.	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.	All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Special requirements shall be that: 
1.	Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile homes, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
2.	Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
3.	All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
4.	Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
(2)	Construction materials and methods. 
a.	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)	Utilities. 
a.	All new replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system; 
b.	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwater; and 
c.	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)	Subdivision proposals. 
a.	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b.	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
d.	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 110,  21-25, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-82. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in section 34-37, basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or in subsection 34-61(b)(2), use of other base flood data, the following standards are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
a.	Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.	Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.	Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 34-61(b)(3)b. 
(3)	Mobile homes. 
a.	Mobile homes shall be anchored in accordance with subsection 34-81(1)b. 
b.	For new mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions; for expansions to existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions; for existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of value of the streets, utilities or improvement has commenced; and for mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, require that: 
1.	Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; 
2.	Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and
3.	In the instance of elevation on pilings:
i.	Lots are large enough to permit steps;
ii.	Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and
iii.	Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level.
c.	No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway, except in an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 110,  26-29, 1-13-1981) 
Sec. 34-83. - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-37 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)	If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(3)	Prohibit the placement of any mobile homes except in an existing mobile home park or existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 110,  30, 1-13-1981) 
Chapter 38 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, app. A; HP, historic preservation overlay district, app. A,  1700 et seq.; administration and enforcement of HP, historic preservation overlay district, app. A,  1703; appeal procedures, app. A,  1900 et seq. (Back)
State Law reference- Local Historic Districts Act, MCL 399.201 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
    Commission means the historic district commission. 
    Committee means a historic district study committee appointed by the common council. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Department means the state department of history, arts, and libraries. 
    Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state or a community within this state, or of the United States. 
    Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under subsection 38-5(f). 
    Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
    Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for purposes of this chapter. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work. 
    Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic district. 
    Standing committee means a permanent body established by the common council pursuant to this article to conduct the activities of a historic district study committee on a continuing basis. 
    Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-2, 3-24-1982) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.201a. 
Sec. 38-2. - Purpose. 
    Historic preservation is declared to be a public purpose. The purpose of this chapter shall be to do one or more of the following: 
(1)	Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving one or more historic districts in the city that reflect elements of the unit's history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
(2)	Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the surrounding areas.
(3)	Foster civic beauty.
(4)	Strengthen the local economy.
(5)	Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state. 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-1, 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.202 
Sec. 38-3. - Violations. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.00. A person who violates this chapter may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-11, 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.215. 
Sec. 38-4. - Exemption. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district, or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the building official or other duly delegated authority before the enactment of this chapter. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.210. 
Sec. 38-5. - Permit for work. 
(a)	A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district or, if required under subsection (c) of this section, work affecting the interior arrangements of a resource is performed within a historic district. The person proposing to do that work shall file an application for a permit with the building official, the commission, or other duly delegated authority. If the building official or other authority receives the application, the application shall be immediately referred together with all required supporting materials that make the application complete to the commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the commission has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed as prescribed in this chapter. If a fee to process a permit application is established by resolution, such fee shall be paid. 
(b)	An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the state historic preservation review board of the state historical commission within the department. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of the appellant's evidence and arguments in written form. The review board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal, but may not charge a fee for considering an appeal. The review board may affirm, modify, or set aside a commission's decision and may order a commission to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over the historic district commission of which its decision was appealed to the state historic preservation review board. 
(c)	In reviewing plans, the commission shall follow the United States secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR 67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the secretary of interior's standards and guidelines and are established or approved by the department. The commission shall also consider all of the following: 
(1)	The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area. 
(2)	The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area. 
(3)	The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used. 
(4)	Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds relevant.
(d)	The commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)	If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the commission considers valuable to the city, state, or nation, and the commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state, or nation, the commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(f)	Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)	The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants. 
(2)	The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances. 
(3)	Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner. 
(4)	Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community.
(Ord. No. 107,  2-6, 2-7, 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.205(1)-(6). 
Sec. 38-6. - Work done without permit. 
    When work has been done upon a resource without a permit under this chapter, and the commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the commission may seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, a commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-6, 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.205(12). 
Sec. 38-7. - Demolition by neglect. 
    Upon a finding by the commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the commission may require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect. If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. The commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-8, 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.205(11). 
Secs. 38-8-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-31. - Grants, gifts, and programs. 
    The common council may accept state or federal grants for historic preservation purposes, may participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes. The common council may make the historic district commission, a standing committee, or other agency its duly appointed agent to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program responsibilities. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.206. 
Sec. 38-32. - Acquisition of historic resource by common council. 
    If all efforts by the historic district commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the common council that public ownership is most suitable, the common council, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants, or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the commission or standing committee. The commission or standing committee is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the common council. Upon recommendation of the commission or standing committee, the city may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.207. 
Sec. 38-33. - Historic district commission; filings with delegated authority; duties of city officials and city employees. 
(a)	The commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed, and denials of applications for permits with the building official or other delegated authority. A permit shall not be issued until the commission has acted as prescribed by this chapter. If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the building official or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied with a written explanation by the commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include notification of the applicant's rights of appeal to the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court. The failure of the commission to act within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the commission, shall be considered to constitute approval. 
(b)	City officials and city employees shall provide information and records to committees, commissions, and standing committees, and shall meet with those bodies upon request to assist with their activities. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.209(1), (2). 
Secs. 38-34-38-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions,  2-231 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 38-51. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a historic district commission. 
(Ord. No. 104,  2-4, 6-12-1979) 
Sec. 38-52. - Membership. 
    The historic district commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the common council. Members shall be appointed for three-year terms. All members shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event of a vacancy on the commission, interim appointments shall be made by the common council at the first council meeting following the vacancy to complete the unexpired term of such position. 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-4, 3-24-1982) 
Sec. 38-53. - Organization; meetings; quorum; voting. 
(a)	The commission shall adopt bylaws governing its organization. The commission shall elect from its membership a chair and vice-chair whose terms of office shall be fixed by the bylaws adopted by the commission. The chair shall preside over the commission and shall have the right to vote. The vice-chair shall, in case of the absence or disability of the chair, perform the duties of the chair. 
(b)	The commission shall in the bylaws provide for the frequency of its meetings and the manner in which the meetings shall be called. The commission shall, however, meet at least once each calendar quarter. The commission shall also establish in the bylaws minimum attendance requirements for its members. Whenever the commission determines that any of its members have failed to meet the minimum attendance requirements which it has established in its bylaws, it may request the mayor to declare such member's office vacant. 
(c)	Five members shall constitute a quorum for conducting a meeting of the commission.
(d)	The concurring vote of four members shall be necessary for approval of plans and for the adoption or modification of preservation guidelines by the commission. Motions or other actions by the commission shall also require a simple majority of the members. 
(e)	The business that the commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings Act. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the commission. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.205(7). 
(f)	The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.205(8). 
(g)	The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment to carry out its duties under this chapter. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.205(9). 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-5, 3-24-1982) 
Sec. 38-54. - Delegation of certain functions. 
    The commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff, to the inspector of buildings, or to another delegated authority. The commission shall provide to the delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this section. On at least a quarterly basis, the commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued for work by its staff, the inspector, or another authority to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.205(10). 
Sec. 38-55. - Appeal of decisions. 
    Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under subsection 38-5(a) may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the state historic preservation review board under subsection 38-5(b). 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-12, 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.211. 
Secs. 38-56-38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- HP, historic preservation overlay district, app. A,  1700 et seq.; appeal procedures, app. A,  1900 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 38-81. - Creation procedures. 
(a)	The city may, by ordinance, establish one or more historic districts. The historic districts shall be administered by the commission established pursuant to this article. Before establishing a historic district, the legislative body of the city shall appoint a historic district study committee. The committee shall contain a majority of persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. The committee shall do all of the following: 
(1)	Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved by the department. 
(2)	Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic resources located within that district. 
(3)	Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States secretary of the interior for inclusion of resources in the national register of historic places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60, and criteria established or approved by the department, if any. 
(4)	Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that addresses, at a minimum, all of the following: 
a.	The charge of the committee.
b.	The composition of the committee membership.
c.	The historic district or districts studied.
d.	The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on maps.
e.	The history of each proposed historic district.
f.	The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
(5)	Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendations to the plan commission, to the department, to the state historical commission, and to the state historic preservation review board. 
(6)	Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)	Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with the Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings Act. Written notice shall be mailed by first-class mail not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the city. 
(c)	After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the legislative body of the city shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the legislative body of the city, to take the following actions: 
(1)	The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local planning body to the legislative body of the city. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district or districts, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance or ordinances. 
(2)	After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district, the common council, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If the city passes an ordinance establishing one or more historic districts, the city shall file a copy of that ordinance, including a legal description of the property or properties located within the historic district or districts, with the register of deeds. A city shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the city, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(d)	A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a committee in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-3(a), 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.203. 
Sec. 38-82. - Creation of additional districts; modification or elimination of districts. 
(a)	The city may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a historic district study committee appointed by the legislative body of the city shall, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, comply with the procedures set forth in section 38-81 and shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action. To conduct these activities, the city may retain the initial committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. 
(b)	If considering elimination of a historic district, a committee shall follow the procedures set forth in section 38-81 for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(1)	The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled establishment of the district. 
(2)	The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined.
(3)	The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures.
(c)	Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the common council may, at its discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the commission. The commission shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as the city approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(d)	If the common council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district, the common council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The common council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied. 
(Ord. No. 107,  2-3(a), 3-24-1982) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.214. 
Sec. 38-83. - Establishment of historic district boundaries. 
(a)	The following historic district is hereby established:
(1)	Beginning at the intersection of the easterly bank of the Clinton River and the northerly right-of-way line of Auburn Road (also known as Main Street); thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way line of Auburn Road (also known as Main Street) to the southeast corner of Lot 52 of Assessor's Plat No. 1 (recorded L. 13 of Plats, P. 47, M.C.R.); thence northwesterly 108.20 feet to the northeast corner of lot 51 of said Assessor's Plat No. 1; thence easterly 50.0 feet and northerly 101.92 feet to northeast corner of Lot 50 of said plat; thence westerly 20.35 feet; thence northerly 66.0 feet along the east line of lot 49 of said plat; thence westerly 5.04 feet; thence northerly 64.78 feet along the east line of lot 48 of said plat; thence northerly 33.0 feet to the southeast corner of lot 47 and northerly 66.0 feet along the east line of lot 47 of said plat; thence easterly 33.0 feet along the north line of lot 60 of said Assessor's Plat No. 1; thence northwesterly 266.20 feet along the westerly line of lots 62 to 67 inclusive to the northwest corner of lot 67 of said Assessor's Plat No. 1; thence northeasterly to the southeast corner of lot 77 of block 1 of Assessor's Replat of John Stead's Addition (recorded L. 13 of Plats, P. 48 M.C.R.); thence northeasterly along the easterly line of lots 68 to 77 to the northeast corner of lot 68 block 1 of said plat; thence northerly to the southeast corner of lot 63 Block 2 of said plat; thence northerly along the easterly line of lots 54 and 63 to the northeast corner of Lot 54 of said plat; thence northwesterly to the southeast corner of Lot 49 Block 3 of said plat; thence northwesterly 165.0 feet along the easterly line of said Lot 49; thence easterly to the southeast corner of Lot 40 Block 3 of said plat; thence northerly along the easterly line of Lot 40 Block 3 and the easterly line of Lot 36 Block 4 to the northeast corner of Lot 36 Block 4 of said Assessor's Replat of John Stead's Addition; thence westerly 570.07 feet along the north line of Lots 30 to 36 inclusive to the northeast corner of Lot 29 Block 5 of said plat; thence southeasterly 165.0 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 27 Block 5 of said plat; thence westerly 297.0 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 2 Block 12 of said plat; thence southeasterly 1072.50 feet along the west line of Brownell Street to the northeast corner of Lot 9 Block 9 of said plat; thence westerly 165.0 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 9; thence southeasterly 82.50 feet along the west line of said lot to the north line of McClellan Street; thence westerly 955.95 feet along the north line of McClellan Street and its extension to its intersection on the easterly bank of the Clinton River; thence southerly along the easterly bank of the Clinton River to the point of beginning. 
(2)	Beginning at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of Penn Central Railroad and the northerly right-of-way line of Auburn Road (also known as Main Street); thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way line of said Auburn Road to its intersection with the westerly bank of the Clinton River; thence northerly and westerly along the westerly and southerly bank of said river to the intersection of said bank with the easterly right-of-way line of the Penn Central Railroad; thence southerly along the said right-of-way line to the point of beginning. 
(b)	The district described in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section is intended to encompass structures north of Auburn Road and along a northern configuration which utilizes Cass Avenue as a center reference, and excludes Van Dyke frontage and industrial properties west of Brownell, together with the structures north of Auburn Road and west of the Clinton River commonly referred to as the so-called Farmer's Market area. 
(c)	The southern portion of the downtown area being contiguous parcels in the City of Utica, Macomb County, and generally south of Auburn Road with specific descriptions being: 
(1)Common Address:7790 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.07-33-483-008Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 5 PART OF LOT 22, BEGINNING AT THE INTERSECTION OF SOUTH SIDELINE OF AUBURN ROAD AND WEST SIDELINE OF CASS STREET, TH S1146' E 84.95 FT; TH S3221' E 8.0 FT TO A PT ON A CURVE CONCAVE TO THE S; TH ALG SD CURVE 36.49 FT & WHOSE LONG CORD BEARS S75 12' 15" W 36.10 FT WITH A RADIUS OF 1497.69 FT; TH S7405'14" W 37.5 FT; TH N055'14" E 118.0 FT; TH S8912'E 46.17 FT TO PT OF BEG. (2)Common Address:7770 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.07-33-483-014Legal Description:T3N, R12E, SEC 33 & T2N,R12E, SEC 4 ASSESSOR'S PLAT NO. 5, LOT 20 & 21, EXC THAT PART LYING SLY OF A LINE 66.71 FT NLY OF A LINE DESC AS: COMM. AT NE COR SEC 4 T2N R12E; TH S0301'44"E 39.12 FT ALG E SEC LINE TO POB; TH S7619'09"W 600.0 FT TO PT OF ENDING. (3)Common Address:7758 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.07-33-483-012Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO 5, LOT 19 EXC E 0.33 FT OF N 70.0 FT; ALSO EXC THAT PART LYING SLY OF A LINE 66.71 FT NLY OF A LINE DESC AS: COMM AT NE COR SEC 4, T2N R12E; TH S0301'45"E 39.12 FT ALG E SEC LINE TO POB; TH S7619'09"W 600.0 FT TO PT OF ENDING. (4)Common Address:7748 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-226-021Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO 5 LOT 18; &. PART OF LOT 22 DESC AS FOLL; BEG AT SW COR LOT 18; TH S8904'46E 75.0 FT; TH S7405'14"W 78.50 FT; TH N055'14"E 23.0 FT TO PT OF BEG. CITY OF UTICA. (5)Common Address:7732 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-226-019Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO 5 LOT 17 EXC W 0.61 FT OF N 81 FT; ALSO EXC THAT PART TAKEN FOR RELOCATION OF M59 CITY OF UTICA. (6)Common Address:7726 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-226-025Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO 5 THAT PART OF LOT 16 LYING N OF A LINE 75.0 FT NORTH OF CEN LINE OF M59 AS RELOCATED; AND W 0.61 FT OF N 81.0 FT OF LOT 17 EXC THAT PART LYING SLY OF A LINE AS COMM AT NE COR SEC 4; TH S0301'45"E 39.12 FT ALG E SEC LINE; TH S7619'09"W 484.07 FT; TH N1340'51"W 46.71 FT; TH N0148'9" 20.0 FT; TO PT OF BEG; TH N8811'41"W 90.0 FT TO PT OF ENDING. CITY OF UTICA. (7)Common Address:7668 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-226-023Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO 5 PART OF LOTS 10, 13, 14 & OUTLOT A, DESC AS BEG AT NE COR LOT 13; TH S8907'21"E 1.62 FT ALG S LINE OF MAIN ST; TH S053'28"W 2.0 FT; TH N8907'21"W 1.62 FT; TH S053'28"W 68.0 FT ALG LINE COMMON TO LOTS 13 & 14 TO SW COR LOT 14; TH S8907'21"E 34.0 FT ALG S LINE LOT 14; TH S058'52"W 52.52 FT; TH 38.72 FT ALG A CURVE TO R, RAD=30.0 FT & L/CH BEARS S3757'03"W 36.08 FT; TH 111.53 FT ALG A CURVE TO R, RAD=2446.64 FT & L/CH BEARS S7613'35"W 111.52 FT; TH N052'39"E 97.02 FT; TH S8907'21"E 9.95 FT; TH N30-31'37"W 77.46 FT & N2654'57" W 18.53 FT ALG W'LY LINE OF OUT-LOT A; TH S8907'21"E 134.81 FT ALG S LINE MAIN ST TO POB; EXC PART OF LOT 13 DESC AS COM AT NE COR LOT 13; TH N8907'21"W 40.50 FT ALG S LINE MAIN ST TO POB; TH CONT N8907'21"W 54.85 FT ALG SD MAIN ST TO NW COR LOT 13; TH SE'LY 102.40 FT ALG LINE COMMON TO LOT 13 & OUTLOT A; TH N 86.50 FT TO POB; EXC THAT PART LYING SLY OF A LINE WHICH IS 20 FT NLY OF A LINE DESC AS: COMM AT NE COR SEC 4 T2N R12E TH S0301'45"E 39.12 FT ALG E SEC LINE; TH S7619'09"W557.96 FT; TH N1340'51"W 68.41 FT TO POB; TH S 7717'28"W200.0 FT TO PT OF ENDING. (8)Common Address:7664 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.07-33-483-04Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO 5 LOT 13 EXC; BEG AT NW COR LOT 14; TH S 70 FT ALG W LINE LOT 14 TO SW COR LOT 14; TH E 46 FT ALG S LINE LOT 14; TH S 68.03 FT ALG E LINE LOT 15 TO BANK CLINTON & KALAMAZOO CANAL; TH NW'LY ALG SD BANK ABOUT 104 FT; TH N 86.5 FT TO SOUTH SIDE LINE MAIN ST; TH W 40.5 FT TO PT OF BEG. CITY OF UTICA. (9)Common Address:7636 Auburn, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.07-33-483-003Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO 5 LOT 12 CITY OF UTICA. 
(d)	Certain noncontiguous historic districts, specifically described as property in the City of Utica, County of Macomb: 
(1)Common Address:44720 Davis Drive, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-227-004Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 5, LOT 8, CITY OF UTICA(2)Common Address:44727 Davis Drive, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-206-020Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6, LOT 9 (3)Common Address:44770 Davis Drive, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-227-002Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 5, LOT 7 EXC; COMM AT NW COR LOT 7; TH N8029'20"E 177.30 FT TO PT OF BEG; TH N8029'20"E 292.70 FT TO W BANK CLINTON RIVER; TH SELY 151.17 FT TO N LINE JEFFERSON ST; TH S6333'40"W 156.62 FT; TH S8038'20"W 270.98 FT; TH N0324'20"E 152.42 FT TO PT OF BEG CITY OF UTICA (4)Common Address:7315 Greeley Street, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-206-016Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6, LOT 13 (5)Common Address:7331 Greeley Street, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-206-028Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6 THAT PART OF LOT 11 LYING N OF A LINE COMMON TO LOTS 9 & 10 EXTENDED W TO W LINE LOT 11; ALSO ALL OF LOT 12, CITY OF UTICA (6)Common Address:7351 Greeley Street, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-206-029Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6, THAT PART OF LOT 11 LYING S OF A LINE COMMON TO LOTS 9 & 10 EXTENDED W TO W LINE LOT 11, CITY OF UTICA (7)Common Address:7360 Greeley Street, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-208-004Legal Description:RIVER VIEW GARDENS LOT. 12(8)Common Address:7557 Greeley Street, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-227-005Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 5, LOT 9, CITY OF UTICA(9)Common Address:7828 Greeley Street, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-232-014Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 5, LOT 33, CITY OF UTICA - - - TIFA DISTRICT(10)Common Address:44633 Utica Road, Utica, Michigan 48317 and 44657 Utica Road, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-207-003Legal Description:T2N,R12E SEC. 4 BEG AT SW COR LOT 49, A.P. NO. 6; CITY OF UTICA; TH N8800'30"E 786.09 FT ALONG S LINE LOT 49 TO CENTER LINE UTICA ROAD; TH S0122'E 418.38 FT ALONG CENTER LINE UTICA ROAD; TH S8800'30"W 781.0 FT; TH N0204'W 418.35 FT TO POINT OF BEGINNING 7.523 A. (11)Common Address:44761 Utica Road, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-205-009Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6, LOT 39 -- -- (12)Common Address:44795 Utica Road, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-205-003Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6, LOT 36 (13)Common Address:44812 Utica Road, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-206-008Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6, LOT 21 (14)Common Address:44828 Utica Road, Utica, Michigan 48317Parcel I.D. No.10-04-206-037Legal Description:ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 6, ALL THAT PART OF LOT 4 LYING S OF M-59 RELOCATED & ADJUSTED LOTS 20, 21, & 22 OF SD SUB; ALSO ALL OF LOT 22, CITY OF UTICA  
(Ord. No. 107,  2-3(b), 3-24-1982; Ord. No. 107A,  I, 1-8-1985; Ord. No. 107D, 6-14-2005) 
Chapter 42 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Police department and police chief,  4.1-4.3. (Back)
Cross reference- Emergency services and emergency management, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. (Back)
Sec. 42-1. - Law enforcement officer qualification. 
    The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as established and adopted by the state law enforcement officers training council in accordance with Public Act No. 203 of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq.) are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)	Be a citizen of the United States.
(2)	Minimum age of 21 years.
(3)	Graduation from high school or equivalent. Equivalent defined as having attained a passing score on the general education development test indicating high school graduation level. 
(4)	Fingerprinting of applicants with a search of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record. 
(5)	The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony offense.
(6)	Good moral character as determined by a favorable report following a comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment records, home environment, personal traits and integrity. Consideration will be given to any and all law violations, including traffic and conservation law convictions as indicating a lack of good character. Acceptable physical, emotional and mental fitness as established by a licensed physician following examination to determine the applicant is free from any physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect his performance of duty as a police officer. 
(7)	The trainee shall possess normal hearing and normal color vision. The trainee shall be free from any impediments of the senses. The trainee must possess normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye correctable to 20/20. The trainee must be physically sound; well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards and in possession of his extremities. The trainee shall be free from any physical defects, chronic diseases, organic diseases, organic or functional conditions, or mental instabilities which may tend to impair efficient performance of duty to which might endanger the lives of others or himself if the lacks these qualifications. 
(8)	A declaration of the applicant's medical history shall become a part of the background investigation. The information shall be available to the examining physician. 
(9)	An oral interview shall be held by the hiring authority or his representative, to determine the applicant's acceptability for a police officer position and to assess appearance, background and ability to communicate. Recruitment and employment practices and standards shall be in compliance with existing state statutes governing this activity. 
(Ord. No. 81,  1, 4-8-1969) 
Sec. 42-2. - Reimbursement for medical services received by individuals who are in custody. 
(a)	Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance service means the use of an authorized vehicle for transportation, or transportation and treatment, on an emergency basis, of patients. 
    Emergency means a condition or situation in which an individual declares a need for immediate medical attention, or where such need is declared by emergency medical personnel or a public safety official. 
    Individuals who are in custody means any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the city, including but not limited to, individuals who are i) under arrest, ii) incarcerated, iii) imprisoned, iv) escaped from confinement, v) under supervised release, vi) on medical furlough, vii) residing in a mental health facility or halfway house, viii) living under home detention, ix) or confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statue or rule. 
(b)	Process: 
(1)	Fire department personnel. 
a.	Not responsible for collection. Fire department personnel shall not be responsible for the collection of any service fee. 
b.	To provide service regardless. Services shall be provided without regard to whether any such person is financially able to or will pay the fee. 
c.	Maintain records. The fire department shall maintain a record of all patients receiving emergency ambulance service. Such records shall, within 30 days such service is rendered, be turned over to the city's billing agent. 
(2)	Billing agent. 
a.	Statement of services to users. The city appointed independent billing agent shall mail to any user of the ambulance service a statement showing the services rendered, and the amount of the fee to be charged. The fees authorized by this section shall be determined by resolution of the city council, and shall be a reasonable pro rata compensatory charge based upon the average cost per run as determined by city records. 
b.	Users with insurance coverage. If it appears that any such user has a policy of insurance which would pay for such service, the statement may be mailed directly to the insurance company involved, in accordance with the billing practices of that company. 
c.	Collection records. The city clerk shall maintain appropriate records indicating all persons to whom such statements were mailed and the fee which was collected. 
d.	Delinquent accounts. Any such user who does not remit the service fee within 120 days of the date of billing shall have his account forwarded to a third party collection agency for appropriate legal action. 
e.	Deposit of fees. All net fees collected by the independent billing agent shall be deposited by the city treasurer to the appropriate account as required by law. 
(c)	Medical services-Medical treatment of individuals who are in custody. Individuals who are in custody shall be solely responsible for the payment of any medical services rendered to, and received by, that individual during the course of his or her confinement with the city or at the city's or court's direction, including without limitation transportation to and from a medical treatment facility, and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or not requested by the individual in custody and shall be required to reimburse the city in full for any fees or charges incurred for such services, if not paid directly to medical facility or practitioner by the individual in custody or his or her insurance carrier. 
(Ord. No. 159,  1-3, 6-14-2011) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Attempts. 
    Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this chapter, and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration, or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the offense, when no express provision is made by this chapter for the punishment of such attempt, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the offense is a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction if the offense is a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 95,  VII, 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Attempts, MCL 750.92. 
Sec. 46-2. - Abolition of distinction between accessory and principal. 
    Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this chapter, whether he directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids, or abets in its commission may be prosecuted and punished as if he had directly committed such offense. 
(Ord. No. 95,  VIII, 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Sec. 46-3. - Illegal occupation or business. 
    No person shall engage in an illegal occupation or business. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(d), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1(d), 2-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(d). 
Sec. 46-4. - Loitering where illegal business or occupation conducted. 
    A person who knowingly loiters in or about a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(j), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Sec. 46-5. - Loitering to solicit employment of legal services or services of sureties on criminal recognizances. 
    A person who loiters in or about a police station, police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building, or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(k), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(k). 
Secs. 46-6-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 46-31. - Harassment. 
    No person shall improperly, lewdly, wantonly, or wrongfully accost, ogle, insult, follow, pursue, lay hands on, or, by gesture, movement of body or otherwise, wrongfully molest any person in any public street, lane, alley, square, park, public vehicle, public place, or space in the city. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(7), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Harassing communications, MCL 750.540e; stalking, MCL 750.411h. 
Secs. 46-32-46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-61. - Trespass. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIX(1), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 46-62. - Trespass after warning by sign. 
(a)	In this section:
    Owner means the title holder of private property, or the lessee, tenant, occupant, agent or trustee thereof. 
    Trespass and the act of trespassing mean the unauthorized use of private property by persons or vehicles without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner. 
    Vehicle means any mobile unit on wheels which is required to be licensed by the state in order to be used on the public highways. 
(b)	No person shall:
(1)	Trespass upon the private property of another by making any use thereof whatsoever, unless the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification therefor shall have been obtained from the owner. 
(2)	Park, leave, stop or stand a vehicle on private property of another without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification therefor from the owners. 
(c)	To invoke the operation and enforcement of this section, the owner must register the property by appropriate description on forms provided by the city clerk, filed with the city police department, who shall maintain a current roster thereof. There shall be an annual registration fee paid to the city by the owner in such amount as shall be prescribed by resolution. 
(d)	Any property registered as provided in this section must be posted with a notice by the owner in one or more places as to be plainly visible to persons unfamiliar with such property for the purpose of giving notice that trespassing is prohibited. The form of the posted notice required by this section shall be substantially as follows: 
This is private property for the use of ____________ only. 
All others using this property are trespassing and in violation of City of Utica Ordinance No. 76. 
This private property has been registered under the provisions of such Ordinance and violators will be prosecuted and unauthorized vehicles towed away or ticketed therefor. 
(e)	In any enforcement proceeding for violation of the provisions of this section, the license plate number displayed on any vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the owner thereof is the person who placed the vehicle on the private property. 
(f)	Any owner or police of the city may cause any vehicle that is violating the provisions of this section to be towed away; or any police officer may issue a ticket therefor and leave it attached to such vehicle, requiring the appearance of the owner thereof in court at the time and place designated therein to answer for the violation of this section. 
(g)	Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 76, arts. I-IV, 9-10-1968) 
Sec. 46-63. - Breaking and entering or entering without breaking. 
(a)	Any person who shall break and enter, or shall enter without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, granary, factory, or other building, boat, ship, railroad car or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the outbuildings belonging thereto, or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to entering, without breaking, any place which at the time of such entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied. 
(c)	This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking were committed by a peace officer or someone under his direction in the lawful performance of his duties as such peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIX(2), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.115. 
Sec. 46-64. - Bad checks. 
(a)	Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker, or drawer, has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft, or order, in full, upon its presentation, or any person who, with the intent to defraud, shall make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for the payment for such check, draft or order for the payment of money when presentation for payment is made to the drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered, or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing shall, if the amount payable in the check is $50.00 or less, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(c)	Where such check, draft or order is protested, on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XVII, 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.131, 750.132, 750.133. 
Secs. 46-65-46-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LARCENY AND RELATED OFFENSES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Larceny generally, MCL 750.536 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 46-86. - Larceny. 
(a)	If the property which is the subject of a larceny shall be of the value of $100.00 or less, the person convicted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Any person who shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, of the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods dug or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	Any person to whom any money, goods or other property, which may be the subject of larceny, shall have been delivered, who shall embezzle or fraudulently convert to his own use, or shall secrete with the intent to embezzle, or fraudulently use such goods, money or other property, or any part thereof, shall be deemed by so doing to have committed the crime of larceny and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIV(1)-(3), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.362. 
Sec. 46-87. - False pretenses. 
    Any person who, with intent to defraud or cheat, shall designedly, by color of any false token or writing or by any false or bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by spurious coin or metal in the similitude of coin, or by any other false pretense, cause any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or mortgage any land or interest in land, or obtain the signature of any person to any written instrument, the making whereof would be punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any money or personal property or the use of any instrument, facility or article or other valuable thing or service, or by means of any false weights or measures obtain a larger amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, or by means of any false weights or measures sell or dispose of a less amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIV(4), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.218. 
Sec. 46-88. - Larceny from libraries. 
    Any person who shall procure, or take in any way from any public library or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert such material to his own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, or who having procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, shall thereafter convert the material to his own use or fraudulently deprive the owner thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIV(5), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.364. 
Sec. 46-89. - Taking or injuring fruit, shade, ornamental trees, shrubs, vines, etc. 
    Any person who shall wrongfully take and carry away from any place any fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub, or any plant, vine, bush, or vegetable there growing, standing or being, with intent to deprive the owner thereof, or who shall without right and with wrongful intent, detach from the ground or injure any fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub, or any plant, vine, bush, vegetable or produce shall be deemed by so doing to have committed the crime of larceny and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIV(6), 9-10-1974) 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 86. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.367. 
Sec. 46-90. - Possession of stolen property 
(a)	Any person who shall buy, receive or aid in the concealment of any stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods, or property knowing the property to have been stolen, embezzled or converted shall be guilty of a crime punishable in the same manner as if the person had stolen, embezzled or converted the money, goods or property. The acquisition of merchandise or personal property at a consideration less than 50 percent of its fair market value, other than by bona fide gift, creates a rebuttable presumption that the acquirer knew that the merchandise or personal property was stolen, embezzled or converted. 
(b)	Any person being a dealer in or collector of any merchandise or personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of such dealer or collector who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering any stolen, embezzled or converted property to him has a legal right to do so or who buys or receives any such property which has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or obliterated on any external surface thereof, shall be presumed to have bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proof. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIV(7), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.535. 
Secs. 46-91-46-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MALICIOUS MISCHIEF 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. (Back)
Sec. 46-106. - Generally. 
    Any person who shall willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any house, barn, building of another or the appurtenances thereof, or any personal property of another, if the damage resulting from such injury shall be $100.00 or less, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(1), 9-10-1974) 
Sec. 46-107. - Fences and gates. 
    Any person who shall maliciously break down, injure, mar or deface any fence belonging to or enclosing lands not his own, or shall maliciously throw down or open any gate, bars or fence, and leave the gate, bars or fence down or open, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(2), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.381. 
Sec. 46-108. - Landscape. 
    A person who willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, cuts down, destroys or injures any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops, or soil of another that is standing, growing, or located on the land of another, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(3), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95-B, 4-14-1981) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.382. 
Sec. 46-109. - Markers. 
    Any person who shall willfully or maliciously break down, injure, remove or destroy any monument erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of this state or any municipality thereof, or of any tract or lot of land, or any tree marked for that purpose, or shall so break down, injure, remove or destroy any milestone, mileboard, guidepost or guide board, lawfully erected upon any highway, or other public way or railroad, or shall willfully or maliciously deface, or alter the inscription on any such stone, post or board, or shall willfully or maliciously mar or deface any building or sign board, or extinguish any lamp, or break, injure, destroy or remove any gas lamp, oil lamp, electric light globe or bulb, or any railing or lamppost, erected on any bridge, sidewalk, street, highway, court or passage, or shall willfully or maliciously injure, remove, deface or destroy any board or structure lawfully erected or used for the posting of bills, posters, or other notices, or shall willfully or maliciously mutilate, deface or destroy any bill, poster, or other printed or written notice lawfully posted on any board or structure used for that purpose, without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(4), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.383. 
Sec. 46-110. - Signs. 
    Any person who shall willfully tear down, destroy or in any manner deface any signs, bill or notices on any private lands, or on any lots or premises shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Provided, that such signs, bill or notices are not in violation of any general law of the state or municipal ordinance, and were placed by the owner or lessee or by their consent. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(5), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.385. 
Sec. 46-111. - Library. 
    Any person who shall willfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface or mutilate or write upon, or by oilier means injure or mar any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof belonging to or loaned to any public library, or to the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(6), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.391. 
Sec. 46-112. - Motor vehicle. 
    Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, who shall: 
(1)	Intentionally and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of such motor vehicle; 
(2)	Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof; or 
(3)	Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure such machine or cause the brake to be removed without the consent of the owner; provided that this section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(7), 9-10-1974) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.416. 
Sec. 46-113. - City property. 
    Any person who shall willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any property owned, operated, or otherwise in the possession of or under the control of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XV(8), 9-10-1974) 
Secs. 46-114-46-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-141. - Hunting wild game or birds. 
    Any person who shall hunt, shoot or kill any wild game or birds in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XX(2), 9-10-1974) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-142. - Use of consumer fireworks. 
(a)	Definitions. The definitions of the "Michigan Fireworks Safety Act" (the Act) are applicable in this section. 
(b)	Prohibitions. Pursuant to the Act in Section 7 (2), no one shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks except on the day before, day of, or day after a national holiday being: New year's Day (January 1), Martin Luther King, Jr, (the third Monday in January), Washington's Birthday (the third Monday in February), Memorial Day (the last Monday in May), Independence Day (July 4), Labor Day (the first Monday in September), Columbus Day (the second Monday in October), Veteran's Day (November 11), Thanksgiving Day (the fourth Thursday in November), and Christmas Day (December 25). No one shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on New Year's day. 
(c)	Penalty. A violation of this section is a civil infraction punishable by a $500.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. 4A,  1-4, 3-11-1986; Ord. No. 4B, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 4C, 5-13-2003; Ord. No. 163,  1-3, 6-12-2013; Ord. No. 163-A,  2, 3, 7-8-2013) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Secs. 46-143-46-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 750.222 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 46-161. - Seizure and forfeiture of weapons. 
    Any article seized under this division shall be forfeited to the city upon conviction of such violator in a court of law of the offense for which the article gave rise, or of any other offense that is related to such original offense. The police chief of the city is hereby authorized to dispose of such articles as he deems appropriate. For good cause shown, the judge before whom such conviction is entered may order such article returned to such violator, provided that the return is ordered upon petition of such violator prior to or at the time of entry of such conviction. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XX(6), 9-10-1974) 
Sec. 46-162. - Possession of deadly weapon. 
    Any person who shall knowingly possess or have under his control a dagger, dirk, stiletto, a knife having a blade greater than three inches in length, razor, airgun, crossbow, martial arts weapons or any other dangerous or deadly weapons or instrument in a public place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply to persons duly authorized by law to have possession of such articles in a public place or to any person having possession of such articles at their place of business for the purpose of conducting such business. No person shall sell any of the weapons enumerated in this section to anyone under the age of 18 years. As used in this section, martial arts weapons are defined and described as: 
(1)	Karate sticks, which consist of two sticks or bars of a hard substance, usually one inch or less in diameter, connected by a rope or other flexible material. The sticks or bars are generally 12 inches to 14 inches long and the connecting rope is usually one inch or less, but of sufficient length to allow the sticks or bars to be folded next to each other. 
(2)	Manriki-cusari, also known as manriki, which consists of two sticks or bars of a hard substance, usually two inches to four inches in length and one inch or less in diameter, connected by a rope, chain or other flexible material generally 26 inches to 28 inches long. 
(3)	Nun-chuku, which consists of two sticks or bars of a hard substance, usually 12 inches to 14 inches long and less than one inch in diameter, connected by a rope, chain or other flexible material generally two inches to four inches long. 
(4)	Section staff, which consists of three sticks or bars of a hard substance, usually 24 inches long and one inch or less in diameter, connected by two ropes or other flexible material one inch or less in length but of sufficient length to allow the sticks or bars to be folded next to each other. 
(5)	Ton-fa, which consists of a hammer type of offensive weapon in which the head of the hammer is rounded at each end to be adapted for punching or poking as opposed to any purpose for which a hammer may generally be used. 
(6)	Shuriken, also known as stars, which consists of a hard round object, which is generally one to three inches in diameter, with from three to 12 symmetrical, sharp points. The design of this weapon is such as to be adaptable for throwing in a spinning fashion to increase the accuracy of hitting a specific target. 
(7)	Kama, which consists of a sickle type of offensive weapon with a grip attached to a handle generally 15 inches in length and with a sickle blade having a measurement of approximately eight inches from the tip of the sickle to the point that the handle is attached to the sickle. 
(8)	Kubotan which is an offensive weapon consisting of a hard substance usually five inches long, one inch in diameter with rounded ends and is easily adaptable for use in a thrusting movement to disable a person by hitting various sensitive points of the human body. 
(9)	Sai which is an offensive weapon with three or more rounded prongs, approximately 14 inches long, connected to a handle, usually 28 inches to 36 inches long, and has the appearance of a pitchfork. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XX(1), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95C,  A, 3-11-1986) 
Sec. 46-163. - Discharge. 
(a)	Any person who shall discharge any pistol, firearm, or other dangerous weapon shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to any person acting in the performance of his lawful public duty or in the lawful protection of or defense of person or property. 
(b)	Private security guards shall be subject to the provisions of this section except to the extent that such guard is acting in conformity with Public Act No. 330 of 1968 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.) or any other state law. Any private security guard, or person purporting to be such by word, act, or dress, shall have in his possession or under his control, proof of compliance with state law and shall, upon request of a police officer who has reason to believe such guard to have violated this section, furnish the police officer proof of such compliance, a failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XX(3), (4), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Local regulation of firearms, MCL 123.1101 et seq. 
Secs. 46-164-46-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 46-191. - Obstructing public places. 
    No person shall stand or idle in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass or public place so as to hinder or impede or tend to hinder or impede passage of pedestrians or vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(5), 9-10-1974) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 46-192. - Crowds. 
    No person shall collect or crowd on any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or public place in the city to the annoyance or disturbance of the public of the city or other persons. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(4), 9-10-1974) 
Sec. 46-193. - Breach of peace. 
    Any person or persons who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper diversion, or any riot, by which the peace and good order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace, and a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(3), 9-10-1974) 
Sec. 46-194. - Disturbance of religious meetings. 
    Any person who, on the first day of the week, or at any other time, shall willfully interrupt or disturb any assembly of people met for the worship of God, within the place of such meeting or out of it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(2), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.169. 
Sec. 46-195. - Disturbance of lawful meetings. 
    Any person who shall make or excite any disturbance or contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park, or at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(1), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.157. 
Sec. 46-196. - Public intoxication. 
    A person who is intoxicated in a public place and who is either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(e), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e); local public intoxication ordinances, MCL 333.6523. 
Sec. 46-197. - Begging and soliciting alms. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value:
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility;
(3)	Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)	In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection (b)(6) shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)	From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility; or 
(8)	Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value:
(1)	By accosting another; or
(2)	By forcing oneself upon the company of another.
(d)	Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(h), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
Sec. 46-198. - Jostling or crowding others. 
    A person who is found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(l), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 46-199. - Prohibited language. 
(a)	Any person who shall use any indecent, immoral, obscene, vulgar or insulting language in a public place or in the presence or hearing of any woman or child shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	It is a misdemeanor to use indecent or immoral language.
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(7), XVI, 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.337. 
Sec. 46-200. - Disturbing schools. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private, or parochial school is disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XIII(6), 9-10-1974) 
Secs. 46-201-46-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-231. - Prostitution. 
    No person shall be a prostitute. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(b), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(b). 
Sec. 46-232. - Voyeurism. 
    No person shall peep into an occupied dwelling of another person or go upon the land of another with the intent to peep into an occupied dwelling of another person. No person shall peep into an area where an occupant of the area reasonably can be expected to disrobe, including, restrooms, baths, showers, and dressing rooms, without the consent of the other person. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(c), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
Sec. 46-233. - Indecent or obscene conduct. 
    A person who is engaged in indecent or obscene conduct in a public place is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(f), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
Sec. 46-234. - Loitering in house of prostitution. 
    A person found loitering in a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged, or allowed is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XII(i), 9-10-1974; Ord. No. 95A,  1, 2-14-1978) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(i). 
Sec. 46-235. - Sale of alcoholic liquor to underage persons. 
(a)	Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a minor. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a minor, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	If a violation occurs in an establishment that is licensed by the state liquor control commission for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a person who is a licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section or unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person less than 21 years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action. 
(c)	A licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless enforcement action under section 46-236 is taken against the minor who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed or attempted to consume, or possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor and, if applicable, enforcement action is taken under this section against the person 21 years of age or older who sold or furnished the alcoholic liquor to the minor. However, this subsection does not apply under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	The person against whom enforcement action is taken under section 46-236 or the person 21 years of age or older who sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the minor is not alive or is not present in this state at the time the licensee is charged. 
(2)	The violation of subsection (a) of this section is the result of an undercover operation in which the minor purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(3)	The violation of subsection (a) of this section is the result of an undercover operation in which the minor purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action. However, any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor shall have been under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and shall have been part of the undercover operation. 
(d)	If a minor participates in an undercover operation in which the minor is to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor under the supervision of a law enforcement agency, his parents or legal guardian shall consent to the participation if that person is less than 18 years of age. 
(e)	In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a minor, a motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action brought under this section. 
(f)	As used in this section:
    Corrective action means action taken by a licensee or a clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee designed to prevent a minor from further possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. The term "corrective action" includes, but is not limited to, contacting a law enforcement agency and ejecting the minor and any other person suspected of aiding and abetting the minor. 
    Diligent inquiry means a diligent good faith effort to determine the age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an official state operator's or chauffeur's license, an official state personal identification card, or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the identity and age of the person. 
    Minor means a person less than 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XXII, 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1701. 
Sec. 46-236. - Possession of alcoholic liquor by underage persons; furnishing false identification. 
(a)	A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this section. 
(b)	A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor. A minor who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required in this subsection is responsible for a state civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00. 
(d)	A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq.) allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) of this section is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq.). The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a) of this section, his parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(e)	This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his employment if employed by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), by the state liquor control commission, or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his personal consumption. 
(f)	The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(g)	The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this section. 
(h)	Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)	An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)	An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(i)	The state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a) of this section or subsection (h)(1) of this section. 
(j)	In this section, the term "minor" means a person less that 21 years of age.
(Ord. No. 95,  XXII, 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.1703. 
Sec. 46-237. - Model glue and related substances. 
(a)	In this section, the term "chemical agent" means any substance containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent, or both, having the property of releasing toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited to, glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon derivatives. 
(b)	Except as provided for in subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section, no person under 18 years of age shall possess or buy any chemical agent. 
(c)	A person may sell or transfer possession of a chemical agent to a person under 18 years of age for chemical agent building or other lawful use where such juvenile has in his possession and exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian. 
(d)	A person may sell or transfer possession to a person under the age of 18 years, not more than one assembly kit which contains not more than one container of chemical agent not to exceed one fluid ounce, as a necessary part of model assembly. 
(e)	A person making a sale or transfer of possession of a chemical agent to a person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian shall record the name, address, sex, and age of the juvenile and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this section shall be kept in a permanent type register available for inspection by the police department for a period of at least six months. 
(f)	No person shall inhale, drink, eat, or otherwise introduce into his respiratory or circulatory system any compound, liquid, chemical, or any other material or combination thereof with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational, or in any manner changing, distorting, or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, judgment, balance or coordination of such person. For the purpose of this section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. 
(g)	It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet, or encourage any person under 18 year of age to violate any provisions of this section. 
(h)	The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any person who inhales, drinks, eats, or otherwise introduces into his circulatory or respiratory system such material or substance pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, dentist, or other person authorized to so direct or prescribe. 
(i)	Violations of this section are a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 77,  1-6, 9-24-1968) 
Sec. 46-238. - Public nudity. 
(a)	In this section:
    Public nudity means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. Public nudity does not include a woman's breastfeeding of a baby, whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding, material as defined in section 2 of Public Act No. 343 of 1984 (MCL 752.362), or sexually explicit visual material as defined in section 3 of Public Act No. 33 of 1978 (MCL 722.673). 
    Public place means any governmentally owned or controlled property and any land and/or building to which the general public is invited to or permitted to enter upon including, but not limited to, business establishments open to the general public. 
(b)	No person shall engage in public nudity. No business establishment, including but not limited to owners, officers, persons in charge of or control of the premises shall permit persons to engage in public nudity. 
(c)	It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any other person to appear nude in public. 
(Ord. No. 132,  2-4, 9-27-1994) 
State law reference- Regulation of public nudity, MCL 117.5h. 
Secs. 46-239-46-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 46-256. - Definition. 
    As used in this division, the term "drug paraphernalia" means any equipment, product, material, or combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting; manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing; testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing; injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the following: 
(1)	An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance. 
(2)	Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance. 
(3)	A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance. 
(4)	A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed for use with a controlled substance. 
(5)	A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana. 
(6)	An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body. 
(7)	A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(8)	A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances. 
(9)	A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade and a mirror. 
(10)	A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user. 
(11)	A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose. 
(12)	A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled substances. 
(13)	A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 333.7451. 
Sec. 46-257. - Possession. 
    Any person who shall knowingly possess or have under his control any drug paraphernalia shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XXI(2), 9-10-1974) 
Sec. 46-258. - Loitering where sold or possessed. 
    Any person who shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any home, building, apartment, store, automobile, boat, boathouse, airplane or other place of any description whatsoever where drug paraphernalia are sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored, possessed, controlled or otherwise kept illegally shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XXI(3), 9-10-1974) 
Sec. 46-259. - Sale-Prohibited. 
(a)	Subject to subsection (b) of this section, a person shall not sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, knowing that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. 
(b)	Before a person is arrested for a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the attorney general or a prosecuting attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less than two business days before the person is to be arrested, that the person is in possession of specific, defined material that has been determined by the attorney general or prosecuting attorney to be drug paraphernalia. The notice also shall request that the person refrain from selling or offering for sale the material and shall state that if the person complies with the notice, no arrest will be made for a violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	If a person complies with a notice sent under subsection (b) of this section, the compliance is a complete defense for the person against a prosecution under this section as long as the compliance continues. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 333.7453. 
Sec. 46-260. - Same-Exceptions. 
    Section 46-259 does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)	An object sold or offered for sale to a person licensed under article 15 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.16101 et seq.) or any intern, trainee, apprentice, or assistant in a profession licensed under such act for use in that profession. 
(2)	An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital, sanitarium, clinical laboratory, or other health care institution including a penal, correctional, or juvenile detention facility for use in that institution. 
(3)	An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in medical, dental, surgical, or pharmaceutical supplies. 
(4)	Equipment, a product, or material which may be used in the preparation or smoking of tobacco or smoking herbs other than a controlled substance. 
(5)	A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device not specifically designed for a use described in section 46-256 
(6)	A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale for the purpose of injecting or otherwise treating livestock or other animals. 
(7)	An object sold, offered for sale, or given away by a state or local governmental agency or by a person specifically authorized by a state or local governmental agency to prevent the transmission of infectious agents. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 333.7457. 
Secs. 46-261-46-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HERBAL INCENSE PRODUCTS 

Sec. 46-271. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
(a)	The City of Utica finds that herbal incense products marketed in the United States that provide a marijuana-like high when smoked have become increasingly popular, particularly among teens and young adults and that these products consist of plant material that has been laced with chemicals that have not been approved by the FDA for human consumption. 
(b)	The city further finds that the State of Michigan has moved to prohibit the sale and possession of similar products, but the changing nature of the products has resulted in the availability of herbal incense products that exceed the state's definition and statutes and therefore are not properly regulated by state law. The city is aware that the side effects of the unregulated herbal incense products pose a threat to the public health and safety of the citizens of the city and it is in the best interests of the city to regulate the sale and use of such products. 
(Ord. No. 162,  1, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 46-272. - Definitions. 
    Cannabinoids: 
(1)	AM Cannabinoids means any synthetic cannabinoids created by Alexandros Makriyannis or his research group, includes, but is not limited to AM-087; AM-251; AM-281; AM-356; AM-374; AM-381; AM-404; AM-411; AM-630; AM-661; AM-678; AM-679; AM-694; AM-855; AM-881; AM-883; AM-905; AM-906; AM-919; AM-926; AM-938; AM-1116; AM-1172; AM-1220; AM-1221; AM-1235; AM-1241; AM-1248; AM-2201; AM-2212; AM-2213; AM-2232; AM-2233; AM-2102; AM-4030. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
(2)	CP Cannabinoids means CP-47, 497; (C6)-CP-47, 497; (C7)-CP-47, 497; (C8)-CP-47, 497; (C9)-CP-47, 497; CP-50, 556-1; CP-55, 244; CP-55, 940; CP-945, 598. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
(3)	HU Cannabinoids means any synthetic cannabinoids synthesized at the Hebrew University, including, but not limited to, HU-210; HU-211; HU-243; HU-308; HU-320; HU-331; HU-336; HU-345. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
(4)	JWH Cannabinoids means any synthetic cannabinoids created by John W. Huffman or his research group, including, but not limited to, JWH-007; JWH-015; JWH-018; JWH-019; JWH-030; JWH-047; JWH-048; JWH-051; JWH-057; JWH-073; JWH-081; JWH-098; JWH-116; JWH-120; JWH-122; JWH-133; JWH-139; JWH-147; JWH-148; JWH-149; JWH-161; JWH-164; JWH-166; JWH-167; JWH-171; JWH-175; JWH-176; JWH-181; JWH-182; JWH-184; JWH-185; JWH-192; JWH-193; JWH-194; JWH-195; JWH-196; JWH-197; JWH-198; JWH-199; JWH-200; JWH-203; JWH-205; JWH-210; JWH-213; JWH-229; JWH-234; JWH-249; JWH 250; JWH-251; JWH-253; JWH-258; JWH-300; JWH-302; JWH-307; JWH-336; JWH-350; JWH-359; JWH-387; JWH-398; JWH-424. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
    Controlled substance as used in this division means any of the above described cannabinoids. 
    Herbal incense as used in this division means anything composed of aromatic biotic materials which release fragrant smoke when burned. 
    Incense product as used in this division means any herbal incense that is not regulated by state law. 
    Person shall mean any person, firm, group, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, limited liability company or any other business entity. For the purposes of this division, the president, managers, owners, shareholders, partners, members or other persons in charge of the business shall be responsible to require the business to comply with this division and shall likewise be subject to the penalties imposed for violations of this division by the business entity. 
    Possession means to have actual physical possession or otherwise to exercise actual dominion or control over a tangible object. 
    Traffic and trafficking means to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, transfer, or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute, dispense or sell a controlled substance. 
    Transfer means to dispose of a controlled substance to another person without consideration and not in furtherance of commercial distribution. 
(Ord. No. 162,  2, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 46-273. - Possession of AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, JWH Cannabinoids or HU Cannabinoids. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to be in possession of AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, JWH Cannabinoids or HU Cannabinoids. A person is guilty of possession when he or she knowingly and unlawfully possesses AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, JWH Cannabinoids or HU Cannabinoids. 
(Ord. No. 162,  3, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 46-274. - Trafficking in AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, JWH Cannabinoids or HU Cannabinoids. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to traffic in AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, JWH Cannabinoids or HU Cannabinoids. A person is guilty of trafficking when he or she knowingly and unlawfully traffics in AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, JWH Cannabinoids or HU Cannabinoids. 
(Ord. No. 162,  4, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 46-275. - Trafficking in similar products. 
(a)	Sale to minors prohibited. No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, shall offer to sell, sell, or give any incense product to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)	Sign prohibiting sale to minors. Each owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling or displaying for the purpose of sale, any incense product shall prominently display a sign therein, in readily visible and legible words, to the effect that offering to sell, to sell, or give any incense product to any person under the age of eighteen years is prohibited. Such sign shall cite this chapter of the code as the basis for the prohibition. 
(c)	Locked facility. All products regulated under subsections 46-275(a) and 46-275(b) shall be kept in a locked storage cabinet or other locked container not readily accessible to the public. 
(d)	Log book. All products regulated under subsections 46-275(a) 46-275(b), and 46-275(c) above shall require the recording in a log book in legible form the date and time of each sale of said product, to include the name, residence address, and date of birth taken from a valid state identification card or driver's license of the person to whom the product is sold or given at the time of sale or distribution. Properly identified law enforcement officers (in uniform or presenting their badge and identification card) shall be exempt from this provision. The log book required above shall be kept for a period of one year after the date of the transaction and during that time shall be made available for inspection by law enforcement upon request during the business' regular hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 162,  5, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 46-276. - Penalties. 
(a)	Prohibited possession. Any person who violates the provision of this article concerning Possession of AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, HU Cannabinoids or JWH Cannabinoids, upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation as a civil infraction first offense MCL 600.101, et seq.; MSA 27A.101, et seq., as amended, and shall pay a civil fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(b)	Trafficking a misdemeanor. Any person who violates the provision of this division concerning trafficking in AM Cannabinoids, CP Cannabinoids, HU Cannabinoids or JWH Cannabinoids is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days and/or a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(c)	Similar products first offense. Any person violating any provision of subsection 46-275(a) through 46-275(d), upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation as a civil infraction first offense MCL 600.101, et seq.; MSA 27A.101, et seq., as amended, and shall pay a civil fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(d)	Similar products second offense. Any person who violates any provision of this division as a civil infraction as a second offense, upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction, as that term is defined and used in MCL 600.101, et seq.; MSA 27A.101, et seq., as amended, and shall pay a civil fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(e)	Similar products third offense. Any person who violates any provision of this division as a civil infraction third offense, upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction, as that term is defined and used in MCL 600.101, et seq.; MSA 27A.101, et seq., as amended, and shall pay a civil fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(f)	Repeated violations. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense and no additional notice other than notice of the original offense shall be required to convict a person for multiple violations resulting from a continuation of such offense. 
(Ord. No. 162,  6, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 46-277. - Applicability of state law. 
    If current or future Michigan law prohibits any substance(s) contained in this division to an extent or with a penalty exceeding this division, that statute shall control the enforcement and the prosecution of that specific offense. 
(Ord. No. 162,  7, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 46-278. - Severability and effective date. 
(a)	Severability. If any section, sentence, or any other part of this ordinance shall be adjudicated to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not effect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this division, but shall be confined in its effect to the section, sentence or other part of this division directly adjudicated in the controversy in which such judgment shall be rendered. 
(b)	Effective date. The ordinance from which this article deriveds shall become effective upon publication of a notice of adoption, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 162,  8, 6-12-2012) 
Secs. 46-279-46-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY 

Sec. 46-291. - Disobeying police officer. 
    Any person who willfully disobeys any reasonable order or rule of a police officer, while such police officer is engaged in the performance of his duty, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XVIII(1), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- Obstruction of police, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 46-292. - False reports to police and fire officials. 
    Any person who shall willfully and knowingly make to any police officer, firefighter, or their duly authorized agents a fictitious report of the commission of any crime or the existence of a fire or safety hazard knowing the report to be false shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If the report of fictitious crime or condition relates to a bombing, an attempted bombing, or threat to bomb and such report shall be willfully and knowingly communicated to any of the aforementioned persons, then the person making such fictitious report shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 95,  XVIII(3), 9-10-1974) 
State law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false reports on crimes, MCL 750.411a. 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 86. (Back)
State Law reference- Public recreation system authorized, MCL 123.51 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN GRANT PARK, HERITAGE PARK, MEMORIAL PARK AND UTICA RECREATION AREA 

Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    The parks and recreation commission and park commission mean a body of volunteers established by the mayor and common council whose charge is to supervise programs, development of park equipment needs, and a variety of other tasks as assigned by the mayor. In the case of fees and written permission the city clerk may be considered a designee of the parks and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  2, 10-14-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 50-32. - Designated public parks. 
    The following parks are hereby designated as public parks subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)	Grant Park, north of Hahn at Platt Street, east of Van Dyke. 
(2)	Heritage Park, west of Van Dyke, south of Hall Road. 
(3)	Memorial Park, north of Hall Road, west of Cass Avenue. 
(4)	Utica recreation area, north of Auburn Road, west of Cass Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  1, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-33. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  18, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-34. - Receipt of service, privilege or license without payment of fee. 
    Where a fee or charge is requested for any service, privilege or license offered by the parks and recreation commission or its licenses at the city office buildings, no person shall obtain, or attempt to obtain such service, privilege or license without payment of such fee or charge, and shall comply with all requirements of any permit pertaining to such services, privilege or license. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  13, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-35. - Closing of parks. 
(a)	No person shall enter or remain in a public park after the posted closing hours except by written permission of the parks and recreation commission. Such permission shall be granted upon a showing that the park will not be damaged or public safety endangered. 
(b)	No person shall use or occupy any area or facility in a public park when such area or facility is closed to the public by order of the parks and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  7, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-36. - Reservation of pavilions. 
(a)	Any person or group may register the use of a pavilion (the facility) by making application to the city clerk and receiving a permit for such reservation. The applicant shall pay a permit fee to reimburse the city for expenses associated with the operation and oversight of the reservation procedure. 
(b)	Permits may be issued for all, or a portion thereof, of a facility. Reservations shall not exceed a 24-hour period nor shall a reservation extend into a second day. 
(c)	The city clerk shall maintain a notice or schedule at the facility so as to advise the general public as to reservation dates and the person or group involved. 
(d)	Permits for reservations shall only be issued for purposes consistent with park purposes and the ordinances, rules and regulation, applicable to public parks. 
(e)	The application for a reservation shall include the name of the facility, the name, address and phone number of the person or group making the reservation. The applicant shall state the purpose of the event for which the application is made and affirm that the applicant has reviewed this article and that the person and group shall abide by the terms of this article. 
(f)	Any person or group that has reserved the facility shall, upon vacating the use thereof, clean and fully restore the facility and the surrounding grounds, including the entire park when so used, to a clean and orderly condition. 
(g)	The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk an additional sum as a security for any damage to park property and to further ensure that the person or group has complied with the terms and conditions of subsection (f) of this section. The city clerk, upon verification from the public works department, shall return the deposit to the applicant less any charges for damage and cleaning. In the event that charges exceed the deposit, the applicant shall be responsible for such charges and shall be billed by the city clerk for any deficiency. 
(h)	No person shall occupy the facility contrary to the reservation permit granted by the city clerk. No person shall interfere with any person or group that has a reservation permit for the facility. Any person or group violating this article may be ordered by a police officer for the city to vacate the facility or park for a violation of this article, and, in addition thereto, shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  16, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-37. - Fee schedule. 
    The parks and recreation commission will recommend fees for the use of park facilities. The mayor and common council shall set by resolution fees applicable to the facilities and publish park facility fees. Fee schedules are available for reviewing at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  17, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-38. - Preservation of property and natural resources. 
(a)	No person shall injure, deface, disturb, befoul nor in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any portion of public park or any facility building, sign, structure, equipment, utility or other property found therein. 
(b)	No person shall dig for, remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing thing or any wild life, or any rock, mineral, artifact or other material within the boundaries of a public park without written permission from the park commission. Such permission shall be given upon a showing that the park will not be damaged. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  3, 10-14-1997) 
State law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 50-39. - Dangerous or obnoxious materials or equipment. 
(a)	No person shall litter and/or deposit on any land or water areas within the boundaries of a public park any garbage, sewage, bottles, cans, refuse, trash, waste or other obnoxious materials except in receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(b)	No person shall have in his possession or control any slingshot, pellet gun, air rifle, archery, fireworks, explosives, or other dangerous weapon or material within the boundaries of a public park. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  4, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-40. - Signs and handbills. 
(a)	No person shall post, fasten, paint or affix any placard, bill, notice or sign upon any structure, tree or automobile within the boundaries of a public park, except temporary directional signs for group picnics or events, which may be placed on designated areas such as approved by the city. Annual reoccurring events that have been previously approved may be approved by the mayor, or designee of the mayor, if the approval is within the parameters of the original approval. Such temporary signs must be removed at the conclusion of the event. 
(b)	Handbills, newspapers or other circulars may be offered or distributed within the boundaries of a public park only by passing them hand-to-hand; such distribution will be allowed only in automobile parking lots, unless other areas for such distribution are designated by the parks and recreation commission. 
(c)	No person, firm or corporation shall conduct any activity within the boundaries of a public park which is prohibited by posted signs conspicuously displayed at the park entrance or other areas of the park. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  5, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 10D, 5-31-2006) 
Sec. 50-41. - Unlawful fires. 
(a)	No person shall start or maintain a fire within the boundaries of a public park, except in picnic stoves, fireplaces, or places designated for such purpose and burning fires shall not be left unattended. 
(b)	No person shall dump any burning material or hot ashes into any trash containers or elsewhere within the boundaries of a public park unless such container or locality shall be marked as a receptacle for such material. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  6, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-42. - Animals. 
(a)	No person shall bring into or have in his possession or control within the boundaries of a public park any dog unless the dog is on a leash and restrained from running at large, provided that this section shall not apply to leader dogs, hearing dogs or service dogs for the disabled. The person in possession or control of any dog shall immediately package and remove any fecal droppings of the animal. Such permission shall be granted upon a showing that: 
(1)	The park will not be damaged;
(2)	Public peace and safety will not be endangered; and
(3)	The right of others to use park facilities will not be compromised.
(b)	No person shall ride or lead any horse within the boundaries of a public park without written permission from the park commission. 
(c)	No person shall permit or allow the running at large, herding, grazing or driving of any livestock of any kind within the boundaries of a public park. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  2, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 10-D, 3-14-2000) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 
Sec. 50-43. - Alcoholic beverages and controlled substances. 
(a)	No person shall possess, transport into or within, have under his control, drink or consume beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages within the boundaries of a public park without written permission of the parks and recreation commission. Such permission shall be granted upon a showing that public peace and safety will not be endangered and the right of others to use park facilities will not be compromised. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, transport into or within, have under his control or sell or furnish to another person within the boundaries of a public park any marijuana or other controlled substances defined by applicable statute in such case made and provided. 
(c)	In any prosecution under this section, a bottle, can or container that is taken for evidence shall be presumed to contain what the label of such bottle, can or container purports it to contain. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  9, 10-14-1997) 
State law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
Sec. 50-44. - Commercial activities. 
    No person or organization other than the park commission, its hirees and licensees shall, within the boundaries of a public park, advertise, offer for hire, vend or sell any service, food, beverage, merchandise or other personal property or advertise, carry on or conduct, any other business or commercial activity, nor shall any person or organization beg or solicit contributions or donations within the boundaries of a public park except by written permission of the park commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  10, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-45. - Motor vehicles and off-the-road vehicles. 
(a)	No person shall operate, or have in his possession or control within the boundaries of a public park an internal combustion vehicle, a moped, motor-driven cycle, or other motor vehicle except on the surfaced area of a roadway or designated parking area. Authorized vehicles are excluded from this requirement. 
(b)	No person shall operate, or have in his possession within the boundaries of a public park any off-the-road motor-driven vehicle, including by way of example, but not by way of limitation, any minibike, motorcycle, dunemobile, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, amphibious vehicle or similar motorized device, excluding toys designed exclusively for use by children, and specially designed vehicles used by handicapped or physically challenged individuals. 
(c)	No motor-driven vehicle within the boundaries of a public park on designated roadway or parking area shall exceed the speed limit of ten miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  11, 10-14-1997) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 50-46. - Musical instruments, radios, record, or tape players, and sound amplifying devices 
    No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio, mechanical record or tape player, loudspeaker, public address system or sound amplifying equipment, of any kind within the boundaries of a public park in such a manner as to cause the sound emanating therefrom to exceed a loudness of 75 decibels when measured on the 70 db. scale at a distance of 15 feet from the sound source without a written permit issued by the parks and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  12, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-47. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)	No person or group of persons shall engage in any loud, boisterous, disorderly or indecent conduct, nor shall any person or group of persons commit or engage in any assault or other activity which shall endanger or annoy other persons or disturb the peace or good order within the boundaries of a public park. 
(b)	No person shall within the boundaries of a public park:
(1)	Observe or attempt to observe persons of the opposite sex while occupying a restroom facility; 
(2)	Obstruct, resist, hinder, assault or oppose any city employee, city employee aid, ordinance or police officer, in the performance of his official duty; 
(3)	Provide or furnish false identification concerning himself or herself to any city employee, city employee aid, ordinance or police officer engaged in the performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  14, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 50-48. - Camping. 
(a)	No person or group of persons shall engage in camping, within the boundaries of a public park, without first obtaining written permission from the parks and recreation commission and then registering with the city police department. 
(b)	No person or group of persons under the age of 18 years shall engage in camping within the boundaries of a public park except a person or group of persons accompanied by an adult, parent, or chaperon that has attained the age of 18 years or older, and first obtained written permission from the parks and recreation commission and then registered with the city police department. 
(c)	Permissions required by this section shall be granted upon a showing that the park will not be damaged, public peace will not be endangered and the right of others to use park facilities will not be compromised. 
(Ord. No. 10-C,  15, 10-14-1997) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; incidents involving hazardous wastes,  22-61 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; dead animals,  26-2; blight,  26-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste management, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved incinerator and approved garbage grinder mean incinerators and garbage grinders respectively, which conform in all respects to the requirements for incinerators and garbage grinders contained in the building code of the city. 
    Ashes means residue from fires including but not limited to fires used for cooking, heating buildings, incinerators and fireplaces. 
    Bulky items means items too large to handle in the regular rubbish truck, including but not limited to items such as bed springs, discarded furniture, large logs, stumps, and similar items, but not construction refuse. 
    Collector means a person, firm or company that removes refuse from any location for disposal in accordance with this article. 
    Commercial refuse means waste materials from businesses, factories and processing plants. 
    Construction refuse means waste materials resulting from alteration, repair or construction of buildings or structures. 
    Dead animals means carcasses of animals, fowl or fish. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food and all other organic matter subject to rapid decomposition including windfall fruit. The term "garbage" does not include dead animals or manure. 
    Newspaper means newsprint paper only, and shall not include magazines, cardboard, corrugated boxes or wrapping paper. 
    Refuse means all items of waste as defined in this section. 
    Rubbish (incinerator) means garbage, paper, rags, rubber, tin cans, glass, bottles and ordinary combustible wastes from residences and business establishments. 
    Rubbish (nonincinerator) means yard wastes, grass clippings, leaves, ashes, and other mineral refuse. 
    Street refuse means street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catchbasin dirt and contents of street litter receptacles. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of public works of the city. 
    Yard wastes means tree branches, twigs, grass, shrub clippings, weeds, leaves, rocks, dirt, and general yard and garden waste materials. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  2, 4-8-1980) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 54-32. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 54-33. - Littering and accumulation. 
(a)	No person shall throw or deposit any refuse upon or into any street, alley or other property, public or private, except as specifically permitted in this article. It shall be the duty of every occupant of property and of the owner of unoccupied property, at all times to maintain the premises occupied or owned by him, in a clean orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of garbage or rubbish on such premises, unless stored or accumulated as permitted by this article. 
(1)	Leaves may be placed next to the curb during the period September 1 to December 1 in those streets having a permanent type of surfacing and a permanent type curb and gutter installed. 
(2)	Rubbish properly bundled or in approved containers may be set out on the lawn extension not more than 12 hours prior to the established time for refuse pickup as prescribed by the superintendent and all containers shall be removed from such extension within 24 hours after pickup. 
(3)	The throwing or placing of refuse or permitting it to accumulate on either public or private property contrary to the provisions of this article declared to be a public nuisance which shall be abated as provided in this article. 
a.	The superintendent shall make written demand that the refuse be removed. The demand shall be either: 
1.	Served upon one of the occupant of the premises upon which refuse has accumulated or the premises directly adjoining the public right-of-way upon which refuse has accumulated or upon the person to whom such premises are assessed for taxes on the then current tax rolls; or 
2.	Posted in a conspicuous place on such premises an order that the refuse be removed.
b.	If such demand has not been complied with within 48 hours after being served or posted, the superintendent may remove such refuse and take such other action as may be required to abate the nuisance caused thereby. 
c.	Upon a determination by the superintendent that the nuisance created by the refuse constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, he may cause the nuisance to be abated without the prior notice described in subsection (a)(3)a of this section. 
d.	The cost of any abatement pursuant to this section shall be charged and billed against the premises and the owner thereof as a special assessment. 
(4)	Newspapers shall be securely and neatly bundled, tied in packages not exceeding 60 pounds and placed separately on the lawn extension in the same manner as prescribed by the superintendent for normal refuse pickup. 
(b)	No person shall place garbage, rubbish, papers, ashes, dead animals, yard wastes, or other refuse upon or at property not owned or occupied by such person without the express permission of the owner or occupant of such property. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  7, 4-8-1980) 
State law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 54-34. - Refuse containers; storage. 
(a)	Any refuse accumulated or stored outside of a dwelling or building on any premises shall be placed in containers conforming to the requirements of this article, which containers shall be placed at the rear or side of buildings at a place which is reasonably inconspicuous and away from streets and places occupied by other persons. No refuse may be stored or accumulated which is contaminated by any garbage, unless stored as garbage. 
(1)	Containers for ashes shall be of metal or sturdy construction and must have adequate handles to prevent spillage. 
(2)	Containers for rubbish to be collected from residential property shall be of metal or plastic of either ten- or 20-gallon capacity with carrying handles and tightfitting covers or in durable nonmetal expendable containers. 
(3)	Garden rubbish shall be placed in containers of wood, metal, or plastic. Branches less than one inch in diameter shall be cut to four-foot lengths and tied securely and compactly in bundles less than 18 inches in diameter. 
(4)	The combined weight of any rubbish container and its contents shall not exceed 60 pounds. 
(5)	The provisions of subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be applicable to rubbish other than newspapers. 
(6)	Newspapers shall not be placed in rubbish containers. Newspapers shall be separately accumulated, securely and neatly bundled, tied in packages not exceeding 60 pounds and placed separately on the lawn extensions for collection with the normal refuse pickup. 
(b)	The occupant of any premises within the city, in which any garbage shall be accumulated, shall maintain on such premises the number of containers sufficient to conveniently store the normal accumulation of garbage on such premises over a period of not less than seven days. Every such container shall be kept tightly covered or closed and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)	In the event that the contract awarded in section 54-37 contains terms or specifications different from those of subsection (a) of this section, the terms or specifications of the contract shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  8, 4-8-1980) 
Sec. 54-35. - Disposition of refuse. 
(a)	Refuse shall be disposed of only to a licensed refuse collector or the city collection service, except that any person may dispose of his own refuse: 
(1)	By an approved incinerator located within a building.
(2)	If permitted by the superintendent by transporting the refuse to an authorized dump, but only in accordance with the rules and regulations pertaining thereto. No person transporting any refuse in accordance with this section shall fail to securely cover and secure the load so that no part of such load shall be lost while being transported. 
(b)	Bundled and securely tied newspapers, when placed in the vicinity of the lawn extension for collection with the normal refuse pickup, shall become the property of the city, and no person other than the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises or designated licensee or agent of the city shall carry away such newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting the collection of newspapers at the door by charitable organizations or clubs. 
(c)	The superintendent shall make such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the collection of refuse as he may deem proper, subject to the approval of the common council. No person shall fail to observe any rule or regulation so adopted and approved. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  9, 4-8-1980) 
Sec. 54-36. - Refuse collection license. 
(a)	No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of refuse within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. Licenses shall be issued upon application, to the city clerk on forms provided by the clerk and upon payment of a fee in the amount established by resolution and posting of a performance amount of $1,000.00. 
(b)	No such license shall be issued except upon certification by the superintendent that the equipment and the ability of the licensee is such that such licensee is able to conduct a refuse collection business in accordance with the terms of this article and rules and regulations adopted by the superintendent under this article. The superintendent shall make such rules and regulations governing the operation of the business of refuse collection, transportation and disposition as he may deem necessary. 
(c)	The superintendent shall revoke the license of any refuse collector who fails to abide by any such rule or regulation adopted by the superintendent or any provision of this article. Prior revocation of a license shall be sufficient grounds for the refusal by the superintendent to certify any future application by such licensee. 
(d)	Licenses shall expire one year from the date of issuance thereof and may be renewed as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)	The collection of bundled waste newspapers at the curb in connection with the newspaper recycling program shall be done only by designated licensees as directed by the superintendent. The collection of bundled newspapers by licenses other than those so designated shall constitute sufficient grounds for revocation of the license of the offending refuse collector. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  4, 4-8-1980) 
Sec. 54-37. - City refuse collection contract. 
(a)	The superintendent is hereby directed to enter into a contract with a licensed collector to provide refuse collection from residential properties within the city. 
(b)	The contract shall be awarded upon competitive bids, subject to final approval by the common council. The award shall be based upon the recommendation of the superintendent and need not be awarded solely to the lowest bidder. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  5, 4-8-1980) 
Sec. 54-38. - Collection schedule. 
    The superintendent, subject to the approval of the council, shall establish a schedule for the collection of garbage and rubbish throughout the city. Such schedules shall provide not less than one collection weekly for residential area. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  3, 4-8-1980) 
Sec. 54-39. - Recycling centers. 
(a)	In addition to the trash and garbage service pickup presently provided by the city, the city will provide one or more recycling collection centers subject to this section. 
(b)	The superintendent is hereby designated to establish and maintain one or more recycling collection centers. The facility shall be designated with a sign stating "Utica Recycling Collection Center." 
(c)	The superintendent may:
(1)	Establish rules and regulations for the operation, maintenance and use of a recycling collection center; 
(2)	Designate the type, location, composition, or conditions for the deposit or maintenance of refuse at a recycling collection center; 
(3)	Restrict or limit the goods or the manner in which the goods may be prepared, conditioned or deposited at the recycling collection center. 
(d)	No person shall tamper with or damage any recycling collection center, or parts or property thereof. No person shall deposit or leave any item that is contrary to posted notices or the rules and regulations established by the superintendent. No person shall remove any items deposited at a recycling collection center without the permission of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 12B, 8-14-1990) 
Sec. 54-40. - Rates; collection. 
(a)	Charges for refuse collection shall be fixed by resolution of the common council and shall be collected from the premises receiving services under the terms of this article. Such charges shall be a lien upon the premises to which the service is rendered. Refuse collection shall be deemed a service rendered to the parcel of land where made. In the event that a refuse collection service contract has been entered into by the city, the rates for collection shall be paid to the city and the contractor shall be paid by the city. 
(b)	The city treasurer shall assess the rates applicable to each parcel of land upon the summer tax bill for the upcoming year and collect, in advance, the charges applicable thereto. The city treasurer may establish a separate account and invest the funds so collected for payment as the refuse collection contract may provide or as billed by such contractor. 
(c)	An owner of property, or resident thereof, may be exempt from being assessed the charges provided in subsection (b) of this section by filing with the city treasurer prior to June for the upcoming year clear and convincing proof: 
(1)	That the property exempted will be maintained for refuse collection for the entire upcoming year by a duly licensed collector; or 
(2)	That the property exempted will be maintained for refuse collection for the entire upcoming year by self-service by the owner or resident thereof. 
(d)	The city treasurer is authorized to collect or rebate the fractional yearly charges in unusual cases for just cause. 
(Ord. No. 12-A,  6, 4-8-1980) 
Chapter 58 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments,  9.1 et seq. (Back)
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(9); administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. (Back)
Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost means, when referring to the cost of any public improvement, the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, and legal fees and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Public improvement means any improvements upon public property which results in special benefit to the real property in the vicinity of such improvement. 
(Ord. No. 58,  1, 7-10-1962) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-2. - Costs of public improvements to be defrayed by special assessment. 
    The entire cost and expense or any part thereof of all public improvements may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the improvement in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 58,  2, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-3. - Proceedings; investigation and report. 
(a)	Proceedings for making public improvements and defraying the entire cost or any part thereof by special assessment shall be initiated by resolution of the common council. For the purposes of determining whether a sufficient number of property owners are interested in a public improvement, the council may require petitions from the owners of property in the proposed special assessment district. Whenever the common council shall determine to make any public improvement and defray the entire cost and expense thereof or any part thereof by special assessment, the council shall by resolution direct the city clerk to make an investigation of the proposed public improvement and report his findings to the council. Such report shall include an analysis of the following: 
(1)	The estimated cost of the proposed public improvement; and
(2)	Plans and specifications for the public improvement.
(b)	There shall also be included recommendations as to the following:
(1)	The portion of the cost to be borne by the special assessment district and the portion if any, to be borne by the city at large; 
(2)	The extent of the improvement and boundaries of the district; and
(3)	Any other facts or recommendations which will aid the council in determining whether the improvement shall be made and how the improvement shall be financed. 
(Ord. No. 58,  3, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-4. - Approval of report; resolution authorizing assessment. 
    Upon receipt of the report of the city clerk if the council shall determine to proceed with such improvement, the common council shall by resolution approve the report prepared by the city clerk and shall approve the plans and specifications and estimate of cost for the public improvement. In addition, by such resolution, the council shall determine to proceed with the public improvement, determine the necessity thereof and set forth the nature thereof, designate the limits of the special assessment district to be affected and describe the lands to be assessed, determine the part or proportion of the cost of the public improvement to be paid by the lands specially benefited thereby and the part or proportion, if any, to be paid by the city at large for benefit to the city at large, and, if the improvement is to be an improvement to the water supply system of the city, the portion representing benefit to the city at large shall be paid from funds of the water supply system and, if the improvement is to the sewage disposal system of the city, the portion representing benefit to the city at large shall be paid by the sewage disposal system, determine the number of installments in which the special assessment may be paid, the rate of interest, not exceeding six percent per annum, to be charged if the payment of any balance is to be deferred and by the terms of such resolution shall direct the city assessor to make a special assessment roll of the part or proportion of the cost to be borne by the lands specially benefited according to the benefits received and to report such information to the council. 
(Ord. No. 58,  4, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-5. - Filing of special assessment roll and report; review by council. 
    When the special assessment roll shall have been reported to the council, the common council shall order the special assessment roll filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination along with the report of the city clerk required to be made pursuant to section 58-3 and shall fix a date, time and place when the council shall meet and review the special assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 58,  5, 7-10-1962) 
State law reference- Notice of special assessment, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 58-6. - Correction or revision of assessment roll; confirmation. 
    The common council shall meet and review the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned meeting thereof and shall consider any objections thereto. The council may correct such roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the council's minutes. After such hearing and review, the council may confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the city assessor for revision, or may annul it or any proceedings in connection therewith. No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed except by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the councilmembers if prior to such hearing written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed with the city clerk by the owners of property which will be required to hear more than 25 percent of the amount of such special assessment. The city clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 58,  6, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-7. - Roll to be final upon confirmation. 
    Such roll shall be, upon confirmation, final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 58,  7, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-8. - Special assessment to constitute lien; when due; installments. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof to be paid in installments, shall from the date of confirmation of such roll constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. Such liens shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the city Charter for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and fees. No judgment or decree nor act of the common council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the premises or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments, not to exceed 20 in number, as the common council may determine at the time of confirmation, and, if in annual installments, the council shall determine the first installment to be due upon confirmation and the subsequent installments to be due one year from the first day of the next succeeding calendar month, and annually on that day and month thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 58,  8, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-9. - Collection by city treasurer; statements. 
    Whenever any special assessment roll shall be confirmed and be payable, the common council shall direct the city clerk to transmit the assessment roll to the city treasurer for collection. The city treasurer shall mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, as indicated by the records of the city assessor, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 58,  9, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-10. - Period for payment without interest or penalty. 
    The whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid at any time after the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll until the tenth day of the second calendar month following such confirmation without interest or penalty. 
(Ord. No. 58,  10, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-11. - Collection fees. 
    Each special assessment shall be collected by the city treasurer with the same rights and remedies as provided in the Charter for the collection of taxes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. On the tenth day of the second calendar month following the due date, the city treasurer shall add to all assessments or installments paid on such day and thereafter a collection fee of four percent of the amount of the assessment or installment and on the first day of each succeeding month he shall add an additional one-half of one percent as a collection fee. All collection fees shall belong to the city and be collectible in the same manner as the collection fee for city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 58,  11, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-12. - Prepayment. 
    After the expiration of the period provided in section 58-10 for payment without interest or fees any installment may be discharged by paying the face amount thereof together with fees and interest thereon from the date of confirmation to the date of payment; provided, however, that if the public improvement has been financed by the sale of noncallable bonds or other evidences of indebtedness which are not prepayable, then the interest shall be computed from the date of confirmation to the date upon which such installment would have fallen due had it not been prepaid. 
(Ord. No. 58,  12, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-13. - Payment of installments on quarterly basis. 
    The common council may by resolution, upon confirmation of the assessment roll on or before the first meeting in January of any year, direct that the owners may pay any installment due and payable during that year or any succeeding year in quarterly portions, such portions to fall due as the council may direct, and, in such case, the city treasurer shall, not later than 20 days after such direction, notify each owner of the option to pay such installment in the manner provided. The failure to mail any such notice shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to any extension of time within which to pay the assessment or any installment thereof. Interest on such installments shall be computed as if the entire amount were paid annually. 
(Ord. No. 58,  13, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-14. - Certification of total cost of improvement. 
    Upon completion of the improvement, the financing thereof and the payment of the cost thereof, the city clerk shall certify to the common council the total cost of such improvement together with the amount of the original roll for such improvement. 
(Ord. No. 58,  14, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-15. - Additional assessments for insufficiency. 
    Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the common council may make additional assessments to supply the deficiency against the city and the several lots and parcels of land in the same ratio as the original assessments, but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 58,  15, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-16. - Refunds. 
    The excess by which any special assessment or the proceeds of sale of any special assessment bonds proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto shall be placed in the general fund of the city, provided, however, that the common council may make provision for refunding such excess by crediting the excess against future unpaid installments in the inverse order which they are payable to the extent such installments shall exist and the balance of such refund, if any, may be paid in cash to the owners of the property as shown by the last tax roll. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 58,  16, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-17. - Division and apportionment of special assessments. 
    Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, the city assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided, and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment roll. The city treasurer shall, within ten days after such apportionment, send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known address by first class mail. Such apportionment shall be final and conclusive on all parties unless protest in writing is received by the city treasurer within 20 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 58,  17, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-18. - Reassessments. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the common council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the common council shall whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have the power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, and whenever any assessment or part thereof, levied upon any premises has been set aside, if the assessment has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment on such premises, and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 58,  18, 7-10-1962) 
Sec. 58-19. - Judgments. 
    If in any action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the person assessed or upon the lot or premises sought to be charged, the court may nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the person assessed or the lot or premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such person or upon such lot or premises. 
(Ord. No. 58,  19, 7-10-1962) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(9); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(10); any ordinance establishing the grade of any road, street or sidewalk saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; temporary businesses, peddlers, direct sellers, auctioneer, farmers' markets and garage sales,  14-361 et seq.; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; obstructing public places,  46-191; parks and recreation, ch. 50; special assessments, ch. 58; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; service or repair of motor vehicles on streets, highways and other public places,  78-116; parking of trucks on residential streets,  78-117; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Excavation permits and bonds. 
(a)	All contractors, firms, individuals or corporations intending to make any excavation within the right-of-way of any street within the city shall first make application for a permit to make such excavation with the city clerk. 
(b)	The city clerk is authorized to issue a permit to any applicant upon the following conditions: 
(1)	All permits shall be issued upon the deposit of an amount as a bond to guaranty refill and resurfacing as determined by the city engineer to be adequate to defray potential expenses incurred by the city. 
(2)	The conditions under which the bond shall be held by the city are as follows:
a.	The contractor shall replace the excavated materials immediately upon completion of the work and the excavation shall be power tamped sand backfill in not more than one foot layers. 
b.	Within 30 days, the roadway shall be resurfaced with material equal to or better than that prevailing at the time of cutting into the surface. 
(3)	All bonds provided for under this section shall be held by the city clerk of a period of 60-days following completion of the project and if the permit holder has not completed the resurfacing required under this section prior to the 60-day period, then the amount on deposit shall be used by the city for such work. 
(4)	The permit shall also provide that the bond shall be refunded to the permit holder at the expiration of the 60-day period provided for under this section if the conditions have been met and the permit holder will be required to guaranty to repair any defect which might occur for a period of six months following completion of the project. 
(c)	Violations of this section are a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 25,  1, 2, 12-15-1955) 
Secs. 62-2-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 62-31. - Width of sidewalks. 
    All sidewalks constructed within the corporate limits of the city shall be six feet in width, except as may be hereafter provided for or specified. The street commissioner may authorize the construction of walks of less than six feet in width where the existing walks on the street or adjacent streets (when the walk is to be constructed on a cross-street) are less than six feet in width, and on streets where no walk exists in the block in which the new walk is to be constructed, when, in his opinion, a walk less than six feet in width is ample to accommodate the pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 17,  1, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-32. - Sidewalks in business areas. 
    Sidewalks shall be constructed from the street curb to the lot line or building (full width walk so-called) on the streets or part of streets to be designated by the city as business areas. 
(Ord. No. 17,  2, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-33. - Standard rules of city apply. 
    All sidewalks hereafter constructed in any street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the city shall be constructed in accordance with the standard rules of the city as approved by the common council and shall be in strict conformity with specifications appertaining thereto as specified by the street commissioner and approved by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 17,  4, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-34. - New sidewalk regulations. 
    Wherever sidewalks are ordered on any street where none have existed, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to establish a sidewalk line on such street for at least a distance that the sidewalks have been or are about to be ordered by setting stakes about 100 feet apart, or as near as may be, such stakes to designate the outer edge of the sidewalk from the lot line, and the record of the same shall be entered in a book to be kept for such purposes in the city engineer's office. 
(Ord. No. 17,  5, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-35. - Construction or driveways crossing sidewalks. 
    All driveways crossing the sidewalk space shall be constructed of brick, asphalt or concrete from the curbline to the lot line and placed at a grade to be fixed by the city engineer, according to specifications furnished by the street commissioner; provided that driveways constructed on unpaved streets may be constructed of crushed stone, slag, crushed brick or bituminous material from the outer line of the gutter to the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 17,  6, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-36. - Advertising in sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall construct or maintain any mosaic, art marble, tiling or any colored material, name, numbers or advertising in any sidewalk space (meaning the space between the lot line of the property and the street curbline, excepting a stamp or plate not exceeding three inches by four inches outside measurements, containing the name of the contractor, or person laying such sidewalk, and the year in which the same was laid, in legible and indeliable characters. No such mosaic, art marble, tiling or open iron grated areaways now existing in any sidewalk space shall be repaired, but shall be entirely removed or closed in within five days upon notice from the city, and if such notice is not complied with within the time specified in this section, the city will proceed to remove and fill in the same and assess the cost against the abutting property; provided further, in case of covered areas or vaults, in sidewalk space, the illuminated pavement shall have in the top coat of the concrete not less than two pounds of no. 10 Carborundum floated into every 15 square feet of surface space between the prism or glass sidewalk lights. 
(Ord. No. 17,  7, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-37. - Sidewalks adjoining provide property. 
    Whenever the common council shall, by resolution, declare the necessity for and order the construction of sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways in any street in front of or adjoining private property, it shall thereafter ascertain the cost and expense of the same and thereupon cause such portion of such cost and expense (except the cost and expense of building crosswalks and intersections of sidewalks) as it may deem just to be equitably assessed against the lots or parcels of real estate to be derived therefrom. That portion of the cost of the construction of sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways not so equitably assessed as provided in this section shall be paid from an account in the general road fund; provided that whenever the common council shall order the building of any sidewalk, it shall first give the owners or occupants, or parties in interest, of the abutting real estate opportunity to build at their own expense the sidewalks ordered in accordance with the specifications fixed by the council. If any person so notified shall not have constructed such walk within the time mentioned, then the same may be constructed and on assessment levied for the cost thereof in the manner provided. If suit or other proceedings shall be brought against the city and such city is compelled to pay damages for injuries to any person or persons on account of failure to comply with the notice, such owner, or party in interest shall be liable to the city for the amount of damages so paid and the same may be collected, if necessary, by suit in court. 
(Ord. No. 17,  8, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-38. - Assessment roll for cost of construction of sidewalks. 
    For the purpose of such assessments, the common council shall create one or more local assessment districts of the real estate to be benefited by the local improvement. The department of public works shall proceed to advertise for bids and award contracts for such local improvement. The cost and expense of the local improvement shall include advertising, inspection and other expenses and shall be assessed against such lot or parcels in the local improvement district in proportion to the benefits to be derived therefrom. The city shall, after ascertaining the cost and expense of the construction of such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveways, prepare for the board of assessors a report in the form of a tentative assessment roll. Such tentative roll shall be made as designated by the board of assessors and shall show the exact amount according to the cost and expense that should be assessed against each parcel of land for the improvement. After this tentative roll has been presented to the board of assessors by the city, the board of assessors shall proceed to the completion of the assessment roll, and assess the cost and expense of the improvement upon the property in such district according to the benefits which the respective lots and parcels of land adjoining or abutting upon such sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway in such district will receive from the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 17,  9, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-39. - Notice of completion of assessment roll. 
    Upon completion of such roll, the assessor shall give notice by one publication in the official newspaper of the city that such roll is completed and will remain in its office for 12 days from the date of publication of such notice for the inspection of all concerned. 
(Ord. No. 17,  10, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-40. - Collection for assessment roll. 
    The assessor upon the date last mentioned in such notice, which shall be at least 12 days after the publication of the same, and after any needful correction or revision of such roll, shall transmit such roll to which shall be attached the affidavit of publication of the assessment notice, together with the report of the street commissioner, to the common council for confirmation. Upon the confirmation of such roll, the same shall be transmitted to the controller and by him to the city treasurer for collection. 
(Ord. No. 17,  11, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-41. - Assessments unpaid a lien upon property. 
    The assessment roll shall contain a list of lots, parts of lots or parcels of land assessed thereon as provided in this section and the total amount assessed thereon. Assessments so levied shall be a lien upon such lots, parts of lots or parcels of land until paid and in default of payment of such assessment the lots, parts of lots or parcels of land so assessed may be sold thereafter in the same manner as provided by law for the sale of land for unpaid special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 17,  12, 10-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-42. - Permit required. 
(a)	The street commissioner is hereby authorized to grant a permit to any owner of real estate in the city to construct a sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway in front of or adjacent to the real estate owned by him conditioned that such owner personally is skilled and competent to construct such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveways to the satisfaction of the street commissioner. 
(b)	No sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway shall be laid in any street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the city without a permit from the street commissioner. This permit must be returned to the city within 30 days from the date of issue with a statement thereon by the contractor of the number of lineal feet of sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway constructed under same. 
(Ord. No. 17,  3, 13, 10-7-1952) 
Secs. 62-43-62-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 62-71. - Notice to repair. 
    When any sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway within the city becomes out of repair, the street commissioner shall give the owner, occupant, or party in interest of the premises in front of or adjacent to which such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway is located notice to repair the same within ten days, and in default thereof, the commissioner shall have the power to repair such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway and charge the cost and expenses thereof to such owner, occupant or party in interest. 
(Ord. No. 18,  1, 9-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-72. - Specifications of notice. 
    The notice, in addition to specifying the time in which such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway shall be repaired, shall also state that work must be done in accordance with specifications for new work furnished by the street commissioner in repairing such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway. Service of notice may be made upon such owner, occupant or party in interest through the United States mail to the last known address as recorded on the tax rolls of the city treasurer; or may be made personally upon such owner, occupant or party in interest; or posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises in front of or adjacent thereto or upon such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway, which is to be repaired. 
(Ord. No. 18,  2, 9-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-73. - Cost of repaired charged to owners of property; assessment roll. 
    If any person so notified shall not have repaired or reconstructed such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway within the time specified in section 62-71, it shall be the duty of the street commissioner to repair or reconstruct such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway in front of or adjacent to the premises of the owner, occupant or party in interest so in default. The cost and expense of such repairs or reconstruction of such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway shall be charged to such owner, occupant or party in interest. In case of nonpayment by the owner, occupant or party in interest of the cost and expense of such repair or reconstruction, suit may be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover the same, or the cost and expense of such repair or reconstruction may be certified to the assessor by the street commissioner in the form of a tentative assessment roll. This tentative roll shall be made as designated by the street commissioner and shall show the exact amount according to cost and expense that should be assessed against each parcel of land for the repair or reconstruction of such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway so repaired or reconstructed. After this tentative roll has been presented to the assessor by the street commissioner, the assessor shall proceed to the completion of the assessment roll from the facts contained in and shown by such tentative roll, in legal and proper form and assess the amount due and payable from the owner, occupant or parties in interest upon the lot, lots or parts of lots in front of or adjacent to the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway so repaired or reconstructed and in proportion to the number of square feet of such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway, so repaired or reconstructed. 
(Ord. No. 18,  3, 9-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-74. - Notice of completion of assessment roll. 
    Upon completion of such roll, the assessor shall give notice by one publication in the official newspaper of the city that such roll is completed and will remain in its office for 12 days from the date of publication of such notice for the inspection of all concerned. 
(Ord. No. 18,  4, 9-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-75. - Assessment roll lien to property; collection. 
    The assessor upon the date last mentioned in such notice, which shall be at least 12 days after publication of the same, and after any needful correction or revision of such roll, shall transmit such roll to which shall be attached the affidavit or publication of the assessment notice, together with the report of the street commissioner, to the common council for confirmation. After such confirmation, the assessment shall constitute a lien, until paid, upon the lots or parcels of real estate listed in the assessment roll. Upon confirmation of such roll, the same shall be transmitted to the controller and by him to the city treasurer for collection. 
(Ord. No. 18,  5, 9-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-76. - Assessment roll list of property; default for nonpayment. 
    The assessment roll shall contain a list of lots, parts of lots or parcels of land assessed thereon as provided in this section and the total amount assessed thereon shall be due and payable according to the provisions of the Charter of the city. Assessments so levied shall be a lien upon such lots, parts of lots or parcels of land until paid and in default of payment of such assessments the lots, parts of lots or parcels of land so assessed may be sold thereafter in the same manner as provided by law for the sale of land for unpaid special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 18,  6, 9-7-1952) 
Sec. 62-77. - Nuisance snow, ice, and rubbish. 
(a)	Any person, company or corporation failing to remove a fall of snow of four to six inches or more; a dangerous accumulation of ice resulting therefrom or unsightly rubbish from the sidewalks adjoining their property in the city within 24 hours after the deposit of said snow, ice or rubbish thereon commits a nuisance within the meaning of this section. 
(b)	The public works commissioner, action for the common council of the city, shall forthwith cause employees of his department to remove and abate such nuisance upon the determination of the existence thereof beyond the period allowed in subsection (a) above for the removal thereof. 
(c)	The public work commissioner or other employee of his department shall record the labor and other expense incurred by the city in the removing and abating any nuisance as herein provided and report the name of the property owner, description of the property adjoining the sidewalk where the nuisance was removed and abated and a statement of the actual cost of such removal to the common council at the next regular meeting thereof following the abating of the nuisance, said report to be thereafter placed on file with the city clerk for payment by the property owner within the next 30 days thereafter or further proceedings under this section. 
(d)	That property owners committing a nuisance hereunder which requires removal as provided in this ordinance shall pay the cost thereof to the city clerk within 30 days after the report thereof is filed in the city clerk's office by the common council. 
(e)	Any property owner who fails to pay the cost of the removal and abating any nuisance under this section within 30 days after the statement thereof is filed in the office of the city clerk shall be sent a copy of the report of the public works commissioner showing the amount to be due therefor and payment of said amount be demanded to be made at the office of the city clerk within 30 days after the regular mailing of said statement. 
(f)	Any person, company or corporation which fails to remove or abate any nuisance under the provisions of this section and fails or neglects to pay the city for the cost thereof within the periods allowed for payment herein, then said costs and expenses shall be recovered by the city in appropriate proceedings against such person, company or corporation or by special assessment upon the lands involved to be collected with the next ensuing levy upon said premises. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1947) 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, app. A; zoning districts and maps, app. A,  300 et seq. (Back)
State Law reference- Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 66-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
(Ord. No. 138, art. II, 11-12-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 66-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the city in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the community specifically designed to: 
(1)	Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the community, consistent with orderly growth policies. 
(2)	Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability.
(3)	Ensure adequate provisions for water, sanitary sewer facilities, and public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 138, art. I, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 66-33. - Scope. 
    This article shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations, or with private restrictive covenants placed upon property running with the land. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon land than imposed or required by such law, ordinance, regulation, or restrictive covenant, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 138, art. I, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 66-34. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article are a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 66-35. - Schedule of fees. 
    Fees for review of plats shall be the same as charged for site plan approvals and variances, if any. 
(Ord. No. 138, art. I, 11-12-1996) 
Sec. 66-36. - Preliminary plats. 
(a)	Preliminary plats shall be prepared and submitted as provided for in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). Fees for plat review shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)	The common council shall, at its next regular meeting following receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission and, prior approval of any variances required by the zoning board of appeals, approve the preliminary plat or disapprove it. Conditions may be imposed as permitted by the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). If disapproved, the common council shall state its reasons in writing. 
(c)	Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat, but rather final plat approval shall be conditioned on all requirements being met. 
(d)	Approval of the preliminary plat by the common council shall be for a period of one year from approval. 
(Ord. No. 138, art. III, 11-12-1996) 
State law reference- Preliminary plats, MCL 560.105 et seq., 560.111 et seq. 
Sec. 66-37. - Final plats. 
(a)	Final plats shall be prepared and submitted as provided for in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). Any fees provided for in this article for review of plats then remaining unpaid shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)	The common council shall review the final plat at its next regular meeting after receipt of the plat. The common council shall, approve the final plat or disapprove it. If approved conditions may be imposed as permitted by the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). If disapproved, the common council shall state its reasons in writing. 
(c)	The common council shall instruct the clerk to sign the municipal certificate on the approved plat on behalf of the common council. 
(d)	The common council may approve a final plat without prior preliminary plat approval if all other requirements pertaining to final plats under the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and all other applicable laws and ordinances are met, provided that a recommendation is first received from the planning commission and prior approval of required variances is granted by the board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. No. 138, art. III, 11-12-1996) 
State law reference- Final plats, MCL 560.105, 560.131 et seq. 
Sec. 66-38. - Lots; requirements. 
(a)	The lot width, depth and area of a residential lot shall not be less than permitted under the zoning ordinance set forth in appendix A to this Code, including variances approved pursuant thereto. 
(b)	All lots shall front upon a street or road and have a direct access to a public street. The front line shall be the street or road unless otherwise shown on the plat. Exceptions may be permitted for lots on lakes, rivers or streams. 
(Ord. No. 138, art. IV, 11-12-1996) 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation,  8.1 et seq. (Back)
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(3); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(13); administration, ch. 2; finance,  2-201 et seq.; businesses, ch. 14; downtown development plan and tax increment financing plan,  18-61 et seq. (Back)
State Law reference- General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 70-1. - Elimination of tax exemption for housing projects. 
(a)	The tax exemption established in subsection 1 of section 15a of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1415a(1)) shall not apply to any and all housing projects situated within the boundaries of the city which are financed with any mortgage aided by, or any financial advance or grant from the United States Government or the state housing development authority. 
(b)	It is the legislative intent of the city, by this section, to implement the authority contained in subsection 5 of section 15a of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1415a(5)) so that nonprofit housing projects within the corporate boundaries of the city shall not be exempt as provided in subsection 1 of section 15a of such Act (MCL 125.1415a(1)) from ad valorem property taxation. 
(c)	This section shall be effective with respect to nonprofit housing corporations, consumer housing cooperatives and limited dividend housing corporations. 
(Ord. No. 102,  1-3, 12-9-1975) 
Chapter 74 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14; utilities, ch. 82; satellite dish antenna, app. A,  1428; zoning, app. A. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to subscribers within the city, but such term does not include: 
(1)	A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations. 
(2)	A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way.
(3)	A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (the Act), except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services. 
(4)	An open video system that complies with section 653 of title VI of the Act.
(5)	Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Cable television company means any person or company granted a franchise in accordance with this article. 
    Cable television service means: 
(1)	The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and 
(2)	Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming services. 
    Franchise means a nonexclusive contract to transact local business providing cable service using the right-of-way awarded by ordinance and accepted in writing by the grantee. 
    Gross revenues means revenues derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service as more specifically set forth in the franchise agreement. 
    Person and company mean and include one or more individuals, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or organizations of any kind, and any combination. 
    Right-of-way means the entire area owned or dedicated by the city or other governmental agency or entity for public use as a street, sidewalk, easement, landscape area or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(3), 2-11-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 74-32. - Declaration of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for regulation of cable television service in the city in the interest of the public; to promote and encourage adequate, economical and efficient cable television service to the residents of the city; to promote and encourage harmony between cable television companies and their subscribers and to provide for the furnishing of cable television system service to the residents of the city without unjust discrimination, undue preferences or advantages. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(2), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-33. - Specifications of article to be minimum requirements. 
    The specifications required by this article are minimum requirements of a franchise agreement. Additional requirements including, but not limited to, rates, charges, deposits, specifications regarding required interconnections, studios or other signal origination facilities, number of channels to be equipped and available for immediate use upon initial construction of the system, use of channels by the city, schools and other educational institutions, quality of community access, availability of equipment to users, required establishment and expansion of service area, other use of channels and other specifications or requirements of a cable television company or system may be established in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(4)(c), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-34. - Cable commission. 
(a)	The common council shall establish a commission to be known as the cable television commission. The cable television commission shall consist of three residents of the city appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation of the common council. Each member of the cable television commission shall serve a term of three years expiring on June 30. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by the mayor with confirmation by the council for the remainder of the term. No employee or person with an interest in a cable television company shall be eligible for membership on the cable television commission. Members of the cable television commission may be compensated at a rate to be established and determined from time to time by the common council. 
(b)	The cable television commission, in addition to the functions and responsibilities that the common council may delegate to it from time to time, by resolution, shall have the following functions: 
(1)	Advise the common council on matters which might constitute grounds for termination of franchise. 
(2)	Recommend to the council, after hearing, resolutions of disputes involving grantees as provided by this article. 
(3)	Advise the council on the regulation of rates and services and make recommendations on changes in rates and services. 
(4)	Recommend to the council the general policy relating to cable television, public, educational and governmental access channels with a view to maximizing services to residents. 
(5)	Encourage the use of public access channels, facilities and equipment by institutions, groups, and individuals within the city. 
(6)	Advise the council on general policy applying to use of the government access channels.
(7)	Encourage interconnection among cable television systems.
(8)	Review and report to the council concerning records and reports which a company is required to submit to the city. 
(9)	Annually submit to the council a proposed budget and shall also prepare an annual report to the council. 
(10)	Conduct evaluations of cable television systems at least every three years and make recommendations to the council regarding amendments to this article. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(17), 2-11-1997) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions,  2-231 et seq. 
Sec. 74-35. - Rights of city. 
(a)	Any franchise granted under this article is made subject to all applicable provisions of law relating to the city and specifically subject to the rights and powers of the city and limitations upon the cable television company holding such franchise as may be set forth in the statutes of the United States, the state and the Charter of the city. 
(b)	This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. If the Federal Communications Commission or any other federal or state entity or court of competent jurisdiction exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of this article, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. Any modification by such body shall to the extent applicable be considered a part of this article as of the effective date of such modification. 
(c)	In the event that the state or federal government discontinues preemption in any area of cable television over which it currently exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit municipal regulatory authority, the city may, if it so elects, adopt rules and regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law, provided that such rules and regulations shall not apply to any franchise issued pursuant to this article prior to the adoption of such rules and regulations to the extent they materially adversely affect the cable television company's obligations under the franchise, including, without limitation, rules, regulations or requirements with respect to system rebuilds, channel capacity, system design, construction and performance requirements, public, educational, and governmental (PEG) access facilities, support for any such facilities, interconnect commitments, activation of interactive capability or institutional networks. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(15), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-36. - Unauthorized tapping, tampering or connecting prohibited. 
    No person shall tap, tamper with or connect, or cause to be tapped, tampered with or connected, any wire or device, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, to any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of a cable television company without authorization from the cable television company owning or controlling such wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to subsection 74-57(a), a cable television company may discontinue service to any person who is violating this section. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(19)-(21), 2-11-1997) 
State law reference- Tampering with utility property, MCL 750.383a. 
Secs. 74-37-74-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. (Back)
Sec. 74-56. - Required. 
(a)	No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable television system in the city nor shall any person provide a cable television service or acquire ownership or control of a cable television company in the city without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the cable television company, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with the specifications of this article, except as otherwise set forth in such agreement. 
(b)	No person shall use, occupy or traverse the right-of-way or any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above, or under the surface of the ground, for the purposes of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a cable television system or facilities therefor or for the purpose of furnishing a cable television service without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the cable television company, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with all the specifications of this article, except as otherwise set forth in such agreement. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(4)(a), (b), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-57. - Initial request for franchise; contents; fees; issuance; transfer. 
(a)	The request for an initial franchise to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable television system in the city or to furnish a cable television service shall be made in writing to the common council in such form as may be prescribed. The request shall be accompanied by a fee of $5,000.00 which fee shall be used to cover expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in the preparation of this article, amendments to this article, development of proposal solicitation documents and any amendments, and reviewing, investigating and evaluating the proposals submitted. 
(b)	Upon the filing of such a request and the payment of the fee as prescribed, the common council shall consider the request and may seek such additional information as it may deem necessary to establish the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to provide a cable television service in the city. 
(c)	If the council determines that the applicant possesses the necessary qualifications, legal, financial, technical and otherwise to reasonably ensure the applicant's ability to satisfactorily install, construct, maintain and operate a cable television system or to furnish a cable television service to the public in the city, the common council may issue a nonexclusive franchise therefor in the city. No franchise shall be issued until the council has held a public hearing on such request after due notice of the time and place of such hearing has been given to the public. 
(d)	In determining whether such a franchise shall be issued, the council shall take into consideration, among other things, the applicant's technical qualifications; financial responsibility and ability to perform efficiently the service for which the franchise is requested, including the prior experience, if any, in providing cable television systems or furnishing cable television service; the proposed rate schedule; the nature and scope of the proposed system; and the timetables for development of the proposed system. 
(e)	Neither a franchise nor a cable system shall be sold, assigned or transferred except in accordance with this section. 
(1)	In the event of a change of control of the cable television company ("change of control" includes a change in ownership of a majority interest), the parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written request to the city for its approval of sale or transfer. The written request shall be accompanied by information required by Federal Communications Commission rules and shall be presented on a form as prescribed by Federal Communications Commission rules. 
(2)	In accordance with federal law, the city shall have 120 days from receipt of the information referred to in subsection (e)(1) of this section to act upon the request for approval. If the city fails to render a final decision on the request within that time, the request shall be deemed granted unless the cable television company and the city agree to an extension of the time. 
(3)	During the review period described in subsection (e)(2) of this section, the city may advise the cable television company that a public hearing is deemed necessary. In such event, the cable television company shall have written notice of the hearing, and of the opportunity to participate fully in it, as far in advance as possible and in no event less than 14 days before the start of the hearing. 
(4)	A decision of the city upon a request pursuant to this section shall be in writing and subject to review and appeal as provided in the federal law. 
(f)	In reviewing a request for sale or transfer, the city may inquire into the technical, legal and financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the cable television company shall assist the city in so inquiring. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its approval. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to the franchise. 
(g)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no consent or approval by the city shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any person or entity controlling, controlled by or under the same common control as the cable television company, or for any sale, transfer or assignment other than a transfer requiring approval. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(5), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-58. - Franchises nonexclusive; term. 
    Any franchise issued pursuant to this article shall be a nonexclusive franchise for a term of years, not to exceed 15 years, as the common council may approve. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(6), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-59. - Fees; reporting; records. 
(a)	During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the person granted such franchise shall pay to the city for the use of its right-of-way, as well as the maintenance, improvements, and supervision thereof, and for the regulation activities required by virtue of the franchise, an amount to be determined by agreement between the city and the person granted such franchise but the amount shall not be less than five percent of the gross revenues. The city shall be furnished with a statement with each payment, certified as correct by the cable television company, and an annual statement for the entire year. The cable television company shall provide to the city, upon request, only those records and reports which pertain specifically to the cable television company's system under this agreement and only the financial records of the revenues earned by the cable television company from the operation of its cable system within the city. 
(b)	Such fee shall be paid as provided in the franchise at the office of the treasurer of the city during regular business hours. If the city treasurer's office is closed on the due date, then payment may be made during regular business hours on the next following day on which the office is open for business. 
(c)	The city shall have the right, at its expense and upon 30 days' written notice, to inspect the cable television company's records showing the gross revenues from which its franchise payments are computed. The right of audit within two years and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this franchise shall be always accorded to the city at city expense. A grantee shall pay the city's expenses if an underpayment of five percent or more is discovered for any calendar quarter. Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable or for any other performance or obligation of the cable television company. Acceptance of any payment shall be final upon completion of any audit. Under no circumstances shall the city be permitted to conduct an audit of any fiscal year more than two calendar years prior to the calendar year in which the audit occurs. The books and records shall be made available to the city in the city. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(7), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-60. - Construction of facilities; right to use right-of-way; restrictions; disposal; duties. 
(a)	A franchise granted pursuant to this article shall confer upon the grantee the nonexclusive right to erect, install, construct, reconstruct, replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate in or upon, under, above and across the right-of-way as existing as of the date of the grant of such franchise and all subsequent extensions thereof and additions thereto, in and belonging to the city, all necessary towers, poles, wires, cables, coaxial cables, transformers, amplifiers, underground conduits, manholes, and other television and/or radio conductors, equipment and fixtures for the installation, construction, maintenance and operation of a cable television system, including audio, video and radio signals, or the furnishing of a cable television service. 
(b)	Prior to the erection or installation of any towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, manholes, or fixtures for use in connection with the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of a cable television system under a franchise granted pursuant to this article, the cable television company of a franchise under this article desiring to erect or install such facilities for use in connection with its cable television system shall first submit to the city engineer for review and approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if requested or required, together with a map indicating the proposed location of such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, guy, anchor, underground conduit, manhole, or fixture for use in a cable television system shall be commenced by any person until approval has been received from the city engineer. 
(c)	Absent renewal, the franchisee shall have a period of 12 months from the date of termination or revocation to remove its towers, poles, wires, aerial or nonburied cables, fixtures or other facilities from the right-of-way; provided, however, that the cable television company shall not disturb any underground conduits, manholes or other facilities constructed underground. At the expiration of such 12-month period, any property not removed by the cable television company shall become the property of the city to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the city in removing such property from the right-of-way shall be reimbursed to the city by the cable television company. 
(d)	In areas or portions of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities providing telephone service and electric service are underground, any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground to the maximum extent feasible and permitted by existing technology and conditions, subject to the approval of the city engineer as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)	All construction, installation, maintenance and operation of any cable television system or of any facilities employed in connection therewith shall, except where inconsistent with city ordinances, rules, regulations, standards and specifications, be in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, any standards issued by the Federal Communications Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto, and applicable regulations of public utilities operating in the city. Every cable television system installed, constructed, maintained or operated in the city shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city. 
(f)	Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of or damage to the right-of-way by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to this article shall be properly guarded by adequate barriers, lights, signals and warnings as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such right-of-way and shall be properly and promptly repaired, all in a manner specified and approved by the city engineer, at such person's expense. 
(g)	Any person owning or maintaining a cable television system or facilities therefor in or on the right-of-way in the city shall, at its expense and without reimbursement from the city, upon request of the city, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from the right-of-way, any property of such person when required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, the construction or change of the transmission or distribution facilities of any telephone or electric public utility or other public improvements. Any such person shall also, at the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its cable television transmission or distribution wires or cables to permit the moving of any building or other structure, provided that the actual expense of such temporary raising or lowering shall be paid in full by the party requesting the temporary raising or lowering. 
(h)	If any person shall fail to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this article as set forth in this article to be done in any right-of-way as designated by the engineer of the city, the city engineer may cause such work to be done and such person shall pay to the city the cost thereof within 30 days of the receipt of an itemized statement of such cost. 
(i)	Any person operating a cable system shall, in addition to all other requirements of this article, within 30 days of the execution of a franchise, file with the city, a construction bond with a company authorized to do business in the state and reasonably acceptable to the city, in the amount of $10,000.00. The purpose of the construction bond is to guarantee the timely construction and full activation of the cable system. The construction bond shall be for the purpose of allowing recovery by the city of any and all damages, losses or costs suffered by the city resulting from the failure of the cable television company to satisfactorily complete and fully activate the cable system throughout the city, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this article. 
(j)	When the cable system is completed to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, the construction bond need no longer be maintained. 
(k)	The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement:
"It is understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor may the intention not to renew be exercised by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(8), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-61. - Termination, revocation or surrender of franchise. 
(a)	Any initial franchise granted pursuant to this article shall expire without further proceedings ten months after its effective date in the event the person granted such franchise has not commenced construction of a cable television system within such period, unless prior to such date, such person shall have applied to the common council and the council shall have, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction periods set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(b)	If any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article fails to provide cable television service within and throughout any area as required under the terms of its franchise agreement, such franchise shall, on the anniversary of the effective date of such franchise next following the ten-month period during which cable television service has not been extended as required under the terms of the franchise agreement, be deemed revoked without the necessity of council action, unless prior to such date, such person shall have applied to the common council and the council shall have, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction of service periods set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(c)	Any franchise granted pursuant to this article may be terminated and canceled without further proceedings 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of a cable television company, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such period; provided, however, that such receiver or trustee may apply for a transfer or assignment of such franchise, as provided in subsection 74-57(e) if duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, and provided further, in case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property or facilities of a cable television company, with or without the appointment of a receiver or trustee, including or excluding the franchise granted under this article, such franchise as granted may be terminated and canceled upon 30 days' written notice of termination served upon the cable television company and the purchaser thereof, unless within such 30-day period, the purchaser shall apply to the city for a transfer or assignment to it of the franchise as provided in subsection 74-57(e). 
(d)	Any franchise granted pursuant to this article, unless otherwise allowed by law, is revocable prior to its expiration for cause as provided in this subsection. Any franchise granted pursuant to this article is revocable for cause by the common council prior to its expiration where the cable television company has failed substantially to comply with any material provision or requirement of this article, or the provisions of its franchise agreement. The council shall give a written notice containing full particulars as to the provision or requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow such cable television company 60 days to comply. At the expiration of such 60 days, the common council may hold a public hearing upon ten days' notice to the person granted a franchise. Such hearing shall be public with the cable television company being permitted to fully participate therein including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and to examine and cross examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded and at the conclusion thereof, the council, if it reasonably finds that the cable television company has not substantially complied with any material provision or requirement of this article or its franchise agreement, may terminate and revoke the franchise. 
(e)	Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article may surrender it by written notice of intent to surrender its franchise filed with the city clerk not less than 60 days prior to the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in such notice, all rights, privileges and authority under such franchise shall terminate; provided, however, that such person shall have a period of 12 months thereafter to remove its towers, poles, wires, aerial or nonburied cables, fixtures or other facilities from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places, subject to the rights of the city as set forth in subsection 74-60(d). At the expiration of such 12-month period, any property not removed by such person shall become the property of the city to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the city in removing such property from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places shall be claimed against such person under the performance bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit required under subsection 74-83(a). 
(f)	In the event a cable television company elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the common council terminates or revokes or fails to renew this franchise, the cable television company shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous uninterrupted service. In the event of a change of cable television company, the current cable television company shall cooperate with the city to operate the system for a reasonable period in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(12), 2-11-1997) 
Secs. 74-62-74-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SERVICE, SYSTEM AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 74-81. - Standard of service. 
(a)	Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall install, construct, maintain and operate its cable television system in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry, in conformity with the standards of operation or maintenance for a cable television system which may be lawfully established by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(b)	Every cable television system franchised under this article, at a minimum, shall make available the following: 
(1)	At least one specifically designated noncommercial public access channel for production and programming on this channel. 
(2)	At least one specifically designated channel for noncommercial governmental use by the city. 
(3)	One channel for noncommercial educational use by the city community schools within its boundary. 
(c)	Every cable television system franchised under this article shall maintain and have available for public, educational and governmental (PEG) use the necessary equipment and facilities for the production of programming on the access channels specified in this article, which equipment and facilities, at a minimum, shall include one operational studio for the production of public, educational and governmental access programs and one mobile studio facility with all necessary equipment needed for the production of such programming or in lieu thereof make a financial commitment for public, educational and governmental (PEG) programming deemed sufficient by the city under this subsection. 
(d)	Every cable television company shall install as part of its cable system, and shall operate through the term, an emergency alert system (EAS) or the successor to that system in accordance with all requirements imposed from time to time by the Federal Communications Commission, including, without limitation, the requirements that cable television systems transmit a visual emergency alert system message on at least one channel (47 CFR 11.51(g)(3)) and that cable systems also provide video interruption and an audit emergency alert system message on all channels, with the audio message further stating which channel is carrying the visual message (47 CFR 11.51(g)(2)). In establishing the cable television company's emergency alert system pursuant to this section, the cable television company shall: 
(1)	Designate a channel, which may be the government channel, which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video; 
(2)	Inform customers of the designated emergency channel at least daily on at least one channel, which may be the government channel, of the multichannel system; 
(3)	Maintain all channel video blanking capability able to be activated remotely by security measures deemed mutually agreeable by the city and the cable television company; 
(4)	Test the emergency override system not less than every three months;
(5)	Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency alert override system; and 
(6)	Maintain the capacity to permit the city in time of emergency to activate the system consistent with federal regulations as stated in 47 CFR 11.55. 
(e)	Every cable television system franchised under this article shall maintain such capacity, capability and technical standards as will enable it to interconnect with any other cable television system located within the city and in any adjacent community. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(9), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-82. - Rates; discrimination; filing schedules; maximum rates; increase in rates; procedures. 
(a)	No rates or charges for cable television service provided in the city, which the city regulates in accordance with federal law, shall be effective until the rates and charges are filed with the clerk of the city. 
(b)	The city shall comply with rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable Television Service) of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations 47 CFR chapter I, part 76, subpart N regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as amended. 
(c)	If, subject to rate regulations, after a company submits for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in these rates, the clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the company, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(d)	The city shall comply with procedures set forth in 47 CFR 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by the company in a rate regulation proceeding. 
(e)	A cable operator which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture as determined by the common council following the procedures set forth in 47 USC 503 
(f)	In the event of a conflict between this article and a cable television franchise, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 131,  1-5, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 140,  1(10), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-83. - Indemnity; proof of insurance; effective date of franchise. 
(a)	Every cable television company, prior to the execution of the franchise agreement, shall file with the city and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, at its expense, a performance bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit from a bank approved by the city, in the amount of $10,000.00 conditioned upon the faithful performance by such cable television company of its obligations under its franchise, and upon the further condition that if such cable television company shall fail to comply with any one or more provisions of this article, or cable television agreement with the city, after following the procedure, if any, in the franchise agreement, there shall be recoverable any damages or loss suffered by the city, as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal of any property of such cable television company as provided in this article plus attorney fees and costs, up to the full amount of the performance bond or letter of credit, such condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of any franchise granted under this article and any renewal thereof and thereafter until such cable television company has liquidated all of its obligations with the city which may have arisen under the franchise or from the exercise of any privilege or right granted. 
(b)	No franchise under this article shall be effective until the provisions of subsection (a) of this section has been fully complied with and the failure to file with the city clerk within 90 days after tender by the city of the franchise agreement, the letter of credit, indemnity agreement, proof of general comprehensive insurance or any other documents and materials as required by subsection (a) of this section or any other provisions of this article or the city may revoke the franchise in accordance with procedures set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(c)	The cable television company and any contractor hired by the cable television company to install, maintain, improve, restore or remove a cable television system within the city shall not commence work under this agreement until they have obtained the insurance required within this section. All insurance coverage shall be with insurance carriers reasonably acceptable to the city. If any insurance is written with a deductible or self-insured retention, the cable television company or contractor shall be solely responsible for such deductible or self-insured retention. The purchase of insurance and the furnishing of a certificate of insurance shall not be a satisfaction of the cable television company's indemnification of the city. The cable television company is responsible to meet all MIOSHA requirements for on-the-job safety. The cable television company and any contractor hired by the cable television company shall procure and maintain during the life of this contract the following coverage: 
(1)	Workers' compensation insurance in accordance with all applicable statutes of the state. Coverage shall include employer's liability coverage. 
(2)	Commercial general liability insurance on an "occurrence" basis with limits of liability not less than $2,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and personal injury, and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for property damage. Coverage shall include the following extensions: 
a.	Contractual liability.
b.	Products and completed operations.
c.	Independent contractors coverage.
d.	Broad form general liability extensions or equivalent.
e.	Coverage for X, C and U hazards.
(3)	Motor vehicle liability coverage, including state no-fault coverage for all vehicles used in the performance of the contract. Limits of liability shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage. 
(4)	Commercial general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance as described in this section shall include an endorsement stating the following shall be an additional named insured: 
"The city, including all elected and appointed officials, boards, commissions, officers and employees." 
(5)	Workers' compensation insurance, commercial general liability insurance, and motor vehicle liability insurance as described in this section shall include an endorsement stating the following: 
"It is understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurer until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew." 
Such notice shall be sent to: 
City of Utica 
Attention: City Clerk 
7550 Auburn Road 
Utica, MI 48317 
(d)	If so requested by the city, cable television company and any contractor hired by cable television company shall within 60 days of such request supply a copy of the insurance policy of any of the insurance coverage required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(11), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-84. - Hearing and determination of complaints; procedure; local office. 
(a)	The common council, or any person or department designated by it, shall, upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person or subscriber of a cable television company, have authority to hear and determine all complaints concerning the rates, charges, rules, regulations, practices, quality or service rendered or refused to be rendered, equipment furnished or refused to be furnished, or any other matter relating to the service or operation of the cable television system or any person franchised under the terms of this article. 
(b)	Upon the filing of any complaint against any person pursuant to the preceding subsection, the common council shall give such person at least 20 days notice of the time and place of a hearing to be given such person upon the matters alleged in the complaint subject to state and federal laws. 
(c)	To aid in the analysis and resolution of any disputed matters relative to the franchise, the city and cable television company may, by mutual agreement (both as to whether to hire and whom to hire), employ the services of technical, financial or legal consultants, as arbitrators. All reasonable fees of the consultants shall be borne equally. 
(d)	Every person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall:
(1)	Maintain a reasonably convenient bill payment location which shall be open during all usual business hours; and 
(2)	Have a publicly listed local telephone number or toll-free number which will be so operated to receive subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a 24-hour basis. 
The company shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints resulting in service calls, their disposition, and all service interruptions. 
(e)	The company shall maintain a suitable repair force of technicians in order to respond to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. The company shall establish to the satisfaction of the city a complaint procedure in order to settle disputes between the company and subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(13), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-85. - Reports. 
    Upon request, every cable television company shall file annually with the city clerk a current map showing the location of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment in the city used by it in providing cable television service. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(14), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-86. - Rights of individuals. 
(a)	A cable television company shall not deny service, deny access, nor otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. The cable television company shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(b)	A cable television company shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, color, national origin or sex. 
(c)	Neither the cable television company, the city nor any other person shall tape or monitor or arrange for the taping or monitoring, or permit, either expressly or impliedly, any other person to tape or monitor any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, without the express written permission of the subscriber; provided, however, that the cable television company shall be entitled to conduct systemwide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmission, or billing for pay services. 
(d)	A cable television company, or any of its agents, affiliates or employees, shall not, without the specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, sell or otherwise make available to any party: 
(1)	Lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers, which identifies by name subscriber viewing; or 
(2)	Any list which identifies the viewing habits of subscribers, except as such list is necessary for the construction, marketing and maintenance of a cable television company's facilities and services under this article and the concomitant billing of subscribers for such services. A cable television company shall not provide information concerning the viewing habits of identifiable individual subscribers to any party for any purpose whatsoever. 
The cable television company shall not utilize the two-way television capability of the system for unauthorized surveillance of any kind. 
(e)	Liability for obscenity, defamation or invasion of privacy on any access channels shall rest with the person, group of persons or any organization or corporation utilizing such access channels. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(16), 2-11-1997) 
Secs. 74-87-74-105. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Customer Service Standards 

Sec. 74-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Normal business hours means 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday, excluding holidays. 
    Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the company. Those conditions which are not within the control of the company include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the company include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
    Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(22), 2-11-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 74-107. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this subdivision is intended to prevent or prohibit: 
(1)	The city and a company from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this article; 
(2)	The city from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law; or
(3)	The establishment or enforcement of any ordinance or regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(23), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-108. - Customer service standards. 
    A company is subject to the following customer service standards certified quarterly by the company: 
(1)	The company will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(2)	Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, seven days a week. From 12:00 midnight to 9:00 a.m., the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received from 12:00 midnight to 9:00 a.m., shall be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(3)	Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a company representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions measured on a quarterly basis. 
(4)	Under normal operating conditions, the customers may receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
(5)	A reasonably convenient bill payment location will be open at least during normal business hours. 
(6)	Under normal operating conditions, each of the following five standards must be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
a.	Standard installations will be performed seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located not more than 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
b.	Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, a company shall begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The company must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
c.	The appointment window for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour block during normal business hours. The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
d.	A company may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
e.	If a company representative is running late for an appointment and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted, the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(7)	The company shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a.	Products and services offered;
b.	Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
c.	Installation and service maintenance policies;
d.	Instructions on how to use the cable service;
e.	Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
f.	Billing and complaint procedures, including the business address and telephone number of the company and of the city. 
(8)	Except with respect to a change in rates which is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee and any other fee, tax, assessment or charge of any kind imposed by federal, state or local government, customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible by any reasonable means. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the company. In addition, the company shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the subsection (7) of this section. 
(9)	Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a company must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(10)	Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than:
a.	The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
b.	The return of the equipment supplied by the company if service is terminated by the company. 
(11)	Credits will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(24), 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 74-109. - Enforcement. 
(a)	A company shall file with the city clerk a notarized statement signed by an officer or employee certifying compliance with the customer service standards under this subsection on an annual basis. 
(b)	Failing to file a certificate shall subject a company to pay a civil fine to the city of up to $500.00 per day. 
(c)	A company in noncompliance shall on a quarterly basis file a statement specifying areas of noncompliance along with a remedial plan. Failing to file a noncompliance statement and remedial plan shall subject the company to pay a civil fine to the city of up to $500.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 140,  1(25), 2-11-1997) 
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code saved from repeal,  1-11(15)a; any ordinance ordering, requiring or authorizing the erection or installation of traffic control signs, signals, devices or markings not codified in this Code saved from repeal,  1-11(15)b; law enforcement, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; malicious mischief with motor vehicles,  46-112; motor vehicles and off-the-road vehicles in parks,  50-45; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; off-street loading and unloading, app. A,  1411; recreational vehicle storage, app. A,  1413. (Back)
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Interpretation. 
    In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control. In the event of conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control. 
Sec. 78-2. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
Sec. 78-3. - Michigan Vehicle Code adopted. 
(a)	The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(b)	References in the Uniform Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Utica. 
(c)	The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 153,  1-3, 2-11-2003; Ord. No. 153A,  1-3, 2-14-2006) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt Michigan Vehicle Code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 78-4. - Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages adopted. 
(a)	The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated by the department of state police is adopted by reference and all future amendments thereof. 
(b)	References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to "governmental unit" shall mean this city. 
(Ord. No. 152,  1, 2, 2-11-2003) 
State law reference- Authority to adopt Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 78-5. - Motor carrier safety. 
    No person shall violate Ordinance No. 137, as amended. 
State law reference- Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, MCL 480.11 et seq. 
Sec. 78-6. - No passing zone. 
    Cass Avenue between Auburn Street and Ruby Street within the city shall be properly marked and signed to provide that there shall be no passing by a motor vehicle of another motor vehicle between such points on Cass Avenue within the city. 
(Ord. No. 67,  1, 5-11-1965) 
State law reference- No passing zones, MCL 257.60. 
Sec. 78-7. - Truck routes. 
(a)	All through truck traffic shall use only the following streets through the city, provided, however, in the case of hardship, upon application to the police chief, an alternate route may be designated by the police chief: 
Hall Road, being State Highway 59; Van Dyke Avenue; and any other street that may be marked by signs indicating that such streets may be used as a truck route. 
(b)	Trucks, trailers, semitrailers or other commercial vehicles shall not be operated on other streets in the city except for the purposes of business originating or terminating on such streets, and in such event, the operator of such vehicle shall use truck routes so far as may be practicable in traveling to and from such destination in residential areas in the city. 
(Ord. No. 39A,  1, 2, 9-13-1960; Ord. No. 39-B, 4-17-1973; Ord. No. 39-C, 11-12-1973) 
Sec. 78-8. - Livestock or slaughterhouse vehicles. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Livestock vehicle means any truck, trailer, or motor vehicle, loaded or unloaded, used to transport, move, deliver or otherwise convey live animals or fowl for the purpose of being slaughtered. 
    Slaughterhouse means every place where live animals or fowl are slaughtered for human consumption. 
    Slaughterhouse vehicle means any truck, trailer or motor vehicle, loaded or unloaded, used to transport, move, deliver or otherwise convey the products, byproducts or waste products of a slaughterhouse. 
(b)	No livestock vehicle or slaughterhouse vehicle shall stand or park upon any street or highway in the city. It shall be presumed that the driver, operator or person in possession of any such motor vehicle was the person who parked or stopped such motor vehicle; provided further that as to any unattended motor vehicle, the registered owner of such vehicle shall be presumed to have parked or stopped such motor vehicle. 
(c)	No livestock vehicle or slaughterhouse vehicle shall drive or travel upon any street or highway in the city, except the following: 
(1)	M-59, also known as Hall Road.
(2)	M-53, also known as Van Dyke.
(3)	M-53, bypass expressway.
(4)	Cass Avenue
(d)	A truck or trailer is presumed, unless rebutted by competent evidence, to be used for a purpose consistent with any lettering, words or company designation contained on any such truck or trailer. 
(e)	No livestock vehicle or slaughterhouse vehicle shall drive or travel upon Cass Avenue between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., Mondays through Saturdays, and at any time on Sundays or legal holidays. 
(f)	Violations of this section are a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 39-E,  1-6, 9-9-1980) 
Secs. 78-9-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-31. - Reimbursement of city expenses in connection with arrests of persons for OWI or impaired driving. 
(a)	For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
(1)	Emergency response means the providing, sending and/or using police, firefighting and emergency medical services by the city to or at an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while intoxicated, to wit: under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance or with a blood alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or while visibly impaired. 
(2)	Arrest means the making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the driver was operating the motor vehicle while intoxicated, to wit: under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance or with a blood alcohol content of 0.08grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or while visibly impaired. 
(3)	Reimbursable expense means the direct costs associated with the occurrence of an emergency response as set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section or an arrest as set forth in subsection (a)(2) of this section, whichever is applicable. Reimbursable expenses shall include, but not be limited to, the costs connected with the administration and provision of an alcohol breath test and the videotaping of the driver, if applicable. These costs shall be established by resolution of the common council of the city and collected by the treasurer of the city. 
(b)	The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or a controlled substance or with a blood alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or while visibly impaired. In addition, the city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle in such a condition there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and/or financial burden is placed upon the city police department, fire department and emergency medical services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle in such a condition. 
(c)	Any person who, while intoxicated, to wit: under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any controlled substance or with a blood alcohol content of 0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or more or while visibly impaired, operates a motor vehicle which results in an emergency response and/or arrest as defined in subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be responsible and/or liable for the expenses of such emergency response and/or arrest. 
(d)	For purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated, to wit: under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or with a blood alcohol content of 0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or more or while visibly impaired 
(e)	The liability for expenses described in subsection (c) of this section shall be of a civil nature and shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge, or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility including fines and/or costs imposed by a judge or magistrate on a driver for operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated, to wit: under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance or with a blood alcohol content of 0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or more or while visibly impaired. 
(f)	A finding of not guilty of OWI or impaired after trial shall relieve such person from civil liability established by this section. 
(Ord. No. 133,  1-4, 10-18-1994; Ord. of 12-8-2009) 
Secs. 78-32-78-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Parking violations bureau, MCL 600.8395. (Back)
Sec. 78-51. - Police department to act as parking violations bureau. 
    The police department is hereby constituted and authorized to act as a parking violations bureau for parking violations under the authority established in this division. The police chief shall be in charge of the parking violations bureau and shall direct members of the police department to perform the duties under this division as he deems proper and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 88A,  1, 7-18-1984) 
Sec. 78-52. - Settlement of violations. 
    Any person charged with any violation of the parking ordinance or traffic control orders of the city, as specified in section 78-58, may, within ten days, if such person is a resident of this state, or if a nonresident, on or before the appearance date, settle such violation and pay the amount specified in section 78-58. Acceptance of the prescribed sanction shall be deemed complete satisfaction by the city. 
(Ord. No. 88A,  2, 7-18-1984) 
Sec. 78-53. - Responsibility for violation; acceptance. 
    The parking violations bureau shall have no discretion to determine the responsibility of any person cited, but may only accept the prescribed sanction in satisfaction of a parking violation notice. The payment of the prescribed sanction shall constitute a plea of responsibility which the parking violations bureau is hereby authorized to accept. 
(Ord. No. 88A,  3, 7-18-1984) 
Sec. 78-54. - Notice of violation. 
    If a violator of the restrictions on parking does not respond to a parking citation within a period of ten days, the parking violations bureau shall send the owner of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter by first class mail informing him of the violation and warning him that failure to respond will cause the citation to be forwarded to the district court for prosecution as a civil infraction and an increase fine or sanction. The notice shall also advise the owner that failure to respond to a parking violation may result in the denial by the secretary of state to renew the violator's license in accordance with section 321a of Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.321a). 
(Ord. No. 88A,  4, 7-18-1984) 
Sec. 78-55. - Failure to comply with notice; filing of citation district court. 
    In the event any person fails to comply with the notice of the parking violations bureau as provided in this division, the police department shall forthwith file a parking citation with the district court with a copy of this citation being served by first class mail upon this registered owner of the vehicle at the owners last known address as provided by MCL 257.742. The citation filed with the court is a civil infraction and shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the parking violation notice and shall fairly inform the defendant how to respond to the citation. The citation need not comply in all particulars with sections 727c and 743 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.727c and 257.743). The citation shall be processed in the same manner as a civil infraction issued in accordance with the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.742). 
(Ord. No. 88A,  5, 7-18-1984) 
Sec. 78-56. - Persons responsible for violations. 
(a)	Except as provided in this section, if a vehicle is stopped, standing, or parked in violation of a state statute, or an ordinance prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle and the violation is a civil infraction, the person in whose name that vehicle is registered in this state or another state at the time of the violation is prima facie responsible for that violation. 
(b)	The owner of a vehicle cited for a stopping, standing, or parking violation pursuant to subsection (a) of this section may assert as an affirmative defense that the vehicle in question, at the time of the violation, was in the possession of a person whom the owner had not knowingly permitted to operate the vehicle. 
(c)	The lessee or renter of a motor vehicle and not the leased vehicle owner is liable for a violation of an ordinance or state statute relating to a standing or parked vehicle involving the motor vehicle if the leased vehicle owner furnishes proof that the vehicle described in the citation, complaint, warrant, or notice was in the possession of, custody of, or was being operated or used by the lessee or renter of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(d)	If a leased vehicle is leased or rented for 30 days or less, the leased vehicle owner may avoid liability for a violation described in subsection (c) of this section if the leased vehicle owner provides all of the following information to the clerk of the court or parking violations bureau issuing the violation not later than 30 days after the leased vehicle owner has received notice of the violation: 
(1)	The lessee's or renter's name, address, and operator's or chauffeur's license number.
(2)	A copy of the signed rental or lease agreement or an expedited rental agreement without signature as part of a master rental agreement, including proof of the date and time the possession of the vehicle was given to the lessee or renter and the date and time the vehicle was returned to the leased vehicle owner or the leased vehicle owner's authorized agent under the agreement. 
(e)	If a leased vehicle is leased or rented for 30 days or less, the leased vehicle owner is liable for a violation of an ordinance or state statute relating to a standing or parked vehicle if one more of the following occur: 
(1)	The leased vehicle owner does not provide the information described in subsection (d) of this section within the 30-day period specified in that subsection. 
(2)	The court or parking violations bureau issuing the violation proceeds against the lessee or renter of the vehicle and the lessee or renter of the vehicle is not convicted of or found responsible for the violation. 
(f)	As used in this section:
(1)	Affiliate means a person that directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with another person. 
(2)	Leased vehicle owner means a person in the business of renting or leasing leased vehicles or an affiliate of the person, if the person or the affiliate is the registered owner of a standing or parked leased vehicle involved in a violation of a local ordinance or state statute. 
(Ord. No. 88A,  6, 7-18-1984) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 600.675b, 600.675c. 
Sec. 78-57. - Payment of monies to city treasurer. 
    The parking violations bureau shall pay over to the city treasurer all monies collected and shall keep such other records and make such reports as may from time to time be required by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 88A,  7, 7-18-1984) 
Sec. 78-58. - Schedule of payments for parking violations. 
    All violations may be settled at the parking violations bureau upon payment of the sanction, for the specific violation as currently scheduled by the district court servicing the city for ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 88A,  8, 7-18-1984) 
Secs. 78-59-78-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLE TOWING 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, MCL 257.252a et seq. (Back)
Sec. 78-76. - Authority of police department to contract for removal, impoundment and storage of motor vehicles. 
    The police department is hereby authorized to contract for the removal, impoundment and storage of motor vehicles or other items temporarily in the possession of the city. The person awarded the contract shall be designated as a contractor. 
(Ord. No. 114,  2, 3-9-1982; Ord. No. 114B,  2, 9-13-1994) 
Sec. 78-77. - Removal of vehicles generally. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in a place where parking is not permitted, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed, by or under the direction of a member of the police department or fire department, by means of towing the vehicle or otherwise, to a place where parking is legal or permitted, or to facilities maintained for storage pursuant to a contract as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 114,  3, 3-9-1982; Ord. No. 114B,  3, 9-13-1994) 
Sec. 78-78. - Additional conditions for removal and impoundment of vehicle. 
    In addition to such places as are posted to prohibit parking or are prohibited by city ordinance or state statute, the following conditions are also prohibited and can be remedied by removal and/or impoundment, by the police department or fire department, of the vehicle and the contents thereof: 
(1)	Abandoned vehicles as defined by state statute.
(2)	Vehicles which obstruct or otherwise impede traffic on any county or state roadway.
(3)	Vehicles that are not in proper condition to be driven due to mechanical failure, flat tire, lack of fuel or as the result of an accident upon the streets of the city for a longer period than is necessary to remove such vehicle. 
(4)	Vehicles, whereby their presence constitute a material obstruction or a definite hazard to the movement of traffic. 
(5)	Vehicles upon a highway that are so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(6)	Vehicles that would be left unattended because the driver of such vehicle has been taken into custody by the police department. 
(7)	Vehicles that are parked contrary to the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, or other emergency reason. 
(8)	Vehicles that the police department, fire department, or public works department, or a member thereof, required to be removed to properly perform a duty consistent with such department. 
(9)	Vehicles involved in the commission of a felony.
(10)	Vehicles that may be impounded or forfeited pursuant to city ordinance or state statute.
(Ord. No. 114,  4, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 78-79. - Liens. 
    Any motor vehicle or item removed, impounded, or stored by the city shall be subject to an immediate lien for all charges associated with the removal, impoundment and storage. The amount of such charges shall be specified in the contract authorized in section 78-76. 
(Ord. No. 114,  5, 3-9-1982; Ord. No. 114A, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 114B,  5, 9-13-1994) 
Sec. 78-80. - Minimum factors for award of towing contract. 
    The police chief shall oversee the contract process as authorized in section 78-76. The minimum factors to be considered for the award of a contract are: 
(1)	Cost of services.
(2)	Whether the full-time business of the person, firm, or corporation consist, in part, of towing, transporting or storage of motor vehicles. 
(3)	Ability to provide towing facilities at any time requested to do so.
(4)	Past experience in providing quick and efficient towing, transporting and storage services. 
(5)	Insurance and bonding criteria.
(Ord. No. 114,  6, 3-9-1982; Ord. No. 114B,  6, 9-13-1994) 
Sec. 78-81. - Procedure for disposition of articles stored by the city. 
    Where no other procedure is provided by law, the following procedure shall apply to the disposition of articles stored by the city: 
(1)	After any article has been stored for 30 days, it shall be considered abandoned and the police chief may cause such article to be sold. The police chief shall cause to be published in a newspaper a notice of public auction of such articles. Such notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the auction. The items to be sold need not be listed provided a list of such articles is made available at the police chief's office for inspection by any interested person. The auction shall be called for no sooner than 30 days nor longer than 45 days after publication. 
(2)	A public auction need not be called more frequently than annually.
(3)	Any excess of proceeds of such sale not necessary to satisfy liens shall be payable to the city for deposit to its general fund. 
(Ord. No. 114,  7, 3-9-1982; Ord. No. 114B,  7, 9-13-1994) 
Sec. 78-82. - Registration plate to constitute evidence of vehicle ownership. 
    In any proceedings pursuant to this division, either criminal or civil or administrative, the registration plate displayed on such motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where such act occurred. 
(Ord. No. 114,  9, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 78-83. - Notification of circumstances of violation; protest; payment of fees to treasury; records. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the person in charge of any impounded vehicle to inform the owner or person claiming an impounded vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the violation on account of which such vehicle has been impounded. In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fee, the person in charge of the vehicle pound shall mark upon the receipt evidencing payment of the impounding and storage fees the words "Paid Under Protest." In such case, it shall thereupon be the duty of the person having knowledge of the facts to forthwith institute the proper proceedings in the district court charging the owner or driver of such vehicle with that violation of the provision of this division or other city ordinance on account of which the vehicle was impounded. On the disposition of the cause in court, it shall be the duty of the treasurer to refund to such person the fees paid under protest, provided such person is acquitted of such charges. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the public works department to account for all fees collected under this division and to pay the fees into the city treasury. The public works department shall also keep the names of all owners of vehicles impounded, the number of their state license tags, the nature and circumstances of each violation and the disposition of each case. 
(Ord. No. 114,  10, 3-9-1982) 
Secs. 78-84-78-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- P-1, vehicular parking district, app. A,  1200 et seq.; off-street parking requirements, app. A,  1406; off-street parking space layout, standards, construction, and maintenance, app. A,  1407. (Back)
Sec. 78-111. - Violations as civil infractions. 
    Any person who shall cause his motor vehicle to be left, parked, standing or abandoned contrary to signs posted prohibiting such parking, standing or abandonment shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 114,  8(B), 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 78-112. - Abandonment. 
    Any person who shall cause his motor vehicle to be left, parked, or abandoned under such circumstances as would give rise to removal, impoundment, or storage pursuant to article II, division 3 of this chapter, except as to subsection 78-78(5), (6), (7) or (8), shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 114,  8(A), 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 78-113. - Parking of inoperable vehicle; permit. 
(a)	For the purpose of this section, the term "inoperable vehicle" means any motor vehicle which is currently not capable of being started and safely and properly operated on the highway and which does not bear a valid and current license plate. This section shall not apply to licensed junkyards or to licensed automotive dealers, gasoline stations and commercial garages engaged in the repair and maintenance of automobiles. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to park or for an owner of property to permit any inoperable vehicle on any property within the city in a place or area not fully enclosed by a building or structure without a permit as provided in this section. 
(c)	Application shall be made to the police chief by appearance at the police station within 96 hours after the time when such parking has been commenced and by filing on a form furnished by the police chief a statement of the following: 
(1)	Address of the premises where the vehicle is to be parked;
(2)	Name and address of the owner or person in control of the premises, and a statement attesting to his permission for such vehicle to be parked and the date of such permission; 
(3)	Name and address of the registered owner of the inoperable vehicle for which the permit is sought; the registration or title shall be presented to the officer issuing the permit; 
(4)	Description of the inoperable vehicle for which a permit is sought as to the make, model, year of manufacture, last license issued and condition which rendered it inoperable; 
(5)	Estimated length of time, not to exceed 60 days, for which the permit is being requested in order to restore the vehicle to operating condition: 
(6)	The signature of the applicant.
(d)	At his discretion, the police chief or his delegated officers may issue a permit based on a proper application. Such permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 60 days from the date of application. A copy of such permit shall be posted inside the vehicle for which it was issued by affixing to the windshield or window in such a manner as to be readily visible at all times. Any permit may be renewed at the discretion of the police chief upon filing of a new application. No permit shall be transferable to any other person. 
(e)	Every permit for storage of an inoperable vehicle on private property shall be subject to the conditions that: 
(1)	No nuisance or safety hazard shall be created or maintained;
(2)	All broken glass or partially detached parts shall be either removed and disposed of as rubbish or secured in a manner to prevent hazard; 
(3)	Trunk or storage compartment shall be kept locked or otherwise secured adequately to prevent possible entrapment of a child; 
(4)	Wheels or tires shall not be removed from the vehicle except for repairs;
(5)	The last issued license plates shall be kept on the vehicle;
(6)	The vehicle shall not be elevated or blocked in any unsafe manner;
(7)	All parts or components removed from the vehicle shall not be stored in the open;
(8)	No waste oil or other fluids shall be allowed to flow on the ground or pavement;
(9)	The vehicle may be parked only in the rear yard of residential property;
(10)	No violation of the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be created;
(11)	All information furnished by the applicant is essentially correct. The making of any false statement is a misdemeanor. 
(f)	Any permit issued under authority of this article may be revoked at the discretion of the police chief when, in his opinion, a violation of this section exists. Notice of such revocation shall be delivered to the permittee or posted conspicuously on the vehicle, along with a notice to cease storing such vehicle and remove it to a proper storage or disposal location. The permittee shall remove the vehicle within ten days after receiving such notice or after the notice is posted. The police chief shall collect a fee of $1.00 at the time of issuance of each permit for storage of inoperable vehicle or renewal thereof. No part of this fee shall be refundable. 
(g)	Any vehicle parked, stored or otherwise kept in violation of this section shall be removed and impounded in the city storage area. 
(h)	Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(i)	The registered owner of the vehicle, owner of the property, and occupant of the property shall be equally guilty of a violation of this section. 
(1)	The person listed upon the tax rolls of the city shall be presumed to be the owner of the premises. A certificate from the city treasurer shall be admissable in evidence in any court of law to establish such ownership. 
(2)	The person regularly residing at, or doing business at, the premises involved shall be presumed to be the occupant thereof. 
(Ord. No. 114,  11, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 78-114. - Municipal building parking lot. 
(a)	The parking area located adjacent to the Utica Municipal Building is hereby declared the municipal parking area and is subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)	The police chief is hereby authorized to designate one parking space for each of the following persons in the municipal parking area: 
(1)	Mayor.
(2)	Mayor pro tem.
(3)	Treasurer.
(4)	Assessor.
(5)	Clerk.
(6)	Assistant clerk.
(7)	Police chief
(c)	The police chief is hereby authorized to designate an adequate number of parking spaces in the municipal parking area for the parking of police vehicles. The police chief is further authorized to designate restricted parking areas or spaces as deemed necessary to the performance of police functions or duties. 
(d)	Any person who parks a motor vehicle contrary to posted restrictions or designations in the municipal parking area is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 106,  1-4, 7-18-1979) 
Sec. 78-115. - Parking in yards. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to encroach upon the required open space on residential properties as provided for in the zoning ordinance by parking of any vehicle which is not self-propelled or is disabled. 
(b)	It shall be lawful to park in a driveway, or other area provided for such purpose, vehicles owned by the property owner or his tenant or tenants legally occupying the property, or their visitors, provided that such vehicles are capable of being operated and, as provided for in this subsection, are not disabled. 
(c)	The provisions of this section in effect prohibit the parking of any vehicle, whether self-propelled or not, in the defined open spaces as provided for in the zoning ordinance of the city. There is no prohibition against parking of such vehicles in the rear of any residence provided there is no interference with the open spaces as defined. 
(Ord. No. 65,  1-3, 12-8-1965) 
Sec. 78-116. - Service or repair of motor vehicles on streets, highways and other public places. 
    It is a misdemeanor to service any motor vehicle, or make any repair to any motor vehicle, in or upon any of the streets, highways, alleys or other public places in the city, except minor repairs which may be necessary in an emergency to render such motor vehicle operative. 
(Ord. No. 114,  8(C), 3-9-1982) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 78-117. - Parking of trucks on residential streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or other owner of a truck to park the truck on the residential streets within the city except for loading and/or unloading in the normal course of business activities. 
(Ord. No. 68,  1, 5-11-1965) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Secs. 78-118-78-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VALET PARKING 

Sec. 78-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Badge means an emblem or device identifying an individual as being an employee of a valet parking service. 
    Parking means the halting of a motor vehicle, whether or not occupied, when not loading or unloading. 
    Pickup and dropoff point means a designated location where a valet parking attendant shall take possession of a motor vehicle and drive such motor vehicle to an area to be parked and to which such vehicle shall be returned to the owner or driver thereof. 
    Revocation means the termination of a valet parking license, which shall not be eligible to be renewed or restored. 
    Standing means halting of a motor vehicle other than for the purpose of and while actually receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Suspension means the temporary withdrawal of a valet parking license for a set period of time. 
    Valet parking attendant means an employee of a valet parking service who operates, drives and parks motor vehicles in the course of his employment. 
    Valet parking service means a person who provides motor vehicle pickup and dropoff services, using in part the public right-of-way, for the purpose of temporarily parking such vehicles, and receives payment therefor. 
(Ord. No. 144,  1, 5-16-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 78-142. - General requirements. 
    The valet parking service shall: 
(1)	Provide sufficient personnel to handle all requests for valet parking promptly and to prevent motor vehicle congestion at pickup and dropoff points. 
(2)	Provide insurance in at least the following minimum amounts with the city named as an additional insured on all insurance policies other than workers' compensation insurance: 
a.	Garage liability, $500,000.00/occurrence, $500,000.00/aggregate
b.	Workers' compensation, statutory.
Insurance certificates evidencing the required coverages shall be deposited with the city. Each of the insurance contracts described in the certificates shall contain a clause requiring ten-day notice of cancellation to the city prior to the cancellation of any insurance coverage. 
(3)	Hire and retain as valet parking attendants only personnel 18 years of age or older, with valid state driver's licenses and no more than six points on their driving record as a result of moving traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 144,  2, 5-16-2000) 
Sec. 78-143. - Attendant requirements. 
    The valet parking attendant shall: 
(1)	Be subject to all state and city traffic laws applicable to motor vehicles.
(2)	Be 18 years of age or older.
(3)	Possess a valid state driver's license with no more than six points on his driving record as a result of moving traffic violations. 
(4)	Not operate during those days and times of day nor operated upon those streets, alleys of other public ways, or places prohibited by regulations promulgated by the police chief. 
(5)	Present upon request an identification badge with a photograph of the attendant and the number of the valet parking service's license. 
(Ord. No. 144,  3, 5-16-2000) 
Sec. 78-144. - Use of public right-of-way. 
(a)	No valet parking service or attendant shall erect or maintain any form of shelter, key box sign or other facilities, in the public right-of-way for the use of attendants or patrons of the service unless duly licensed by the city. 
(b)	The valet parking service may use such portions of the public right-of-way as may be designated in the license issued by common council under the terms, conditions, and restrictions imposed by common council. 
(Ord. No. 144,  4, 5-16-2000) 
Sec. 78-145. - Parking areas. 
    All vehicles parked by a valet parking attendant shall be legally parked in conformance with city ordinances. No attendant shall park a vehicle in a street parking area. 
(Ord. No. 144,  5, 5-16-2000) 
Sec. 78-146. - Duties of the police chief. 
(a)	The police chief shall from time to time designate areas as pickup and dropoff points. All licensees shall stop only at such designated areas to pick up and drop off vehicles. 
(b)	The police chief shall from time to time set operating times for valet parking services that are most acceptable in terms of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)	The police chief shall make such other rules and regulations he deems necessary for the safety and efficient operation of valet parking services and for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)	The police chief shall cause the enforcement of this article, and may revoke a valet license for a violation of this article, rules, regulations or the terms, conditions or restrictions of the valet license. 
(e)	Any aggrieved person may appeal the actions of the police chief by a hearing before the mayor, upon written request detailing the action reviewable and the reason for such review and appeal. The mayor shall issue a recommendation to the common council for final action. 
(Ord. No. 144,  6, 5-16-2000) 
Sec. 78-147. - License. 
(a)	No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in the valet parking service business upon the streets, alleys or other public ways or places unless the owner holds a currently valid license for a valet parking service pursuant to this article. 
(b)	Application for valet parking service licenses under this article shall be made to the city clerk upon such forms prescribed by the city, with the accompanying licensee fee as established by resolution. 
(c)	The application shall be referred to the police chief, who shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based upon such investigation, the police chief shall recommend the common council to approve or deny the license application. In making his determination under this section, the police chief shall consider: 
(1)	The proposed location of the pickup and dropoff point of valet parking service or services; 
(2)	The traffic patterns in the area;
(3)	The availability of parking in the area;
(4)	The proposed parking area for motor vehicles parked by the valet parking service or services; 
(5)	The proposed location of signs; and
(6)	Whether such person has previously operated in this city or state or another city or state under a valet parking license or permit and has had such license or permit revoked or suspended; and the reasons therefor. 
(d)	The common council has sole authority to issue a license for valet parking.
(Ord. No. 144,  7, 5-16-2000) 
Secs. 78-148-78-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ROLLER SKATES, STREET SKATES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER BLADES, ETC. 

Sec. 78-171. - Intent and purpose. 
    This article is designed to define and regulate the use of roller skates, street skates, scooters, skate blades, roller blades, skateboards and other roller devices, upon public property and property open to the general public, to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and to provide penalties for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 150 (intro ), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 78-172. - Definitions. 
    Roller skates and street skates mean a set or series of small wheels on the bottom of a shoe or frame, or that would attach to a shoe or frame which are used for gliding on a hard surface such as a floor, sidewalk, parking lot, etc. 
    Scooter means a multiwheeled device designed to be ridden by a person standing thereon. 
    Skate blades and roller blades mean shoes with a row of wheels attached thereto, either permanently or temporarily affixed to a shoe or frame. 
    Skateboard means a board or flat piece of material consisting of metal, fiberglass, plastic, wood, or other material which has wheels affixed thereto, and is designed to be ridden by a person standing thereon. 
    To roller skate, for purposes of this article, means to skate on any type of roller skates, street skates, scooter, skate blades, roller blades, or skateboard. 
(Ord. No. 150,  (A), 7-9-2002) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 78-173. - Violations of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to roller skate, in violation of the following: 
(1)	Riding on sidewalks. Whenever any person is roller skating, upon a sidewalk or other paved surface intended for use by pedestrians, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall not approach, overtake or pass such pedestrian in a reckless or careless manner, and shall not pass such pedestrian, except in single file, if such person is roller skating with other skaters. 
(2)	Riding on certain devices or structures. It shall be unlawful to roller skate on any bench, table, planter, wall, retaining wall, or other device, or structure, which is not intended for pedestrian or vehicle traffic, or to jump or step on or off such devices or structures in the process of roller skating. 
(3)	Riding prohibited where posted. The police chief is hereby authorized, by traffic control order, to erect signs on any publicly owned parking area, street, sidewalk, parking structure, parking lot, or other publicly owned property prohibiting roller skating thereon. 
(4)	Reckless and/or dangerous roller skating. It shall be unlawful for any person to roller skate on any sidewalk or other paved surface intended for pedestrians in a reckless or careless manner, or in a manner which is likely to result in injury or harm to any person or property. 
(5)	Riding on private property without permission. It shall be unlawful for any person to roller skate on any private property without first obtaining and carrying on his person the written permission of the owner of such private property to allow such roller skating. Failure of a person who has been roller skating on private property to produce such written permission, upon the request of any police officer, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person is in violation of this section. 
(6)	Roller skating while attached to vehicles. No person shall roller skate while either the roller skates or the person is attached to any vehicle upon any street or highway or any area open to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 150,  (B), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 78-174. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who violates any provision or section of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction and responsible for a civil fine of not more than $100.00 and any reasonable court costs. 
(Ord. No. 150,  (C), 7-9-2002) 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 14; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; hydrant and department connections,  30-39; floods, ch. 34; historic preservation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; telecommunications, ch. 74. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the department of public works. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
(Ord. No. 111B, 7-8-2006) 
Sec. 82-2. - Cross connections. 
(a)	The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality R325.11401-R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. This section does not supersede the state of Michigan Plumbing Code, but is supplementary to it. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the department of public works to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the department of public works and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(c)	The representative of the department of public works shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)	The department of public works shall discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connections has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)	The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the State of Michigan Plumbing Code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE
FOR DRINKING 
(f)	All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted on an annual basis as required by the city and in accordance with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals that are approved and State of Michigan certified shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her testing. 
(g)	The "Cross Connection Control Plan" as prepared by Hydro Designs, Inc. for the City of Utica is hereby adopted by reference as the cross connection control plan for the city. Copies are on file with the city clerk's office. 
(h)	Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, or any written order of the department of public works, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 111A,  1-7, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 111B, 7-8-2006) 
Secs. 82-3-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 82-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    System means the water or sewer system. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 82-32. - Establishment of rates and charges. 
    All rates and charges for services rendered by the water and sewer system shall be established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 60,  9, 11-23-1962) 
Sec. 82-33. - Adjustment of rates. 
    The water and sewer rates shall be periodically adjusted by the superintendent of the department of public works by the percentage of any increase or decrease, rounded to the next highest whole percentage point, in the event water and sewer service rates charged to the city by the board of water/sewer commissioners of the City of Detroit. 
(Ord. No. 60B,  9(F), 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 82-34. - No free service. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(Ord. No. 60,  10, 11-23-1962) 
Sec. 82-35. - Billing. 
    All metered customers of the system will be billed quarterly and all bills must be paid within 30 days from the date on the bill, and ten percent will be added to the amount of the bill if not paid within 30 days from the date of the bill. Water shall be shut off if not paid within 90 days of the date due. Water so shut off shall not be turned on again until a turn-on charge in the amount established by resolution, plus all sums due and owing are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 60,  9, 11-23-1962; Ord. No. 60-69,  1(a), 4-23-1968) 
Sec. 82-36. - Enforcement. 
    The charges for water and sewer services which are under the provisions of section 21 of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121) are made a lien on all premises served thereby, unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the city official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on May 1 of each year, to the tax-assessing officer of the city, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected, and the lien thereof enforced. Provided, however, where notice is given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by section 21 (MCL 141.121), no further service shall be rendered such premises until a cash deposit in the amount established by resolution shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. 
(Ord. No. 60,  9, 11-23-1962; Ord. No. 60-69,  1, 4-23-1968) 
State law reference- Lien, MCL 141.121. 
Secs. 82-37-82-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Box (meter) means any approved box or vault for housing of water meters. 
    Consumer and customer mean the corporation, association, or individual being served by legally using water supplied by the city. 
    Consumer's installation means all pipes, valves, stops, plumbing and contrivances of every kind and nature used in connection with, or forming a part of, the consumer's installation for utilizing water for any purpose, connected directly or indirectly with the corporation stop at the main, whether such installation is owned outright or used under lease or otherwise, by the consumer. 
    Corporation stop means a valve which is inserted into the main for the connection of the water supply service pipes in sizes up to and including two inches in diameter. 
    Curb stop means a valve for insertion in the service pipes, in size of three-quarter inch to two inches, inclusive, in diameter, at or near the curbline. 
    Curb stop box means a box or metal housing which encloses, protects, and provides access to the curb stop. 
    Mains, municipal water, means the system of water pipes, valves, fittings and equipment use to distribute water throughout the area served by the municipal water system. Mains are located on public property or on private property over which easements have been provided. 
    Main (private) means any system of water pipes, valves, fittings, and equipment use to distribute water within the area served by the municipal water system but owned privately by a person or persons. 
    Plumber is licensed by the city in accordance with the city ordinances. 
    Premises means a property which cannot be completely divided in its present utilitarian condition through sale. That is: 
(1)	A building under one roof owned, leased, or occupied by one party as one business or residence; 
(2)	A combination of residential buildings, or of commercial buildings, leased or occupied by one party in one common enclosure; 
(3)	The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall; or
(4)	A building owned by one party having more than one internal division, such as apartments, offices, stores, etc., and which may have a common or separate entrance. 
    Service control valve means a valve for installation in water service pipes, located at or near the main. 
    Service control valve box means a box or metal housing which encloses, protects, and provides access to the service control valve. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Stop and waste valve means a valve installed at the termination of the water supply service pipe of three-quarter-inch and one-inch sizes, and at the beginning of the consumer's plumbing system. Gate type. 
    Tap means the drilling and threading of an opening in a main for insertion of a corporation stop. 
(Ord. No. 39(1), art. I, 7-12-1960) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 82-62. - Violations declared misdemeanor. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  301, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-63. - Withholding water from premises for violations. 
    A supply of water may be withheld from the premises when the ordinances of the city applying to water supply or rules and regulations of the common council have in any manner been violated. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  224, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-64. - Plumber to make connections. 
    No person shall make any attachment to or connection with the service pipes of the department unless registered as a master plumber with the department, or employed as a licensed journeyman plumber by a master plumber so registered. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  220, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-65. - Requirements for master plumbers. 
    Master plumbers must be residents of the state and at least 21 years of age. Master plumbers must be regularly educated artisans, masters of their trade. Master plumbers must have established places of business and proper signs thereon, or employed by business firms so established. Each master plumber must register with this department annually during the month of April, for which registration there is no charge, at the time he must present his state license and his board of health registration. No master plumber shall allow his name to be used by any other party, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of doing work or making the application of service connection. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  221, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-66. - Checkvalves and safety valves. 
    In private houses or buildings used for residence purposes only, it shall be of the option and risk of the owner whether he shall use checkvalves or not on feed pipes entering range boilers. A safety valve must be used wherever a checkvalve is set. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  238, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-67. - Use of fire hydrants; permit. 
(a)	No person shall, except authorized city personnel, use or take any water from any fire hydrant without having obtained a permit. The superintendent of the department of public works shall issue a permit upon the following conditions: 
(1)	The applicant files for a hydrant usage permit in such form and format as the superintendent may designate; 
(2)	Payment of a permit fee and deposit in the amount established by resolution;
(3)	Water usage shall be metered and the permittee shall pay the amount established by resolution for such usage; 
(4)	Permits shall expire after 30 days. Additional usage beyond 30 days may be authorized if processed as an original application with the full payment of new application fees and all charges due under the prior permit. 
(b)	The superintendent may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement this section. 
(c)	The permittee is responsible for any costs, expenses or damages beyond water usage, which amounts may be deducted from the security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 60B,  9(G), 11-14-1995) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Sec. 82-68. - Temporary emergency sprinkling restrictions. 
(a)	Whenever the mayor receives notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department in conjunction with the water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that the supply or pressure demand for water cannot be accommodated and general welfare is likely to be endangered, or conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city, the mayor shall determine that a state of emergency exists and prescribe the following emergency shall apply in the city for all properties connected to the city water system. In such event, sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall be only allowed for properties with even-numbered addresses on even-numbered dates within a month and for properties with odd-numbered addresses on odd-numbered dates within a month. 
(b)	Whenever the mayor receives notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that provisions in subsection (a) of this section are not sufficient, or conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city for all properties connected to the city water system, sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall not be allowed. 
(c)	The city and the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department shall, within 24 hours of notification, cause these regulations to be posted at the city office and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the stations with a normal operating range covering the city and may cause such announcement to be further declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become effective immediately after notice of enforcement of the ordinance as posted at the city offices. Upon notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that the emergency regulations are no longer necessary, the city shall cause a public announcement lifting the water restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 139,  1, 6-11-1996) 
Secs. 82-69-82-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 82-86. - Application for service connections. 
    Applications for the installation of service connections shall be made by a registered master plumber at the city after the owner of the property or his authorized agent has made application for water service and has paid necessary fees. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  201, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-87. - Water connections to new buildings or structures; testing. 
    Within the limits of the city, no person shall install or cause to be installed, in any new building or structure located within the limits of the city, any plumbing required to be tested with water supplied by the city unless an application for water connection from the city water lines to the service has been issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  202, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-88. - Information to be supplied to city. 
    Applicants must state, in detail, the purpose for which the supply is required, giving a legal description of the property to be served, side of street and between streets desired location of the service entry, other such information as required on printed forms supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  203, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-89. - Execution of applications for connections; expenses for incorrect installations. 
    Applicants will be held responsible for the proper execution of the applications for the water service and service connections. All expense incurred by reason of incorrect installation shall be charged to and paid for by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  204, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-90. - Service connections; tapping water main. 
    All service connections and pipes from the water mains to the lot line shall be furnished and installed by the department. This work shall consist of tapping the main; inserting the corporation cock with proper couplings, laying of service pipe and providing a curb stop with the approved type of stop box, and cover marked "water." Copper must be installed before the tap is made. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  205, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-91. - Installation of water service connection. 
    The water service connection shall consist of the tap to the water main, the extension of the water service pipe to the curb stop and curb stop box or service control value and service control value box/service control valve gate well, whichever is applicable. The water service connection shall be installed completely within the street right-of-way or public easement provided. The person for whose benefit the connection is made shall, on behalf of himself, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, hold the city harmless for any loss or damage that may in any way be occasioned by the making of such connection. 
(Ord. No. 60B,  9(B), 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 82-92. - Obstructions to service connection; charges. 
    No service connection will be installed when the section the service line installed by the plumber is in the line with the driveway, tree, fire hydrant, catchbasin or other obstruction. The charge for each such water connection as established by the department as well as any other fees must be paid at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  206, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-93. - Unusual circumstances; special permission. 
    In all cases where any unusual circumstances, relating to services or meters, make it necessary to deviate from the regular rules, special permission must be received from the department. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  207, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-94. - Specifications for new service pipe connections. 
    All new service pipes connecting with the distribution main shall be of lead, copper, or cast iron or such other material as has been approved by the department, and shall have an inside diameter of at least three-quarter of an inch. In no case will use of galvanized or wrought iron pipe be permitted. All risers under the sink and meter boxes must be lead or copper pipe. Galvanized pipe will not be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  208, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-95. - Copper pipe specifications. 
    The copper pipe used must be extra heavy, soft and meet the following specifications: The weight of copper pipe shall not vary more than five percent from the weight specified. All thickness and inside diameter shall not vary more than plus or minus 0.003 inches from the specifications given in this section. Copper tubes shall be seamless drawn or rolled kneeled for flanging purposes, and contain 99.94 percent pure copper, Type K. Joints between lengths of copper tubing shall be well-made, watertight, and develop the full strength of the copper tube. Joints between lengths of copper tubing shall be of the type ordinarily accepted by the department for underground work. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  209, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-96. - Curb valves. 
    Curb valves shall be used on all lead and copper connections up to and including two inches in diameter and must be the inverted type, round way, T-handled stopcock. All control valves on cast iron service connections, three inches or larger in diameter, shall be of the left hand key type, nonrising, stem with a two-inch square head to be constructed with a cast body of all brass. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  210, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-97. - Depth and installation of service pipes. 
    The top of all service pipes shall be at least five feet below the pavement grade and on paved streets where the final grades are not known, six feet below the surface of the earth. The five-foot depth applies to services extending into a building where there is no basement and where a meter pit is used. All service connections must be installed at least three feet from the existing gas service. Before installing water connection, the plumber must check the location of gas service. Service pipes must be uniform in size in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  211, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-98. - Extension of service pipes to cellar or basement. 
    When premises have a cellar or basement, service pipes must be extended into the cellar or basement, and no branches taken therefrom except in the cellar or basement, and on the outlet side of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  212, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-99. - Installations vulnerable to frost or freezing. 
    It is expressly forbidden for any plumber to lay a service pipe inside of a building, along the outside wall, or in any position where there is danger of frost; also, to make new connections, or to install any new attachments or fixtures to old connections that shall require a running stream to prevent freezing. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  213, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-100. - Separate building connections. 
    On future installations, there shall be individual services; provided the common council may permit one service for conditions of use, occupancy, or ownership so warrant. Each building must have a separate connection with the street main, except in cases where there is more than one building located on a single lot or registered unit of land or on a group of adjacent land units used as a single piece of property such as a factory site, provided such lot or lots or parcels of land are held in undivided ownership. In such cases, the several buildings so located may be served by one connection with the main provided the service is of sufficient size to meet all requirements. Where two or more buildings are on one service and ownership is subsequently divided, individual service must then be installed. Unusual conditions not specifically contemplated here shall be reported to the department for disposition and the ruling of the department thereon shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  214, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-101. - Manifold services. 
    Manifold services will not be permitted on public property but may be installed on private property in basements or meter pits. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  215, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-102. - Permission required to cross street or alleys. 
    Water lines shall not be allowed to cross public streets or alleys without permission of the department and the municipal agency governing the roads or alleys. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  216, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-103. - Properties supplied by more than one service main. 
    Where properties are supplied by more than one service from different mains and connected inside the property, all services so connected must be provided with a meter and checkvalve properly maintained to prevent cross feeds, with waste crock on bottom of pipe, each side of check so as to drain pipes and meters. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  217, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-104. - Disconnection of unused service connections. 
    When a new service line is required, the owner of the property must have all unused service connections entering the property disconnected at the street main. When a new building is erected upon a property and existing service line is used, all unused lines entering such property must be disconnected at the street main. Plumbers will therefore, acquaint themselves as to the existence of old service lines, which information can be obtained from the records of the department. Charges for disconnecting all services except those in the same trench as the new service and of the screw type, shall be borne by the parties applying for the disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  218, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-105. - Cross connection prohibited; color coding of water pipes. 
(a)	Any connection between water pipes receiving their supply from the city mains or pipes carrying water from underground storage tanks or other sources is expressly forbidden. 
(b)	When properties with water from other sources than city mains is used, water service must be equipped with a physical break or air gap with test cocks on the meter in accordance with the state and county health department regulations. 
(c)	Systems using water from any other source than city mains must paint or color-code all pipes carrying the city water in light blue and all lines carrying water from the other sources shall be painted brown except in plants where color-codes have already been adopted, and these codes provide different colors for water and other water. Such codes will be accepted providing charts depicting the various colors are prominently displayed in the plant. Failure to comply with section 82-104 shall deem to be sufficient cause to discontinue the water supply to any plant or district where the violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  219, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-106. - Inspection of underground service piping. 
    All underground service piping must be inspected by the department before it is covered. Twenty-four hours' notice is required for such inspection. Any part of the plumber's work which does not comply with the regulations and requirements of the department will be rejected and must be changed to meet these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  222, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-107. - Refusal to accept incorrect installations. 
    The department may refuse to accept applications for installation of service connection from any plumber whose outstanding work has not been installed according to the rules and regulations of the department. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  223, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-108. - City to tap or connect mains, insert service cock. 
    No persons shall tap or connect any water main or insert a service cock within except the employees of the department duly authorized to do so. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  225, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-109. - Temporary taps. 
    Applications for temporary taps must state the length of time for which the connection is to be used. If a temporary tap is to be used for a longer period than originally requested, an extension of time must be obtained from the office of the department. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  226, 7-12-1960) 
Secs. 82-110-82-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS 

Sec. 82-126. - Required. 
(a)	All connections with the water mains must be prepared for the use of water through a meter. 
(b)	The department reserves the right to read, service and install meters and their appurtenances including remote meter installations. 
(c)	The department must be allowed an entrance to the property including the building in which a water meter is installed to accomplish the activity set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)	Upon failure to comply with the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the owner or occupier of the premises, after a ten-day registered notice, shall be subject to section 82-63 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  227, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-127. - Meters for multiple units. 
    A block of store buildings, a terrace building, or apartment house may have a single meter for all or separate meters for each unit, depending upon the arrangement of the service line. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  228, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-128. - Water meters. 
(a)	The department will furnish meters as follows:
(1)	Single dwellings: Five-eighth inch or three-quarter inch.
(2)	Two-family apartments: Three-quarter inch or one inch.
(3)	Four-family or larger apartments: One inch.
(b)	When larger meters are needed, the applicant will be required to pay the difference between the price of the meter furnished by the department in the place of the meter required. 
(c)	All properties under a combination of residential and commercial shall be classified as commercial. 
(d)	In all residential, combination residential-commercial properties and apartment hotels, where meter requires three inches or larger, it must be of the compound type. 
(e)	The department will furnish only one meter for a service. All meters in addition to the one paid for by the board must be paid for by the owner. Should more than one meter be placed in a single line, an agreement must be signed by the property owner, protecting the city in treating the property in its entirety should enforcement of the rules and regulations necessitate a shutoff. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  229, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-129. - Purchase of meter by customers outside city limits. 
    Outside the city limits where the city collects from individual suburban customers if such exist, meters must be purchased by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  230, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-130. - Meter required before occupancy. 
    The meter must be set before the property becomes occupied on new homes. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  231, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-131. - Additional trip charges. 
    When, due to faulty work, it is necessary to make more than one trip to set a meter, a charge in an amount established by resolution will be made for each additional trip. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  232, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-132. - Interference or removal of meter; permission required. 
    All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a water meter from any service connection without first receiving permission from the department. Whenever the meter is removed by permission, it must be immediately returned to the department under penalty of having the water shut off and/or his plumber's registration revoked. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  233, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-133. - Access to meters. 
    Meters and their valves will not be allowed in closets or departments that are kept locked, in coal bins, under buildings, porches, or any location where there is difficulty of access. Meters and their valves will be allowed in lavatories, and under show windows only as follows: A meter may be set in a lavatory of a gas station provided meter is set in a clean, sanitary location, easily accessible for removal or reading. The meter may be set under show windows only when set within eight inches off the floor, at least 24 inches wide and 24 inches high with the couplings at least four inches above the floor with 18 inches clearance above the meter coupling to allow for meter reading. The meter shall be set opposite the center of the doorway. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  234, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-134. - Conditions for setting meter. 
    All meters shall be set horizontally and dry, clean, sanitary, perfectly accessible with valves on both sides and where a small leak in the flowage of water will do no damage. A shutoff will not be accepted in place of a valve. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  235, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-135. - Services requiring "T" valve. 
    All meters 11/2 inches or larger must have a "T" between the meter and outlet valves to be used for testing the meter without its removal. The size of the side opening of the "T" shall be 11/2 inches, for 11/2 service, and two inches for all service pipe up to four inches and three inches for larger service pipe, according to plans which can be had upon application to the city. Side opening of such "T" shall be plugged. Any service larger than 11/2 inches must be equipped with a valved bypass. The department shall install all meters after preparation for their reception has been made by the plumber except detector checks used on file lines, in which case the plumber will have to call for detector checks and install it on their line. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  236, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-136. - Setting meters below grade. 
    Meters can be set below grade line, in a brick or cement wall, cellar or basement, under kitchen sink or on the first floor. A run, not to exceed 130 feet, will be allowed between the lot line nearest the street main and the meter. 
(Ord. No. 39(1),  237, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-137. - Lawn sprinkler cleaning or auto washing connections. 
(a)	In this section:
    Area maintenance means uses for water outside of a building or structure that: 
(1)	Does not deposit such water into a sanitary system by other than accidental absorption;
(2)	Is generally and traditionally associated with uses such as:
a.	Watering lawns;
b.	Cleaning outside structures;
c.	Washing automobiles and other personal property; and
(3)	Is used solely upon and at the property where the area maintenance meter is located.
(b)	The owner of any premises using metered water may, upon application, preinspection, signing an agreement as provided for in this section, obtaining a permit, and paying such fees as required by resolution, install a separate water meter for metering the use of water for area maintenance. 
(c)	The cost of the area maintenance meter and its installation shall be paid by the property owner. The area maintenance meter shall be connected on the water line coming into the building from the public water supply immediately before the regular meter for the premises. Only lines approved by the department shall be connected at the area maintenance meter. There shall be no connections, or use of water directly from the area maintenance meter, for other than approved outdoor area maintenance. 
(d)	An owner shall enter into an agreement with the city before receiving a permit for an area maintenance meter. The agreement shall conform to Exhibit A to Ordinance No. 113A, or as it is modified by resolution. Proof of ownership of the subject property shall be required prior to any approval. The superintendent of the department, building inspector or city clerk is authorized to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. 
(e)	The charge for water billed through an area maintenance meter shall be the same rate charged for all water usage in the city, however, no sewer charge or sewer surcharge shall be added thereto. Charges shall be billed and paid semiannually. A penalty of ten percent shall be added to any bill not paid within 30 days. Charges shall constitute a lien upon the property as provided in this article. 
(f)	The department and the building department shall, at any reasonable hour, have the right to enter any building wherein there is an area maintenance meter to inspect the meter and piping system to see that there are no violations respecting the area maintenance meter. The refusal of entry, upon request, shall be unlawful. 
(g)	A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Upon there appearing to be a violation of the provisions of this section, the city may, at its option, do any or all of the following: 
(1)	Disconnect the area maintenance meter;
(2)	Suspend water service to the premises;
(3)	Add the sewer charge and, if applicable, the surcharge for water used by the area maintenance meter; 
(4)	Institute court proceedings;
(5)	Assess actual costs necessary to enforce this section, including legal fees associated with court action. 
(Ord. No. 113A,  1-6, 11-14-1995) 
Secs. 82-138-82-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewerage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any diameter. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface water, and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying a sewage. 
    Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the department or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  101-119, 7-12-1960) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 82-162. - Violations. 
(a)	Any person, firm, corporation or other organization which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Any person, firm, corporation or other organization which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be responsible to the city for all costs, expenses or other damages occasioned by such conduct. Such liability may be enforced in addition to any criminal penalty by an appropriate civil action. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  1101, 7-12-1960; Ord. No. 39-3, 3-18-1980) 
Sec. 82-163. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  601, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-164. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)	Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)	The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose situated with the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  201-204, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-165. - Filling of septic tanks. 
    All septic tanks within the city which cease to be used by the premises shall be filled with a suitable material determined by the building inspector. Property owners of the premises having unused septic tanks as of November 11, 1975, shall be given a notice by the building inspector that they shall have 90 days from the date of such notice to comply with the provisions of this article. Applicants for sewer taps be advised that upon completion of the connection to the sanitary sewer shall have 30 days to comply with the requirement of filling their unused septic tanks. 
(Ord. No. 101,  1-3, 11-11-1975) 
Sec. 82-166. - Damaging or tampering sewage works. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  501, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-167. - Registration and licensing of persons installing or repairing sewer system. 
(a)	No person shall lay, alter, or repair any house drain or sewer work, or make any connections whatever with any sewer or house or building belonging to the sanitary sewer system, or do any kind of work connected with the laying of house drains or house sewers or making any repairs, additions or alterations of any drain or sewer connected, or designed to be connected with the sanitary sewer system, unless regularly registered by the city. Any person doing such work without such registration shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to penalties as provided in this article. 
(b)	Any person desiring to do business as a sewer builder and to construct house drains connecting with the sewer system of the city shall file in the office of the city clerk a petition giving the name of the individual, firm or corporation, together with his place of business and such other information as may be required by the city and asking to be registered by the city clerk as a sewer builder. Such petition must show that such person is experienced in his trade and willing to be governed in all respects by the rules and regulations which are or may be adopted by the common council. Each applicant shall at the time of making his application pay an annual registration fee established by resolution and the application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that if licensed he will indemnify and save harmless the city from all accidents and damages caused by any negligence in protecting his work, or by any unfaithful, imperfect, inadequate, careless or unskilled work done by him, and that he will also promptly and at a proper time replace and restore sidewalk, pavement or street surface or any opening he may have made to as good a state and condition as he found previous to opening the sidewalk, pavement or street surface, and keep and maintain the sidewalk, pavement or street surface in good order to the satisfaction of the municipal authority having jurisdiction for the period of one year next thereafter. On receiving his license, the city clerk shall make a record thereof and of the actual place of business, the name under which the business is transacted, and the licensee shall immediately notify the city clerk of any change in either thereafter. No license shall be granted for more than. one year and all licenses shall be granted to expire on May 1 next succeeding their issue. The contractor shall provide bond as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  1001, 1002, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-168. - Sewer taps and permits. 
(a)	The builder will be held responsible and shall take steps necessary to prevent sand, mud, and water from entering the sanitary sewer. A sewer tapping permit will be issued for each house at the time the building permit is issued. At this time, a deposit in the amount established by resolution will be made. The deposit will be held in escrow by the city for one year or until such time as the city engineer and the superintendent are satisfied that the sewers are functioning properly. 
(b)	If the sewer in the street has to be cleaned due to sand and debris entering the sewer, it will be cleaned and amount of cleaning deducted on a pro rata basis from the escrowed monies of all houses involved. If a builder takes out five or more permits in the block, the deposit will be reduced in the amount established by resolution. The inspection fee remains the same. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  801, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-169. - Sewer tap charge. 
    No tap (sewer connection) charges except for inspection shall be made when sewer risers and sewer leads are installed by the property owner at the property owner's cost or when sewer risers and sewer leads are installed by the city and the cost has been included in a special assessment against the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 60B,  9(D), 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 82-170. - Roof water and surface water drainage. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, builder or contractor to construct or permit to be constructed, or permit the continuation of use of any drain for roof water or surface water in such a manner that roof water or surface water will drain into the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(b)	The city engineer shall, within 30 days after November 6, 1951, furnish the city clerk with a list of any and all locations within the city where a violation of the provisions of this section occur. The city clerk shall immediately notify each person violating this section, by depositing a notice regarding such violation in the United States Mail, registered, return receipt requested, and such notice shall advise of the mailing of such notice, then that person will be prosecuted for violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 22,  A, B, 11-6-1951) 
Secs. 82-171-82-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. (Back)
Sec. 82-186. - Permit. 
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)	There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1)	For residential and commercial service; and
(2)	For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as established by resolution for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and a fee as established by resolution for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  301, 302, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-187. - Responsibility for costs and expenses. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  303, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-188. - Separate building sewers. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  304, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-189. - Old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  305, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-190. - Specifications. 
    The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, slip seal type vitrified clay sewer pipe, or other suitable material approved by the city. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within five feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the city where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  306, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-191. - Size and slope. 
    The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city, but in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  307, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-192. - Elevation. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  308, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-193. - Low drains. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  309, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-194. - Trench work; specifications. 
    All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification C-12-19 except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(Ord. No. 39(2),  310, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-195. - Joints and connections. 
(a)	All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, Federal Specification 00-L-156, not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish, or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and approved. 
(b)	All joints in vitrified clay pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-poured jointing material or cement mortar as specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)	Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved material. 
(d)	Cement joints wall be made by packing a closely twisted jute or oakum gasket, or suitable size to fill partly the annular space between the pipes. The remaining space shall be filled and firmly compacted with mortar composed of one part Portland cement and three parts mortar sand. The material shall be mixed dry; only sufficient water shall be added to make the mixture workable. Mortar which has begun to set shall not be used or retempered. Lime putty or hydrated lime may be substituted to the extent of not more than 25 percent of the volume of the Portland cement that may be added. 
(e)	Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the city.
(Ord. No. 39(3),  311, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-196. - Connection to building sewer. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is less than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A saddle or 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 39(3),  312, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-197. - Notification for inspection; supervision of connection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city 24 hours prior to the time inspection is required and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 39(3),  313, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-198. - Barricading and lighting of excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city or other municipal authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 39(3),  314, 7-12-1960) 
Secs. 82-199-82-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOUSE LEADS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 82-216. - Plugging of laterals. 
    The sewer contractor shall plug all laterals from the sewer with a solid disc cemented into the end of the pipe. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  901, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-217. - Plugging of house lead; connection of weep tile or sump pump to sewer prohibited. 
    The house lead when laid to the house shall be plugged with a solid disc cemented in. This plug shall not be removed until such time as the cast iron is installed. The openings in the cast iron house lead shall be plugged with a metal plug, either a cast iron plug or a galvanized iron disc and cemented with mastic to prevent water from entering sewer. Weep tile shall be connected to an internal or external sump and discharged by adequate piping or tubing to a ditch or storm sewer. Neither weep tiles nor sump pumps shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. Sump pumps shall not be discharged into a sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  902, 7-12-1960; Ord. No. 39-3, 3-18-1980) 
Sec. 82-218. - Notification prior to connection of building sewer and weep tile. 
    The builder shall notify the city at least 24 hours prior to connection of the building sewer and again 24 hours before connection of the weep tile. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  903, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-219. - Requirements to pass inspection. 
    Requirements to pass inspection, as provided in this article, are as follows: Immediately prior to calling for inspection of not more than two days prior thereto, the trench leading to the sanitary sewer must have been properly excavated to the depth and grade, and be in readiness for laying the sewer service line in the making of connection to the sanitary sewer. Between that time the trench is open, it will be the building contractor's responsibility to maintain in proper position the plug at the end of the pipe leading to the lot line from the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  904, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-220. - Issuance of permit; approval of service line and connection; backfilling. 
    When the city shall have found all conditions to exist as required by this article, the city shall issue to the building contractor the permit to lay the service line to make the connection with the sanitary sewer, and to backfill all basement walls, footings or foundations to grade so that all rainwaters will flow away from the house or building. After such service line has been laid, and the connection made to the sanitary sewer, and before the service line and connection are covered, the approval of the city shall be required before the trench and the service line shall be backfilled. The city shall have the full right and the authority to require such changes and modifications to the laying of such service line and/or its connection to the sanitary sewer as are in accordance with safe practice and the provisions of any county or state sanitary regulations or laws relating thereto. Upon such approval being obtained, the building contractor shall, within 24 hours thereafter, backfill the trench containing service line connection to the sanitary sewer, providing sufficient backfill then and thereafter to maintain a grade over the trench, not lower than the proper grade of the lot at the sidelines of the trench. The cost of the two inspections provided for are included in the fee provided in section 82-168, but further additional inspection shall be at the rate established by resolution, which sum or sums shall be paid to the city clerk before such additional inspection is made. At the time of the connection of this service line to the sanitary sewer, the contractor will effectively and permanently plug such sewer connection; including plugging of outlet from perimeter tiles and maintain such plugs or plug until the rough carpentry of the house or building has been substantially completed, and the roof is in place and fully completed. At such time, all such plugs may be removed by the building contractor upon the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  905, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-221. - Other drainage. 
    Up to the time the service connection is made to the sanitary sewer, as provided here and after, the building contractor shall so conduct his operations that all drainage required in the basement excavation, inside and outside, and all drainage of other sorts required as a result of building operations must have been effected and realized by some other means other than by use of the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  906, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-222. - Pumping of accumulated water. 
    In the digging of each and every basement excavation, the building contractor shall provide a sump toward which the entire excavation shall be sloped, and from which accumulated water may be pumped. The building contractor shall provide in each building area one or more pumps of sufficient capacity to pump and remove such accumulated water, and the building contractor shall pump and remove such accumulated water into the roadside ditches or drainage ditches existing in the area. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  907, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-223. - Grade and slope around houses and buildings during building operations. 
    During all building operations, and after backfill and after sanitary sewer connection has been made, the building contractor and/or owner shall maintain a grade away from each house or building so that all surface water and rainwaters shall flow away from the house or building. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  908, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-224. - Gutters and downspouts. 
    In all houses or buildings the design of which provides for eave gutters and downspouts, all such downspouts shall be connected to the storm sewers, if available, or shall be fitted with elbows and conductor pipe not less than 16 inches from the elbow, and in such cases, the building contractor shall provide concrete splashblocks at the time such downspouts are installed, which shall carry the water a minimum of four feet away from the basement wall to a point where surface drainage will carry the water away from the house. Depositing of the roof waters, by the use of gutters and downspouts, upon the graded side of the house or building within four feet of the house or building or by any other means allowing roof waters to enter the sanitary sewer system, is hereby specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  909, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-225. - Maintenance of slope or grade. 
    After occupancy of any house or building has been granted, where such house or building is connected to sanitary sewer, the owner thereof shall be responsible for maintaining such slope or grade away from the house or building so that all surface water will flow away from the house or building, and shall maintain his roof conductors, downspouts and splashblocks in such a manner as will prevent surface water or roof water from infiltrating around the basement wall or foundation footings as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  910, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-226. - Maintenance of house lead. 
    The owner is responsible for maintaining the house lead up to the municipal sewer main in the street. If any excavation is necessary in the public right-of-way, permission must be obtained from the public authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  911, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-227. - Demonstration of clear sewer lead. 
    Prior to final building inspection and issuance of occupancy permit, the building contractor or owner may be required to show the superintendent that the sewer lead is clear from the house to the main. 
(Ord. No. 39(9),  912, 7-12-1960) 
Secs. 82-228-82-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 82-246. - City of Detroit sewage treatment ordinance. 
    The provisions of Ord. No. 125B are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 125B, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 82-247. - Stormwater discharge prohibition. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Yard drains, patio drains, catchbasins, downspouts, weep tile, perimeter drains or any other structure used for the collection and conveyance of stormwater shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer connected directly or indirectly to the city system. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  401, 7-12-1960; Ord. No. 39-11, 9-10-1968) 
Sec. 82-248. - Discharge of stormwater and unpolluted drainage in designated storm sewers; industrial cooling water and process waters. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  402, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-249. - Prohibited discharges. 
    Except as provided in this article, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 100 degrees Fahrenheit.
(2)	Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil, or grease. 
(3)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(5)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)	Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 39(4),  403, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-250. - Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. 
(a)	Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)	Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. Grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  404, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-251. - Maintenance of interceptors. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  405, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-252. - Discharge limitations; plans and specifications of preliminary treatment facilities. 
(a)	The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (ii) containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (iii) containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 82-249, or (iv) having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. Where necessary, in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (ii) reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 82-249, or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city and of the state water resources commission and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. 
(b)	Such plans and specifications shall be submitted for approval by the city and the state water resources commission within 30 days after notification of the necessity thereof. In the event that satisfactory plans and specifications are not furnished, or if furnished and construction does not proceed according to agreed upon construction time, the city shall, upon 30-day notice in writing to such person admitting wastes above the approved standards, terminate sewer service to such owner. All costs of termination of service and resumption, after completion of required construction, shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  406, 7-12-1960; Ord. No. 64,  1, 10-20-1964) 
Sec. 82-253. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. In the event such preliminary treatment facilities are not maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, the city may, after notice as provided for in section 82-252, terminate sewer service until proper operation is provided for. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  407, 7-12-1960; Ord. No. 64,  2, 10-20-1964) 
Sec. 82-254. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the city, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  408, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-255. - Measurements, tests, and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in section 82-249 and section 82-252 shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 82-254, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  409, 7-12-1960) 
Sec. 82-256. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 39(4),  410, 7-12-1960) 
Chapter 86 - VEGETATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; taking or injuring fruit, shade, ornamental trees, shrubs, vines, etc.,  46-89; parks and recreation, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; plant materials, app. A,  1422; zoning, app. A. (Back)
Sec. 86-1. - Height restrictions for grass, weeds and lawns. 
(a)	In this section:
    Environmental significant means trees, shrubs or bushes that: 
(1)	Would likely be preserved if the vacant land became occupied land; or
(2)	Lends a present natural and aesthetic beauty to vacant land consistent with the trees, shrubs or bushes in the area. 
    Grass means any of the various green plants with long, narrow, bladelike leaves normally or traditionally associated with: 
(1)	Cultivation for lawns;
(2)	The grazing of animals; or
(3)	The production of seedlike fruit, such as wheat, rye, barley or oats.
The term "grass" does not include ornamental shrubs, trees or bushes located as part of a landscape layout or design for occupied land. The term "grass" does not include plants, shrubs, trees or bushes on vacant land that have environmental significance. 
    Lawn means grass, ground cover, or any combination thereof used for land cover. 
    Noxious weeds shall include Canada Thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary Alyaum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elation 1.) and poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicondendron vernix) or other plant which in the opinion of the council is regarded as a common nuisance. 
    Occupied land means a parcel of real property, a portion of which has been put to a land use including, but not limited to, uses defined in the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
    Owner means any person having an interest in real property and includes interests being equitable, a leasehold, or by tenancy. The obligations of owners are joint and several. Any person or persons listed upon the tax rolls as owner or agent is presumed to have an interest in such property. 
    Vacant land means a parcel of real property other than occupied land. 
    Weed means any of the various undesired, uncultivated plant (generally green in color) that grows in profusion so as to crowd out a desired crop or disfigure a lawn. Weed includes the term "noxious weeds." 
(b)	It shall be the duty of all owners and occupants of occupied land to cut all grass, weeds or lawns as follows: 
(1)	All residential type properties (R1A, R1B, R1P, R10, R2, R3) when exceeding eight inches, to a height less than eight inches. 
(2)	All other property when exceeding 12 inches, to a height less than 12 inches.
(c)	It shall be the duty of all owners of vacant land to cut all grass, weeds or lawns as follows: 
(1)	All residential type properties (R1A, R1B, R1P, R10, R2, R3) when exceeding eight inches, to a height less than eight inches. 
(2)	All other property when exceeding 12 inches, to a height less than 12 inches.
(d)	It shall be the duty of all persons to destroy all noxious weeds located on property that they own or occupy. 
(e)	In case any owner, agent or occupant shall refuse or neglect to cut any grass, weeds or lawn to comply with this section, the superintendent of the department of public works, or his designate, may enter upon such land to cut such grass, weeds or lawn to comply with this section. 
(f)	Entry upon land as provided in subsection (e) of this section is considered a service to the property and shall result in the imposition of a lien upon the land, assessed forthwith and collected with the next tax payment or collection. The assessment shall be based upon the time necessary to cut the grass, weeds or lawn, including travel time, and shall be as established by resolution. 
(g)	A variance to this section may be granted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
(h)	This section does not apply to land that is, at the time of enforcement of this section, being used for the annual growing and harvesting of agriculture products. 
(Ord. No. 30,  2, 3-13-1958; Ord. No. 112,  1-4, 7-14-1981) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING 
ZONING ORDINANCE 
CITY OF UTICA, MACOMB COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
TITLE 
    An ordinance to regulate the use of land, natural resources and structures; to regulate structures designed for trade, industry, residence or other specified uses; to regulate and limit the height, the area, the size and location of structures hereinafter to be erected or altered; to regulate and determine the area of yards, court, or other open spaces; to control congestion in the streets, to secure safety in case of fire, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings and for such purposes to divide the city into districts and zones; to establish appeal procedures; to provide for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. 
PREAMBLE 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by Public Act 207, PA 1921 as amended (MCL 125.581 et seq), of the State of Michigan and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, comforts, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Utica by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial, and other use areas, by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing over-crowding; and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation, and other public requirements; and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
  
ENACTING CLAUSE 
NOW THEREFORE THE CITY OF UTICA ORDAINS: 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the city's zoning ordinance being Ord. No. 129. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citations to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance rezoning property or amending the zoning map or otherwise relating to zoning saved from repeal,  1-11(a)(16); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; massage parlors,  14-101 et seq.; distance of mechanical amusement devices from schools,  14-277; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; historic preservation, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66; telecommunications, ch. 74; vegetation, ch. 86. (Back)
State Law reference- Zoning, MCL 125.581 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I - TITLE 

Section 100. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Utica Zoning Ordinance," and will be referred to herein as "this ordinance." 
ARTICLE II - CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 200. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this ordinance: 
1.	The particular shall control the general.
2.	In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
3.	The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
4.	Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural and the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
5.	A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
6.	The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
7.	The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
8.	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either ...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.	"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
b.	"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.	"Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
9.	Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
Section 201. - Definitions. 
    Abutting. Having a common border with or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley, or easement. 
    Accessory building. A building or portion of a building subordinate to a main building on the same lot occupied by, or denoted exclusively to, an accessory use. 
    Accessory use, or accessory. A structure or use that: a) is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal building or use; b) is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use; c) is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served; d) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants, business or industry in the principal building or principal use served; and, e) is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served. 
    Addition. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. 
    Administrative review. A form of site plan review that is conducted by the building official for the purpose of reviewing an addition to an existing development for any public or private project that does not necessarily need a formal review before the city's planning commission based on and subject to the criteria found in section 1800.1.c. of this ordinance. 
    Adult entertainment uses. Any use of land, whether vacant or combined with structures or vehicles thereon by which said property is devoted to displaying or exhibiting material for entertainment, a significant portion of which includes matter or actions depicting, describing or presenting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
1.	Adult entertainment use shall include, but not be limited to the following:
a.	An adult motion picture theater is an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material which has a significant portion of any motion picture or other display depicting or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
b.	An adult mini-motion picture theater is an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material which has as a significant portion of any motion picture or other display depicting, describing or presenting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
c.	An adult motion picture arcade is any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically or mechanically controlled stall or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where a significant portion of images so displayed depict, describe or relate to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
d.	An adult bookstore is a use which has a display containing books, magazines, periodicals, slides, pictures, cassettes, or other printed or recorded material which has as a significant portion of its content or exhibit matter or actions depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or an establishment with a (substantial) segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
e.	An adult cabaret is a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, "go-go" dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where a significant portion of such performances show, depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
f.	An adult motel is a motel wherein matter, actions or other displays are presented which contain a significant portion depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
g.	An adult massage parlor is any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatment or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities" or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes "specified anatomical areas." 
h.	An adult model studio is any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display "specified anatomical areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such considerations or gratuities, except that this provision shall not apply to any bona fide art school or similar education institution. 
i.	An adult sexual encounter center is any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in "specified sexual activities" or exposing "specified anatomical areas." 
2.	Significant portion. As used in the above definitions, the phrase "significant portion" shall mean and include: 
a.	Any one or more portions of the display having continuous duration in excess of five minutes; and/or, 
b.	The aggregate of portions of the display having a duration equal to ten percent or more of the display. 
c.	The aggregate of portions of the collection of any materials or exhibits composing the display equal to ten percent or more of the display. 
3.	Display. As used in the above definitions, the word display shall mean any single motion or still picture, presentation, dance or exhibition, live act, or collection of visual materials such as books, films, slides, periodicals, pictures, video cassettes or any other printed or recorded matter which is open to view or available to the general population whether for free or otherwise. 
4.	"Specified sexual activities."
a.	Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
b.	Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
c.	Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
5.	"Specified anatomical areas."
a.	Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, pubic region; 2) buttock; and, 3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and, 
b.	Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Adult foster care facility. A governmental or nongovernmental establishment subject to state licensing procedures as may be required having as its principal function the receiving of adults for foster care. It includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults who are aged, emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. Adult foster care facility does not include a nursing home, a home for the aged, an alcohol or a substance abuse rehabilitation center, a hospital for the mentally ill, or similar facilities. 
    Adult foster care family home. A private residence with the approved capacity to receive not more than six adults who shall be provided foster care for five or more days per week, and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
    Adult foster care large group home. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive at least 13, but not more than 20 adults who shall be provided foster care. 
    Adult foster care small group home. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity of not more than 12 adults who shall be provided foster care. 
    Aged. An adult whose chronological age is 60 years of age or older, or whose biological age, as determined by a physician, is 60 years of age or older. 
    Alley. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartments. A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place or residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Arcade. Arcade shall mean any place of business or establishment whose principal use shall be the housing of mechanical amusement devices. Mechanical amusement devices include any machine, which, upon the insertion of any coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or which, for a fee paid to the operator or owner, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, skillball, mechanical grab machines, television display devices or machines and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto whether operated principally by mechanical means or electrical means or a combination thereof, under whatever name they may be indicated or called. 
    Architectural features. Architectural features of a building or a structure shall include cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments. 
    Automobile repair. The general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair; overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast inn. A use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for payment. 
    Block. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river, or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the municipality. 
    Boarding house. A dwelling where meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation and where one or more rooms are occupied by persons by prearrangement for definite periods of not less than one month. A boarding house is to be distinguished from a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast establishment, or a convalescent, nursing, or group home. 
    Buffer area. An area, usually landscaped, intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 
    Building. A structure erected on site, a mobile home or mobile structure, a premanufactured or precut structure, above or below ground, having a roof or walls and built for, or capable of, the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    Building height. The vertical distance from grade to the top of parapet wall in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line for mansard roofs, to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. The height of detached accessory structures shall be the distance from grade to the top of a parapet wall in the case of a flat roof, and to the peak of the roof for mansard, gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 
    Building line. A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this ordinance, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. (See diagram.) 
    Building official (inspector). The administrative official designated by the city manager with the responsibilities of administering and enforcing this ordinance. 
    Carwash. An area of land and/or structure with machine or hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles. 
    Clinic. An establishment where human or animal patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examinations and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, veterinarians, or similar professionals. 
    Club, private facilities. Any nonprofit facility established to provide recreational or social activities for the sale and exclusive use of its members, their families, and guests. 
    Cluster development. A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific locations on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
    Commercial vehicle. A vehicle in excess of three-quarter ton capacity with a commercial registration used for commercial purposes. For purposes of this ordinance, commercial vehicles shall include trucks, buses, truck-tractors with or without semi-trailers, and similar vehicles. 
    Convalescent or nursing home. A structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing, and medical care. 
    Day care center. A school, kindergarten, or adult care facility wherein day care, or day care and education is provided. 
    Development. The construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District. A portion of the incorporated area of the municipality within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Dwelling unit. A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having cooking and sanitary facilities. 
    Dwelling unit, manufactured. Is a dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled, or finished off the premises upon which it is intended to be located. 
    Dwelling, mobile home. A detached residential dwelling unit with a body width greater than eight feet, of not less than 40 feet in length, and designed for transportation, after fabrication, on streets or highways, on its own wheels, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks, or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A mobile home shall not be considered a travel trailer, motor home, or any other type of recreational vehicle. In addition, mobile homes which do not conform to the standards for one-family dwellings, of this ordinance, shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the city unless located within a mobile home park or a mobile home plat zoned for such uses, or unless used for temporary residence purposes as hereinafter provided. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A building containing three or more dwelling units designed for residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth for one-family dwellings. 
    Dwelling, one-family. A building designed exclusively for one family for residential use. 
    Dwelling unit, site built. Is a dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled, and finished on the premises which are intended to serve as its final location. Site built dwelling units shall include dwelling units constructed of precut materials and panelized wall, roof and floor sections when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on the premises which are intended to serve as its final location. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A building containing not more than two separate dwelling units designed for residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth for one-family dwellings. 
    Easement. A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
    Earth berm. A mound of earth planted with ground cover, grass, trees, or other landscaping material intended to minimize the view of parking areas and reduce noise and dust from adjacent uses and passersby. 
    Elderly housing. A building or group of buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy of the dwellings is restricted to persons 60 years of age or older, or couples where either spouse is 60 years of age or older. This does not include a foster care, home for the aged, or nursing home. 
    Erected. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like, shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services. A public utility or municipal department utilizing underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal system, but not including buildings. 
    Excavation. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family. A single individual doing his own cooking, and living upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a collective body of persons doing their own cooking, and living together upon the premises or a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon birth, marriage, or other domestic bonds distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, club, fraternity, or hotel. 
    Fence. Any permanent partition, structure, or gate erected upon or near, but not limited to, the dividing line between adjoining property owners, for the purpose of separating, screening, enclosing or protecting property. Hedges, ornamental shrubs, trees and bushes shall be considered fences when placed in a manner or position to serve as such. 
    Floodplain (flood prone area). Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floor area, gross. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The "floor area" of a building shall not include the basement floor area except when more than one-half of the basement height is above grade. "Floor-area" shall include elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof), attic space having headroom of seven feet, ten inches or more, interior balconies, and mezzanines. Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in "floor area." 
    Floor area, residential. For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Foster care. The provision of supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours per day, five or more days per week, and for two or more consecutive weeks of compensation. 
    Frontage. The minimum width required in a use district which abuts a public right-of-way or private road. 
    Garage, private. An accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, service. Any premises used for the storage or maintenance of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
    Gasoline service station. A place for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major automobile repair. 
    Governmental agency. Any department, commission, independent agency, or instrumentality of the United Sates, of a state, county, incorporated or unincorporated municipality, authority, district, or governmental unit. 
    Grade. The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building, measured at a distance four feet out from the edge of the building. 
    Greenbelt. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Health care facility (hospital). A facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis and treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition allowing overnight stay, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital. 
    Historic district. An area containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community of such significance to warrant conservation and preservation. 
    Home for the aged. A supervised personal care facility, other than a hotel, adult foster care facility, hospital, nursing home, or county medical care facility, that provides room, board, and supervised personal care to 21 or more unrelated, nontransient, individuals 60 years of age or older. Home for the aged includes a supervised personal care facility for 20 or fewer individuals 60 years of age or older when the facility is operated in conjunction with and as a distinct part of a licensed nursing home. 
    Home occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling that constitutes either entirely or partly, the livelihood of a person living in the dwelling, said use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants therein and having no external effects. 
    Hotel. A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service, and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms. 
    Junk yard. An area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any open area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk. 
    Kennel. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats, or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded for remuneration. 
    Loading space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is legally described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
    Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner. A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more streets. 
    Lot coverage. The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior. Any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 
1.	Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, is that line separating said lot from the streets. 
2.	Rear lot line. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
3.	Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record. A lot which actually exists in a subdivision plat as shown on the records of the county register of deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. Whenever an owner has combined two or more lots as contained on any recorded plat into a single building site, or combined two or more lots contained on any recorded plat in the records of the township assessor or treasurer, said combination of lots shall be deemed to be a single lot of record for the purposes of this ordinance. 
    Lot, through. Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot width. The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines or in the case of a corner lot, the side lot line and opposite lot line. 
    Lot, zoning. A single tract of land, which may include one or more lots of record, which conforms with this ordinance with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage in the district. 
    Main building. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Major thoroughfare. An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Master plan. The comprehensive community plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Mezzanine. An intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    Mini-warehouse (self-storage facility). A facility consisting of a building or a group of buildings in a controlled-access compound, where individual stalls or lockers are rented out to different tenants for the dead storage of customers' goods and wares. 
    Mobile home park. A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for residential use. 
    Motel. A series of attached, semi-detached, or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space which provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation and cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Motorized home. A self-propelled motor vehicle which provides the amenities of day-to-day living while used as a means of transportation for recreational or travel purposes. 
    Municipality. The City of Utica, Michigan. 
    Nonconforming building. A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto and that does not conform to the provisions of the ordinance in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming lot. Any lot, outlet, or other parcel of land which does not meet the land area or dimension requirements of this ordinance. 
    Nonconforming use. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Normal grade level. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of 1) the existing grade prior to construction; or 2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the fence. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, the fence height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the fence is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zoning lot, whichever is lower. 
    Nuisance factors. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 1) sound, 2) dust, 3) smoke, 4) odor, 5) glare, 6) fumes, 7) light, 8) vibration, 9) shock waves, 10) heat, 11) electronic or atomic radiation, 12) effluent. 
    Nursery, plant materials. A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. 
    Nursing home. A nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, but excluding a hospital or a facility created by Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1985, as amended, (MCL 36.1 et seq.), which provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity. 
    Occupied. The word occupied includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented or leased, or intended to be occupied. 
    Off-street parking facility. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open air business use. An open air business use, as used herein, shall be deemed to include any business when said business is not conducted from a wholly enclosed building. 
    Open front store. A business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open front store" shall not include automobile repair or gasoline service stations. 
    Overnight lodging facility (hotel/motel/motor inn). An establishment or building(s) providing a number of bedrooms, baths, etc., and usually food, for the accommodation of travelers or other transient guests. 
    Parking space. An area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Planned commercial or shopping center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements. 
    Porch. A projection on a building or structure containing a floor, which may be either totally enclosed or open. 
    Principal use. The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Public building. Buildings that are financed largely by public funding and are available for public use, as distinguished from buildings that are government financed, but are intended for private use; i.e., public housing. 
    Public utility. A person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, transportation or water. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which moves one or more persons over the ground, air, water, ice, or snow, and which is either self-propelled or connects to a vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Restaurant: 
1.	Standard restaurant. A standard restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or principal method of operation includes the consumption of food on the premises. 
2.	Carry-out restaurant. A carry-out restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or method of operation encourages the consumption of food off site or it may permit incidental consumption on the premises. 
3.	Drive-in/drive-through restaurant. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design, method of operation, includes one or both of the following characteristics: 
a.	Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle, either by a carhop, or by other means which eliminate the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle. 
b.	The consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, within the restaurant building, or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building, is permitted. 
    Right-of-way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses. 
    Room. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a room is a living room, dining room or bedroom equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, stairways, hallways, and storage. Plans presented showing one, two, or three bedroom units and including a "den," "library," or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
    Setback. The distance required to obtain minimum front, side, or rear yard open space provisions of this ordinance. 
    Sign. Is a name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure, parcel or lot and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. Signs include, but are not limited to, figures, devices, pennants, emblems and pictures. Any of the above which is not placed out of doors, when placed near inside the surface of a window in such a way as to be in view of the general public and used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information to motorists and pedestrians, shall also be considered as a sign. Signs shall include the following types: 
1.	Abandoned sign. A sign which advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity no longer conducted or available upon the premises where such sign is displayed. 
2.	Accessory sign. A sign which is accessory to the main or principal use of the premises. 
3.	Animated sign. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
4.	Banner. Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material, with or without frames. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
5.	Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
6.	Building marker. Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
7.	Bulletin board/announcement sign. A sign related to a public school, parochial school, private school, public park or recreation facility, church or other religious institution, which identifies activities or events to take place involving the patrons of such specific use. 
8.	Canopy sign. Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
9.	Changeable copy sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. 
10.	Flashing sign. An illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
11.	Freestanding sign/ground sign. A sign which is attached to or a part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure whether portable or stationary. 
12.	Identification sign. A sign stating the name or description of the use of the premises on which the sign is located. 
13.	Incidental sign. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zoning lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar directives. 
14.	Illuminated sign. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper. 
15.	Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
16.	Marquee sign. Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
17.	Monument sign. A sign attached to a permanent foundation and not attached or dependent for support from any building, pole, posts, or similar uprights. 
18.	Nonaccessory sign. A sign which is not accessory to the main or principal use of the premises. 
19.	Nonconforming sign. Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
20.	Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
21.	Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; sign converted to a- or t-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
22.	Projecting sign. A sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a building or structure and projecting therefrom, including marquee signs. 
23.	Real estate sign. A sign placed upon a property advertising that particular property for sale, rent, or lease. 
24.	Residential sign. Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
25.	Residential development sign. A sign placed on the premises of a subdivision, or other real estate development site, to identify a proposed start of development, the participants of such development (such as owner, contractor, architect, leasing agent, etc.), and relative date of availability. 
26.	Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building supported by the roof structure. 
27.	Swinging sign. Signs which are designed or constructed to move or pivot as a result of wind pressure for the purpose of attracting attention. 
28.	Suspended sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
29.	Temporary sign. Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
30.	Wall sign. A sign erected or fastened against the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall and not extending more than 14 inches beyond the surface of the portion of the building wall on which erected or fastened. 
    Special condition use. Any use of land listed as a principal use permitted subject to special conditions which, due to its potential effect on adjacent lands, in particular, and the overall city in general, requires approval by the city council according to the standards as provided in this ordinance. 
    Story. That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Story, half. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the usable floor area is only that area having at least five feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street. A public dedicated right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property including emergency response vehicles. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Swimming pool. Any constructed or portable pool, used for swimming or bathing over 24 inches in depth, or with a surface area exceeding 160 square feet. 
    Temporary use or temporary building. A use or building permitted by the board of appeals to exist during a specified period of time. 
    Use. Any purpose for which a lot, building, or other structure or a tract of land may be designated, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land, and to also include the conduct of an activity or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility; and any functional, social, or technological activity that is imposed or applied to land or to structures on the land; and the employment or occupation of a building, structure, or land for a person's service, benefit, or enjoyment. 
    Variance. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
    Variance, nonuse. A departure from the provisions of the zoning ordinance relating to setbacks, side yards, frontage requirements, lot size, parking, signage, and other requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
    Variance, use. A variance granted for a use or structure that is not permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
    Wall, obscuring. A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Wireless communication antenna (WCA). Any antenna used for the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals excluding those used exclusively for dispatch communications by public emergency agencies, ham radio antennas, satellite antennas, those which receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services which are one meter (39 inches) or less in diameter and those which receive television broadcast signals. 
    Wireless communication facilities (WCF). All structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals and may include, but is not limited to radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Citizen band radio facilities, short wave facilities, ham, amateur radio facilities, and satellite dishes, and governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority are not included in this definition. 
    Wireless communication support facilities (WCSF). A monopole, guyed, or lattice type tower designed for the attachment of or as support for wireless communication antennas or other antennas. 
    Yards. The open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, and as defined herein: 
1.	Front yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of corner lots, front yard shall be deemed to exist along each street frontage. 
2.	Rear yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
3.	Side yard. An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
    Zoning district. A zoning district is a portion of the city within which, on a uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and within which contain yard, open spaces, lot area, and other requirements are established by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 129-3, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 129-18, 4-11-2006; Ord. of 11-27-2006) 
ARTICLE III - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; distance of mechanical amusement devices from schools,  14-277; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; subivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 66. (Back)
State Law reference- Zoning districts authorized, MCL 125.581. (Back)
Section 300. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Utica is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-1A through R-1B, one-family residential district 
R-2, two-family residential district 
R-3, multiple-family residential 
0-1, office district 
C-1, central business district 
C-2, general business district 
MXD, mixed use district 
I, industrial district 
P-1, vehicular parking district 
Section 301. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Districts Map, City of Utica Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies this ordinance, and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein. 
Section 302. - District boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning districts map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate limits shall be construed as following corporate limits. 
4.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
5.	Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
6.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
7.	Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 6 above, the city council, acting as the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
8.	Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
Section 303. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the City of Utica shall be vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches. 
Section 304. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Wherever any area is annexed to the City of Utica, one of the following conditions will apply: 
1.	Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified as being in whichever district of this ordinance most clearly conforms with the zoning that existed prior to annexation, such classification to be recommended by the planning commission to the city council and the council shall approve same by resolution. 
2.	Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as an R-1A through R-1B district until a zoning map for said area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend the appropriate zoning districts for such area within three months after the matter is referred to it by the city council. 
3.	Whenever any city is incorporated, or whenever territory is annexed to any city incorporated pursuant to the provisions of the Home Rule Cities Act, the then existing zoning regulations for the territory within the newly incorporated city or for the annexed territory shall remain in full force and effect for a period of two years after incorporation or annexation, unless the legislative body of the city shall lawfully adopt other zoning regulations or ordinances. 
ARTICLE IV - R-1A THROUGH R-1B, ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 400. - Intent. 
    The one-family residential districts are established as districts in which the principal use of land is for one-family dwellings. For the one-family residential districts, in promoting the general purpose of this ordinance, the specific intent is: 
1.	To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of the land for one-family dwellings. 
2.	To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or continuation of one-family dwellings in the district. 
3.	To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.	To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or local streets other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
5.	To discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create requirements and costs for public services, such as fire and police protection, water supply and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for one-family dwellings. 
Section 401. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a one-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
1.	One-family detached dwellings in accordance with section 1300 
2.	Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways and recreational facilities.
3.	Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of this ordinance.
4.	Public, parochial and other private schools offering courses in general education and not operated for profit. 
5.	Home occupation in accordance with section 1415 
6.	[Reserved.]
7.	Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
(Ord. No. 129-2, 9-10-1996) 
Section 402. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following special condition uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with section 4c.(2) of the city-village zoning act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review," of this zoning ordinance. 
1.	Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The principal buildings on the site shall be set back from abutting properties zoned for residential use not less than 15 feet. 
b.	Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in article XI, schedule of regulations may be allowed provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
c.	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 1417, access to a major thoroughfare. 
2.	Public utility buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. Further, no building and/or structure shall be located in any required yard. 
3.	Day care centers including adult day care use (not including dormitories) provided that for each person so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of open space. Such space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. 
4.	Home for the aged (congregate care facility) or adult foster care facility for more than six adults when the following conditions are met: 
a.	Minimum lot size shall be three acres.
b.	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 1417, access to a major thoroughfare. 
c.	No structure shall be located closer than 40 feet to any property line.
d.	The site shall be so developed as to create a land to building ratio on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the facility there shall be provided not less than 1,500 square feet of open space. The 1,500 square feet of land area per bed shall provide for landscaped setbacks, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements, and space required for accessory uses. The 1,500 square feet requirement is over and above the building coverage area. 
5.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
6.	Bed and breakfast establishments in accordance with section 1416 
(Ord. No. 129-2, 9-10-1996) 
Section 403. - Required conditions. 
    For all nonresidential uses allowed in the residential districts, the setbacks shall equal the height of the main building, or the setbacks required in section 1300, whichever is greater. 
Section 404. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XIII, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
ARTICLE V - R-2, TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 500. - Intent. 
    The R-2, two-family residential districts are designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office, thoroughfares or other uses which would affect residential character. This district also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the city where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. 
Section 501. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a two-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
1.	All uses in the one-family residential districts, permitted and as regulated under section 401. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-1A through R-1B one-family residential district, shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
2.	Two-family dwellings.
3.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
Section 502. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following special conditions uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with section 4c.(2) of the city-village zoning act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review," of this zoning ordinance. 
1.	All special condition uses for the one-family residential districts, permitted and as regulated under section 402 
Section 503. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XIII, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
ARTICLE VI - R-3, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 600. - Intent. 
    The R-3, multiple-family residential district is designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as a transitional land use between nonresidential districts and lower density one-family districts. The multiple-family district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium density, one-family community. 
Section 601. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a multiple-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
1.	All uses in the R-2, two-family residential district, permitted and as regulated under section 501 
2.	Multiple-family dwellings.
3.	Boarding houses.
4.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
Section 602. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following special condition uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with section 4c.(2) of the city-village zoning act, as may be amended (MCL 125.584c(2)), and further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review," of this zoning ordinance. 
1.	All special condition uses in the one-family residential district, permitted and as regulated under section 402 
2.	General hospitals, with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met: 
a.	All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at [least] three acres in area. 
b.	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 1217.
c.	The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 50 feet for front, rear, and side yards for all two story structures. For each story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
d.	Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view with an obscuring wall or fence six feet in height. 
3.	Convalescent or nursing homes when the following conditions are met:
a.	The building shall not exceed a building height of two stories.
b.	The minimum lot size shall be three acres.
c.	No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line.
d.	All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 1217.
e.	There shall be provided on the site, not less than 1,500 square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The 1,500 square feet of land area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirement and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings. 
4.	Housing for the elderly when the following conditions are met:
a.	All housing for senior citizens shall be constructed on parcels of at least three acres and may provide for the following: 
(1)	Cottage type one-story dwellings and/or apartment type dwelling units.
(2)	Common service containing, but not limited to, central dining rooms, recreational rooms, central lounge, and workshops. 
b.	Minimum dwelling unit size shall be 350 square feet per unit (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities). 
c.	Total coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units and related service buildings) shall not exceed 25 percent of the total site not including any dedicated public right-of-way. 
d.	Buildings of greater height than the maximum height allowed in article XIII, schedule of regulations may be allowed provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
5.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
Section 603. - Required conditions. 
1.	The maximum horizontal length of any one building shall be 180 feet measured along any front, side, rear, or other exterior elevation. 
2.	The minimum land area required for each multiple-family dwelling unit in the district shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
Dwelling Unit TypeLand Area Required
(Square Feet)1 and 2 bedroom unit4,8003 bedroom unit6,0004 or more bedroom unit7,200 
3.	Within any yard setback or area between buildings, an area equivalent to 70 percent of any required yard or any required minimum area between buildings must be landscaped and developed as usable open space or recreation area available to the residents of the development, and further, said areas shall be kept free of all vehicular uses. 
4.	On sites which are four acres or larger in size, the open land area shall include a landscaped greenbelt of a minimum ten foot width, located and continually maintained, along any property boundary adjoining a residential district or fronting on a public road right-of-way. 
5.	The minimum livable floor area per multiple-family unit shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
Unit TypeMinimum Floor Area
Required (Square Feet)Efficiency350One bedroom600 Two bedroom800 Three or more bedrooms1,000 
Section 604. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XIII, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
ARTICLE VII - O-1, OFFICE DISTRICTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. (Back)
Section 700. - Intent. 
    The office district is intended to provide locations of the low-intensity, office-type professional and administrative services necessary for the normal conduct of a community's activities. The district has the following characteristics: allowable activities take place in attractive buildings in landscaped settings; they generally operate during normal daytime business hours; they produce a minimum amount of traffic; and their use characteristics make them compatible with adjacent residential uses. 
    The office district is specifically designed to prohibit retail establishments and other business activities that generate heavy traffic or constant visits of the general public. However, a limited range of convenience retail and service businesses is permitted within larger office developments for the benefit of office personnel and visitors, provided that offices remain the predominant use within the district and provided further that the commercial uses are compatible with nearby residential development. 
    The office district is intended to serve as transitions between nonresidential districts and single-family residential districts. 
Section 701. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an office district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
1.	Office-type business related to executive, administrative, or professional occupations including, but not limited to, offices of a lawyer, accountant, insurance/real estate agent, architect, engineer, and similar occupation. 
2.	Clinics, except veterinary clinics having outdoor runs.
3.	Medical, dental, and optical laboratories that provide testing services or provide medical or dental devices such as artificial limbs, teeth, eyeglasses, etc. 
4.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses, not offering drive-through facilities. 
5.	Business service establishments such as typing services, photocopying services; quick-printing establishments, office supply stores, and similar establishments. 
6.	Other uses similar to the above uses.
7.	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses.
Section 702. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following special condition uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with section 4c.(2) of the city-village zoning act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review," of this zoning ordinance. 
1.	Mortuary establishments when adequate assembly areas are provided off-street for vehicles used in funeral processions. A caretakers residence may be provided within the main building or mortuary establishments. All access shall be in accordance with section 1417 
2.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
Section 703. - Required conditions. 
1.	No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of an office or business establishment.
2.	The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited.
3.	Warehouse or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
Section 704. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XIII, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
ARTICLE VIII - C-1, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. (Back)
Section 800. - Intent. 
    The C-1, central business district, is designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the general business district. It is generally characterized by an integrated cluster of establishments serviced by a common parking area, and generating large volumes of pedestrian traffic and ancillary vehicular trips. 
Section 801. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the central business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
1.	All uses in the 0-1, office districts, permitted and as regulated under section 701 
2.	Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building, such as but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware. 
3.	Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to: repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe and etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops, photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry-cleaners. 
4.	Dry cleaning establishments, or pick-up stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
5.	Standard or carry-out restaurants.
6.	Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
7.	Post office buildings.
8.	New and used car salerooms, showrooms, or offices which do not provide outdoor sales space and/or service and repair activities. 
9.	Health and athletic clubs.
10.	Discount, department, or variety stores.
11.	Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct. 
12.	Local municipal administration buildings, museums, and libraries.
13.	Other uses similar to the above uses.
14.	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses.
Section 802. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following special condition uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with section 4c.(2) of the city-village zoning act, as may be amended (MCL 125.584c(2)), and further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review," of this zoning ordinance. 
1.	Residential units when the following conditions are met:
a.	The dwelling unit(s) shall be provided on any floor other than a floor where grade level access is provided. 
b.	The minimum floor area per unit shall equal 500 square feet for a one bedroom unit, 700 square feet for a two bedroom unit, 900 square feet for a three bedroom unit, and 1,100 square feet for units containing four bedrooms. 
c.	Of street parking shall be provided in the ratio of two parking spaces for each residential unit provided. 
Section 803. - Required conditions. 
1.	Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited.
Section 804. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XIII, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
ARTICLE IX - C-2, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. (Back)
Section 900. - Intent. 
    The C-2, general business district is designed to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the central business district and which are oriented to serving the needs of "passer-by" traffic and locations for planned shopping centers. Many of the business types permitted also generate greater volumes of traffic and activities which must be specially considered to minimize adverse effects on adjacent properties. 
Section 901. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following uses unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
1.	All uses in the C-1, central business district, permitted and as regulated under section 801 
2.	Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
3.	Overnight lodging facility, subject to the following:
a.	Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.	Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area.
c.	No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more than 30 consecutive days within any calendar year. 
4.	Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least 100 feet from any front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district. 
Arcades as defined and permitted by all municipal regulations shall only be permitted in this district as accessory use to any of the above permitted in this item 4. Any such use shall only be accessible and directly supervised from within the building and shall not in any manner constitute a principal use of the premises. 
5.	Plant material nursery and other open air business uses.
6.	Automotive service facilities providing: tire (but not recapping), battery, muffler, rustproofing/undercoating, auto glass, reupholstering, wheel balancing, shock absorbers, wheel alignments, and minor motor tune-ups only, when developed in accordance with the following: 
a.	There shall be no outside display of any parts and/or products.
b.	Any repair and/or replacement activity shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building. 
c.	All new, used, and/or discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed building approved by the building department. 
d.	Any such activity shall be located not less than 25 feet from a property line.
e.	There shall be no outside parking and/or storage or any partially dismantled or inoperative vehicles. 
f.	In operations such as automobile reconditioning, but not necessarily limited to, such activities there shall be no releasing of toxic gases, liquids, or materials in any form into the atmosphere, the water or sewer systems of the City of Utica, or on, or into the earth and further, no adverse affects shall be created by any activity on adjacent property or development. 
7.	Bank, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses including those offering drive-through facilities. 
8.	Veterinary hospitals and clinics having boarding facilities.
9.	Other uses similar to the above uses.
10.	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses.
Section 902. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following special condition uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with section 4c.(2) of the city-village zoning act, as may be amended (MCL 125.584c(2)), and further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review," of this zoning ordinance. 
1.	Vehicle dealers with outdoor sales space and/or repair facilities for the sale of new or secondhand automobiles, house trailers, recreational vehicles, or rental trailers and/or automobiles, all subject to the following: 
a.	The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. 
b.	Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.	Any servicing of vehicles including major motor repair and refinishing shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Any such activities shall be clearly incidental to the sale of said vehicles and shall occur within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)	Partially dismantled and/or damaged vehicles shall be stored within an enclosed building.
(3)	New, used and/or discarded parts and supplies shall be stored within a completely enclosed building. 
(4)	Any such activity shall be located not less than 50 feet from any property line.
(5)	There shall be no external evidence, beyond the building, by way of dust, odor, or noise of such activities. 
d.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
2.	Business in the character of an open front store or, a fast food or drive-in restaurant subject to following conditions: 
a.	A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
b.	Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets.
c.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
d.	A six-foot high completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for R, O-1 or C-1 districts. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Said wall shall further meet the requirements of article XIV, general provisions. 
3.	Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and where no repair work is done, other than incidental service as provided for elsewhere in this article, but not including vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. 
b.	The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. Gasoline service stations which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and have no facilities for repair or servicing or automobiles (including lubricating facilities) may be permitted on lots of 10,000 square feet, subject to all other provisions herein required. 
c.	The view of all rest room doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and residential districts. 
d.	Tow trucks (wreckers) and vehicles under repair shall not be permitted in the front yard. 
e.	The parking of vehicles on site shall be limited to those which may be serviced within a 24-hour period. 
f.	A ten-foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along all street frontages.
4.	Adult entertainment use subject to the following conditions:
a.	No adult entertainment use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment use nor within 600 feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)	All class "C" establishments licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
(2)	Pool or billiard halls.
(3)	Coin-operated amusement centers.
(4)	Teenage discos or dance halls.
(5)	Ice or roller skating rinks.
(6)	Pawn shops.
(7)	Indoor or drive-in movie theaters.
(8)	Any public park.
(9)	Any church.
(10)	Any public or private school having a curriculum including kindergarten or any one or more of the grades, one through 12. 
Such distance shall be measured along the centerline of the street or streets or address between two fixed points on the centerlines determined by projecting straight lines at right angles from the part of the above listed uses nearest to the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use, and from the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use nearest to a use listed above. 
b.	No adult entertainment use shall be located within 500 feet of any area zoned residential. Such required distances shall be measured by a straight line between a point on the boundary line of a zoned residential area nearest to the contemplated structure or contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use to a point on the contemplated structure or contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use nearest to the boundary lines of a zoned residential area. 
c.	All adult entertainment uses shall be contained in a freestanding building. Enclosed malls, commercial strip stores, common wall structures, and multi-uses within the same structure do not constitute a freestanding building. 
d.	No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not regulated as an adult entertainment use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
e.	The provisions of city ordinance no. 120 shall also apply.
5.	Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops subject to the following conditions:
a.	Work on vehicles shall be done in a completely enclosed building.
b.	Outdoor storage of disabled vehicles or automotive parts shall be prohibited unless fully enclosed and secured by a six foot high obscuring wall or fence. 
c.	Tow truck (wreckers) and vehicles under repair shall not be permitted in the required front yard. 
d.	A ten-foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along all street frontages. The planning commission may waive this requirement if it is found to be impractical to provide such an area in existing developed areas. 
e.	The parking of vehicles on site shall be limited to those, which may be serviced within a 24-hour period, unless said vehicles are parked in a fully enclosed and secured area as stipulated in item b. above. 
6.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
(Ord. No. 129-9, 12-12-2000) 
Section 903. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XIII, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of the lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
ARTICLE X - MXD, MIXED-USE DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. (Back)
Section 1000. - Intent. 
    The mixed-use district is established to provide an aesthetically attractive working environment exclusively for, and conducive to, the development and protection of offices, research and development institutions, manufacturing establishment of a non-nuisance type, and specialized retail uses. 
    The provisions of this article have been developed to coordinate these developments with the intent to: 
1.	Establish and maintain high aesthetic standards;
2.	Preserve the district's visual character by assuring improvements are properly related to their sites and to surrounding developments; 
3.	Encourage originality, flexibility, and innovation in site planning and development, including architecture, landscaping, and graphic design; and, 
4.	Encourage development that is compatible with and complementary to nearby residential and commercial areas. 
Section 1001. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the mixed-use district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged, except for one or more of the following uses: 
1.	Corporate headquarters, regional headquarters, and general administrative offices used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government. 
2.	Laboratories and adjunct facilities used for basic and/or applied research, in all sciences, and including product development and testing, engineering development, and marketing development. 
3.	Light industrial uses including manufacturing, fabricating, processing, converting, altering, assembly, and testing of products, when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
4.	Retail and commercial uses allowed as permitted uses in the C-2, general commercial district of this ordinance, except as prohibited by section 1003 provided such use constitutes no more than 20 percent of the developed gross floor area of the entire development. 
5.	General hospitals, medical clinics, and/or optical facilities that provide testing services or provide medical or dental devices such as artificial limbs, teeth, eyeglasses, etc. 
6.	Theaters, auditoriums, concert halls, and similar places of assembly when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
7.	Business and technical schools.
8.	Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations (but not including service or storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the location of such facilities within the district. 
9.	Health and athletic clubs.
10.	Common open space, including pedestrian plazas and courts.
11.	Any other use which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same general character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses. 
Section 1002. - Accessory uses. 
    The following shall be allowed as accessory uses in the mixed-use district: 
1.	Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use.
2.	Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3.	Day-care facilities.
4.	Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, saunas, game and craft rooms, tennis courts, and exercise studios, which are provided in association with a permitted use. 
5.	Parking and loading structures and areas provided in conjunction with a permitted use. 
6.	Veterinary clinics and pet hotel facilities as an ancillary use in a retail store containing no less than 20,000 square feet of non-veterinary and pet hotel retail space, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)	The veterinary clinic shall be located interior to the principal structure and shall be provided with a separate door to allow immediate access by customers. 
(b)	There will be no exterior kennel space provided. Kennel space for the pets hotel shall be interior to the building and not create any nuisances to neighboring properties or businesses with regard to odors, noise and pet droppings outside of the business. 
(c)	The veterinary clinic and pets hotel shall exclude exotic and/or domestic farm animals. It is the intent to limit such animals to household-type pets such as dogs, cats, etc. 
(d)	The overnight stay of animals treated by a veterinarian may be allowed, provided such stay is required by reason of health emergency and, provided further, that animals so housed shall be attended during their stay by a veterinarian. 
(e)	The length of stay of animals housed in the pets hotel shall be limited to 30 consecutive days for any one stay. 
(Ord. No. 129-4, 11-17-1996; Ord. No. 129-17, 5-10-2005) 
Section 1003. - Prohibited uses. 
    The permitted uses enumerated above shall not be construed to include either as a main or accessory use, any of the following uses: 
1.	Motor freight terminals.
2.	Machine shops.
3.	Veterinary clinics and kennels.
4.	Drive-in theaters.
5.	Outdoor material storage facilities including, but not limited to, plant material and garden supply stores, lumber yards, contractor storage yards, and similar uses. 
6.	Self-storage (mini-warehouse) facility.
7.	Heliports.
8.	Residential dwelling, with the exception that cluster housing and townhouse, multiple-family developments may be allowed subject to the criteria found in sections 1300 and 1302 and further subject to the following, whichever is more restrictive than the requirements or standards in sections 1300 and 1302, the more restrictive requirements shall prevail. 
a.	Cluster housing and/or multiple-family townhouse developments shall be only developed in areas of the MXD District that border existing single-family residential zoning districts and developments that border Shelby Township - the northern boundary of the MXD District, with the exception that not more than one senior citizen, multiple-family development may be permitted at any acceptable location (site) within the MXD, District. 
b.	The maximum density allowed for any cluster or townhouse developments shall not exceed five units per buildable acre of land. For the purpose of this ordinance, buildable land shall mean the area of any lot or parcel of land that is actually buildable, which of the purpose of developing land or computing densities, shall not include existing or proposed rights-of-way for and roads (public or private), streams, drains, or wetlands. However, the planning commission may modify the density, lot coverage regulations, lot area and frontage requirements, number of attached units and setback requirements when a proposed project presents and offers unique design features and amenities for a mixed-use district residential development such as, but not necessarily limited to: a) increased open space; b) active or passive use parks; c) community buildings; d) recreational facilities; e) additional landscaping including unique streetscapes, street furniture, sign treatments, etc. and unique building and/or structure architecture. In no case shall the density exceed ten units per acre for developments that are contiguous to existing single-family zoning districts and single-family developments in Shelby Township that border onto the city's MXD, District. For a development that does not border onto Shelby Township, a density not to exceed 35 units per acre may be permitted in a multiple-story, senior residence building, with a senior residence being defined as a residence occupied by persons who have reached the age of 50 years old or older. In addition, a senior residence development shall not include an assisted living facility, such as, but not necessarily limited to a convalescent or nursing home. 
c.	In calculating density for parcels with wetlands, 20 percent of the wetland area may be used for the purpose of determining density. 
d.	No building shall be located closer than 50 feet from an outer property line, except that a senior residence building shall be allowed to develop with the minimum required setbacks permitted in the MXD, District (50-foot front and rear yards and 25-foot side yards). 
e.	A landscape berm, at least four feet in height shall be provided along the entire property line of any cluster housing and/or townhouse development abutting any MXD District interior roadway; i.e., Northpointe Boulevard, Utica Park Boulevard, etc., or commercially developed site. 
f.	The minimum floor area for any cluster housing dwelling unit or townhouse development shall not be less than 1,200 square feet. The minimum floor area for any senior residence shall not be less than 425 square feet. 
g.	Not withstanding the requirements of sections 1300 and 1302 and Article X concerning cluster housing dwelling units or townhouse developments, except for a senior residence development: all other applicable provisions of this ordinance shall be met. 
9.	Radio, telephone, and television towers, antennae, and similar structures.
10.	Vehicle wash establishments.
11.	Mortuary establishments.
12.	Gasoline stations, with the exception that facilities designed to only dispense fuels to motor vehicles may be allowed providing they do not include the sale of minor accessories, convenience goods or other services such as but not necessarily limited to automobile repair; and further said facilities shall be accessory to a principal use that meets the following standards: 
a.	The principal use shall be a retail commercial facility which has not less than a total gross floor area of 150,000 square feet. 
b.	The principal use and the accessory use (ancillary gas pumps) shall be located on site with not less than ten acres in area. 
c.	The minimum site area for ancillary gas pumps on the principal use site shall not be less than 20,000 square feet. 
d.	Access to the ancillary gas pumps shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards on-site or to adjacent streets and/or access drives. 
e.	The parking of vehicles on the ancillary gas pump site shall be limited to the time it takes to dispense fuel to vehicles using the facility with all other parking or storing of vehicles being expressly prohibited. 
f.	The principal use site, including the accessory use site, shall provide adequate off-street parking, loading and unloading space and access (ingress and egress). 
13.	Adult entertainment uses and business establishments by which said property is devoted to displaying or exhibiting obscene material, and/or providing representations or descriptions of any of the types of sexual conduct, or ultimate sexual acts, as defined by Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of 1984, of the State of Michigan (MCL 752.361 et seq.). 
14.	Animal slaughter, meat processing, or meat packing establishments.
15.	Racetrack, rifle range, golf driving range, and similar outdoor recreation facilities, except that tennis courts and swimming pools may be provided in connection with a health or athletic club, or hotel/motel establishment. 
16.	Disposal sites for hazardous or toxic wastes, trash, rubbish, or garbage.
(Ord. No. 129-6, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 129-8, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 129-13, 7-11-2003; Ord. No. 129-14, 7-6-2004) 
Section 1004. - Required conditions. 
1.	Area of application. This district is to be applied to those areas particularly suited for mixed-use development. Property may be designated mixed-use district when the following criteria are satisfied. 
a.	The site has been designated for mixed use development in the city's future land use plan. 
b.	The property and the affected area are presently provided with adequate public facilities, services, and transportation networks to support this use; or such facilities, services, and transportation networks are planned to be provided concurrently with the development of the property; and, 
c.	The development will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment, and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of smoke, fumes, glare, noise, vibration, or odors. 
2.	Area and bulk requirements. 
a.	The minimum land area required for mixed-use district development shall be 40 contiguous acres under single ownership and control. For purpose of this requirement, streets shall not be deemed to divide acreages. 
b.	Lot coverage, including all buildings and paved areas, shall not exceed 60 percent of the gross lot area. Building coverage is limited to 30 percent of the gross lot area. 
c.	The minimum lot area and lot dimensions shall be:
(1)	Area: One acre.
(2)	Width: One hundred-foot road frontage.
(3)	Depth: Two hundred feet.
d.	The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 50 feet for front and rear yards and 25 feet for side yards. Principal or accessory buildings shall not be less than 100 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands. 
The following improvements are expressly excluded from this setback restriction: 
(1)	Structures below and covered by the ground.
(2)	Steps, walks, driveways, and curbing.
(3)	Planters, walls, fences, or hedges not exceeding four feet in height.
(4)	Landscaping.
(5)	Pedestrian plazas.
e.	The maximum building height permitted is 36 feet. Buildings greater than the maximum height may be allowed provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. In no instance shall a building exceed six stories (72 feet in height). 
An additional ten feet in building height shall be allowed to permit the placement and installation of mechanical equipment, provided said equipment is suitably screened from public view. 
3.	Site design requirements. 
a.	Access to each parcel or lot must be from an internal street and not from abutting major thoroughfares or arterials. The internal street system shall be of a rolled curb and gutter design built to city specifications. 
b.	There shall be set aside for common open space not less than one acre of land for every ten acres of land devoted to office, research, industrial and/or business, and commercial uses. Such computation shall exclude the area devoted to the internal street system. 
The location of common open space shall be consistent with the declared function of the common usable open space, and where possible, the common open space shall be planned as a contiguous area, centrally located to the site for the maximum benefit of the area. Protected environmentally sensitive areas, such as woodlands, wetlands, and drainage areas, and that portion of landscaped boulevards, may be included in the calculation of required common open space. 
c.	Open spaces for public congregation are required and must be equipped or designed to allow pedestrian seating and to be easily observed and accessible from the pedestrian circulation system. These provisions apply only to new office uses with a gross floor area of 25,000 square feet or more. When computing this urban open space requirement, only the gross floor area of the office uses will be considered. 
As a minimum, there must be one square foot of open space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area. The plaza area must be located behind the required setback and easily accessible to, and visible from, the street but in no instance more than three feet above or below the level of the adjoining grade. All plazas must be accessible to the handicapped. There must be at least one linear foot of seating for each 30 square feet of plaza area. Step space shall not be counted as meeting this requirement. 
Within the plaza area, one tree must be planted for each 500 square feet or portion thereof up to 2,000 square feet. One additional tree is required for each additional 1,000 square feet of plaza space. Ornamental trees shall account for 20 percent of this planting requirement. Urban design features are encouraged as part of pedestrian plazas. The following amenities such as, but not limited to, ornamental fountains, stairways, waterfalls, sculptures, arbors, trellises, planted beds, drinking fountains, clock pedestals, public telephones, awnings, canopies, and similar structures, are permitted. 
d.	The internal circulation system shall include pedestrian paths which provide continuous circulation from the boundary streets to each lot or parcel within the development, common open space area, and all other important interior site destinations. 
e.	A minimum of 20 percent of the lot or parcel area of all development shall be open land with vegetative ground cover and other plant materials, not covered by buildings, paving, or other impervious surfaces. Pedestrian plazas may be included in the calculation of this landscaping requirement. 
f.	All utility lines serving internal development shall be underground except that subtransmission and transmission lines may be overhead. Entry fixtures must be located away from high use areas and main entrances or screened in an approved manner. 
4.	Building design requirements. 
a.	Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design, relationship to surroundings, sensitive integration of form, textures, and colors with the particular landscape. 
b.	Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent development in the general vicinity. 
c.	Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings. 
d.	Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways. 
e.	All exterior building walls and structures shall be constructed with attractive, durable materials such as concrete, masonry, stone, brick, finishing wood, or glass. No temporary or flammable material will be approved. 
f.	In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings. 
g.	Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
h.	Colors shall be harmonious and shall use only compatible accents.
i.	Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance. 
j.	Over street connections are expressly prohibited.
k.	To minimize the impact of mechanical equipment on the appearance of the building and the community, window air-conditioning units or condenser elements should not be located on the front facades. Antennas should be located where they are not visible on the front facade. Mechanical equipment on the ground should be screened with a fence or plant materials or housed in a structure that is in harmony with the surroundings. Mechanical equipment attached to the side or roof of a building, including heating vents, should be kept as low as possible and covered or screened to blend with the building to which it is affixed. 
Section 1005. - Processing requirements. 
    The process for obtaining review and approval of a mixed-use development is as follows: 
1.	Mixed-use developments shall be subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review" of this zoning ordinance. 
2.	Prior to committing to any lot or site design, the developer and its professional consultants shall meet with the city administration to review the local regulations governing the proposed design, including design and processing requirements. 
At this meeting, the applicant is expected to outline to the city, the project in terms of land use, anticipated building arrangement and site design, and proposed construction timetable. 
3.	A development plan for the total acreage embraced by the proposal shall be submitted to the city planning commission for its review, and to the city council, for its approval before any development may be undertaken or any building permit is issued for a site within the mixed-use district. 
4.	An application shall be submitted by the applicant and be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount established by council resolution. The application shall also be accompanied by statements, plans, evidence, material, and documentation necessary to enable the planning commission and city council to make the findings required by this Article. The required documentation shall consist of any or all of the following: 
a.	A narrative which provides the evidence that the project satisfies section 1004 requirements, and describes existing site characteristics, the proposed character of the development, and a discussion of the means of serving the development with sewer and water. 
b.	Statement of covenants, grants of easements, and other restrictions to be imposed upon the uses of land and structures. 
c.	A site plan prepared in accordance with section 1800 
d.	A schedule indicating the proposed timing of the development, including staging, if appropriate. 
e.	Any other data, plans, or drawings considered by the planning commission or city council to be necessary for the consideration of the proposal. 
ARTICLE X(a) - DMXD, DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE DISTRICT 

Section 1000(a). - Intent. 
    The downtown mixed-use development district (DMXD) is established to provide an aesthetically attractive working environment exclusively for, and conducive to, the development and redevelopment of the downtown area of the city as herein defined in this article. 
    The regulations set forth in this section have been developed to coordinate these developments and/or redevelopments with the intent to: 
1.	Encourage and direct a form of development and/or redevelopment, within the boundaries of the DMXD, which will achieve the physical qualities necessary to maintain and enhance the economic vitality of the downtown and maintain the desired character of the City of Utica's Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
2.	Encourage mixed uses of a high density (retail on the first floor with office and residential uses on upper floors) and the renovation of existing buildings; ensure that new buildings are compatible with their context and the desired character of the city's central business district (CBD); ensure that all uses relate to the pedestrian; and promote uses that enhance the viability of the downtown. 
3.	Encourage the DMXD to be developed, utilized, and maintained as a prominent and unique community symbol and as an attractive center for cultural activities, special events and festivals. 
4.	Maintain the uniqueness and identity of the downtown, toward which end emphasis shall be placed upon maintaining the historic character of the city's CBD. 
5.	Encourage the development of environmentally sensitive lands in a safe and economically sound manner. 
(Ord. No. 129-10,  1000(a), 1-31-2002) 
Section 1001(a). - District boundaries. 
    The downtown mixed-use development district (DMXD) is described as follows: 
-Add Legal Description and Map- 
(Ord. No. 129-10,  1001(a), 1-31-2002) 
Section 1002(a). - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the downtown mixed-use district (DMXD), no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged, except for one or more of the following uses: 
1.	All uses in the O-1, office districts, permitted and as regulated under section 701 
2.	All uses in the C-1, central business district, permitted and regulated under section 801, principal uses permitted and section 802, principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
3.	Overnight lodging facility, subject to the following:
a.	Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.	Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area.
c.	No guest shall establish permanent residence at an overnight lodging facility for more than 30 consecutive days within any calendar year. 
4.	Attached single-family dwellings, subject to the following:
a.	No single-family attached dwelling unit shall have ground level frontage on a major thoroughfare unless the planning commission finds it advantageous to the development to waive this requirement. 
b.	Single-family attached dwelling units shall include two enclosed (garage) off-street parking spaces. 
c.	The minimum gross floor area for any single-family dwelling shall be 900 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 129-10,  1003(a), 1-31-2002; Ord. No. 129-16, 5-10-2005) 
Section 1003(a). - Accessory uses. 
    The following shall be allowed as accessory uses in the downtown mixed-use district: 
1.	Uses and structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.
2.	Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3.	Day care facilities.
4.	Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, such as swimming pools, saunas, game and craft rooms, tennis courts, exercise rooms/studios and outside venue facilities, which are provided in association with a permitted use. 
5.	Parking and loading structures and areas provided they are in conjunction with a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 129-10,  1004(a), 1-31-2002) 
Section 1004(a). - Prohibited uses. 
    The permitted uses enumerated above shall not be construed to include either as a main or accessory use, any of the following uses: 
1.	Adult entertainment uses and business establishments by which said property is devoted to displaying or exhibiting obscene material, and/or providing representations or descriptions of any the types sexual conduct, or ultimate sexual acts, as defined by Public Acts No. 343 of 1984 (MCL 752.361 et seq.). 
2.	Businesses with a drive-up, drive-through or drive-in character.
3.	Outdoor advertising or billboards (non-accessory signs).
4.	Detached single-family ground floor residences.
5.	Veterinary clinics and kennels.
6.	Heliports.
7.	Mortuary establishments.
(Ord. No. 129-10,  1004(a), 1-31-2002) 
Section 1005(a). - Required conditions. 
    Building placement: Buildings and their elements shall be placed on lots and/or parcels of land as follows: 
1.	The minimum land area required for a downtown mixed-use development shall be two contiguous acres under single-ownership and control. For the purpose of this requirement, streets or the Clinton River shall not be deemed to divide acreages. 
2.	Lot coverage, including all buildings and paved areas, may be up to 100 percent of the property. 
3.	Front, side and rear setbacks shall not be required, except that no building or structure shall be located closer than 40 feet to the banks of the Clinton River and 25 feet from any development boundary line, excluding the Auburn Road frontage. The area along the Clinton River shall be maintained as open space and provide pedestrian access with public walkways and seating plazas. 
4.	The minimum distance between buildings shall be subject to the requirements found in section 1301(c) of this ordinance. 
5.	Minimum lot or parcel dimensions shall be:
a.	Area: Two acres.
b.	Width: 100 feet of road frontage.
c.	Depth: 200 feet.
6.	All buildings fronting onto Auburn Road shall have their primary pedestrian entrances from the front or road frontage side of the building with secondary pedestrian access being provided at the rear of the buildings. 
7.	All buildings fronting onto Auburn Road shall have, at a minimum, office and/or commercial uses on their ground floors unless the planning commission finds that such uses are not necessarily beneficial to the proposed project or to the downtown mixed use district; then the planning commission may waive such uses from being required. 
    Building height: The maximum building height permitted in DMXD, downtown mixed use-district shall be as follows: 
1.	Residential buildings in the DMXD shall not exceed five stories or 60 feet in height.
2.	Office and commercial buildings in the DMXD shall not exceed six stories or 72 feet in height. 
3.	Mixed use buildings containing office and/or commercial uses, along with over night lodging facilities or residential uses, shall not exceed six stories or 72 feet in height. 
    Parking requirements and loading/unloading: 
1.	For all residential uses located within the DMXD zone, including upper floor dwellings, off-street parking shall be required pursuant to sections 1405 and 1406 of this ordinance. 
2.	For all non-residential uses located within the DMXD zone, off-street parking shall be required pursuant to sections 1405 and 1406 of this ordinance. 
3.	Loading/Unloading. There are no loading/unloading space requirements. However, loading docks and service areas shall be permitted only at the rear of the building being serviced. Loading and unloading shall be expressly prohibited from any public thoroughfare (Auburn Road). On a case by case basis, site plan review shall define loading/unloading needs for each use requiring such space, and the planning commission shall specify how those needs will be met. In meeting said needs, the planning commission shall utilize private access drives at the rear of the building being serviced. Loading/unloading areas shall minimize disruption to customer traffic and emergency vehicle access; and, where appropriate, may include public open space areas for loading/unloading. 
    Residential density: 
1.	For attached residential dwellings, the maximum allowed density shall not exceed 30 units per acre. However, the density may be increased to 40 units per acre providing the dwellings have their entire required off-street vehicle parking requirements being contained in an enclosed structure, i.e., parking garage either above or below grade. 
2.	For a mixed use building(s), the maximum allowed density shall not exceed 45 units per acre. 
    Signage requirements: 
1.	Free standing signs shall be prohibited in the DMXD zone.
2.	Wall signs shall conform to the requirements found in section 1505.4. of this ordinance. In no case, however, in a mixed use building, shall any portion of a building facade used for a residential use be used in the calculation of the wall sign area. 
    Architectural and design standards: Architectural style of buildings in the DMXD zone shall be harmonious with the architectural styles found in the city's central business district historic preservation overlay zone. Compliance with these standards shall be verified through the site plan review process. Any variation from these standards shall be specifically reviewed by the planning commission who shall make recommendations to the city council for final approval. The city council, by the means of section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses", may approve, modify, or deny the planning commission's recommendation to make any variations with the following architectural and design standards. 
1.	Exterior building finish: The exterior finish material on all facades shall be the same and limited to glass, brick, cut stone or coarsely textured stucco. Exterior insulation finish systems, commonly known as Dryvit, aluminum, vinyl and wood are not allowed. Wood, however, may used for trim and doors. 
2.	Blank walls: Blank walls shall not face a public street. Walls facing a public street shall include windows and architectural features customarily found on the front of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing, or decorative finish materials. 
3.	Storefronts: Storefronts shall be directly accessible from public sidewalks (front and rear of said storefronts), and retail storefronts must have transparent areas equal to 70 percent of its portion of the facade, between two and eight feet from the ground. Other commercial uses and office uses must have transparent areas at least 25 percent of its portion of the ground floor facade. Special architectural features may be considered for adjustments to the ground floor facade window provisions, which shall be reviewed and approved by the city council. Storefronts shall have window mullions systems, doorways, and signage which are integrally designed into the facade. 
4.	Glass: Glass shall be clear or lightly tinted only. Mirrored glass shall be prohibited. 
5.	Sliding doors and sliding windows: Sliding doors and windows shall be prohibited on any facade that faces a public thoroughfare. 
6.	Flat roofs: Flat roofs shall be encouraged on mixed used and non-residential buildings, and roof mounted equipment shall be fully screened with parapet walls providing said parapet walls do not exceed six feet in height. 
7.	Pitched roofs: Pitched roofs shall not shed snow or water onto any public right-of-way, pedestrian walkway or onto any adjacent property without the approval of the city council. 
8.	Mansard roofs: Mansard roofs shall be prohibited in the DMXD zone. 
9.	Balconies, railings, and porches: Balconies, railings and porch structures shall be constructed of metal, wood, cast concrete, or stone. 
10.	Awnings: Facades may be supplemented by awnings, which add color and visual interest to an entry or display window, and give shade and shelter. They can also provide a location for store logos or signs. Awnings shall be made of quality materials, such as heavy canvas that will not fade or tear easily. When awnings are used on both upper and lower facades, they should be of compatible color, material and design. Prohibited awning types include rigid plastic formed awnings (typically cubed or curved, with or without internal lighting); stock unpainted metal awnings; and mansard style canopy awnings. Storefront awnings shall be a minimum of eight feet above sidewalk grade and shall not extend above the second floor window sill or extended any closer than four feet to a curb of a public road. 
11.	New buildings: Any new building shall provide distinct and prominent architectural features of enhanced character and visibility, which reflect the importance of the building's location and which creates a positive visual landmark. 
12.	Planter boxes: Planter and/or flower boxes shall be allowed, on a public sidewalk, without permit, provided that the planter containers be placed at the storefront entry and/or under storefront display windows and encroach upon the sidewalk no more than two feet from the building. Planter boxes are also encouraged to be used throughout the mixed-use development. 
13.	Outdoor displays: Appropriate temporary outdoor displays for retail shops are allowed on a storefront's private property abutting the sidewalk. Permits are not required for appropriate store merchandise displays on a storefront's private property, provided that the display coverage allows customers easy storefront entry. 
14.	Colors: Colors of any building component, including accents, shall be harmonious. 
15.	Over street connections: Over street connections may be allowed between mixed-use buildings and/or non-residential buildings, but they are expressly prohibited between buildings used solely for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 129-10,  1005(a), 1-31-2002; Ord. No. 129-16, 5-10-2005) 
Section 1006(a). - Processing requirements. 
    The process for obtaining review and approval of a downtown mixed-use development is as follows: 
1.	Downtown mixed-use developments shall be subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses", and section 1800, "site plan review" of this zoning ordinance. 
2.	Prior to committing to any lot and/or parcel or site design, the developer and its professional consultants shall meet the city administration and planner (planning consultant) to review the local regulations governing the proposed development, including design and processing requirements. 
At this meeting, the applicant is expected to outline to the city, the project in terms of land use, anticipated building arrangement and site design, and proposed construction timetable. 
3.	A development plan (master plan) for the total acreage embraced by the proposal shall be submitted to the city planning commission for its review, and to the city council, for its approval before any development may be undertaken or any building permit is issued for a site within the downtown mixed-use development district. 
4.	An application shall be submitted by the applicant and be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount established by council resolution. The application shall also be accompanied by statements, plans, evidence, material, and documentation necessary to enable the planning commission and city council to make the findings required by this article. The required documentation shall consist of any or all of the following: 
a.	A narrative which provides the evidence that the project satisfies section 1005(a) requirements, and describes existing site characteristics, the proposed character of the development, and a discussion of the means serving the development with sewer and water. 
b.	Statement of covenants, grants of easements, and other restrictions to be imposed upon the uses of land and structures. 
c.	A site plan prepared in accordance with section 1800 
d.	A schedule indicating the proposed timing of the development, including staging, if appropriate. 
e.	Any other data, plans, or drawings considered by the planning commission or city council to be necessary for the consideration of the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 129-10,  1006(a), 1-31-2002) 
ARTICLE XI - I, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. (Back)
Section 1100. - Intent. 
    The I, industrial district is designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. 
    The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
1.	To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the municipality's expected future economy for additional manufacturing and related uses. 
2.	To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
3.	To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
4.	To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the Municipality's tax revenue. 
Section 1101. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
1.	Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
2.	Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
a.	Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities.
b.	The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as, but not limited to, bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
c.	The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, and yarns. 
d.	The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
e.	Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and meal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products. 
f.	Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radio and phonographs. 
g.	Laboratories; experimental, film, or testing.
h.	Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like. 
i.	Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that such plants shall not deal directly with consumer at retail. 
j.	All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses. 
3.	Warehouse, storage, and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations. 
4.	Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies. 
5.	Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other similar municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage. 
6.	Kennels.
7.	Greenhouses.
8.	Trade or industrial schools.
9.	Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to, lumber yard, building materials outlet, upholsterer, cabinet maker). 
10.	Recycling centers.
11.	Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when located in a completely enclosed building. 
12.	Other uses similar to the above uses.
13.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
Section 1102. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following special condition uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with section 4c.(2) of the city-village zoning act, as may be amended (MCL 125.584c(2)), and further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in section 1802, "review and approval of conditional uses," and section 1800, "site plan review," of this zoning ordinance. 
1.	Mini-warehouses (self-storage facilities) subject to the following conditions:
a.	The minimum size of the site devoted to such use shall not be less than three acres.
b.	Building setbacks shall be as follows: Front yard not less than 20 feet; side and rear yard not less than ten feet. 
c.	Building separation between self-storage buildings on the same site shall be 15 feet, as measured from side-to-aide or front to rear, or equal to the building height, whichever is greater. 
d.	The total lot coverage of all structures shall be limited to 50 percent of the total lot area. 
e.	A sight-proof barrier shall be provided around the perimeter of the development. Said barrier shall be located at the setback line and may consist of either the solid facades of the storage structures or a fence. If a fence is provided, it shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be constructed of brick, stone, masonry units, or wood products which are determined by the building inspector to be durable and weather resistant. 
f.	A ten feet landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and required barrier along all street frontages. A five foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and barrier where the site abuts any residential district. All materials shall be planted in conformance with section 1222. 
g.	Parking shall be provided in the ratio of one space for each 2,000 square feet of gross building area. At a minimum, two parking spaces must be assigned to, and located conveniently to, each individual storage building. In addition, two spaces for the resident manager, and one additional space for each additional employee shall be provided adjacent to the rental office. 
h.	Internal driveway aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
i.	All off-street parking areas and driveways shall be hard surfaced and drained in accordance with section 1207. 
j.	All ingress and egress from this site shall be directly onto a collector or major thoroughfare as identified on the city future land use plan. 
k.	Building height shall not exceed one story 15 feet except that a caretaker or resident manager's unit may be allowed a building height of two stories 25 feet. 
l.	No single storage building shall exceed 5,000 square feet.
m.	All storage on the property shall be kept within an enclosed building.
n.	The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only, and shall not be used for any auction, or sales, or storage and transfer business; for the servicing, repair, or fabrication of any vehicle, boat, trailer, appliance, or similar item; or for the operation of power tools, compressors, kilns, or similar equipment; except, that limited sales to tenants of products and supplies incidental to the principal use, such as packing materials, identification labels, rope, locks, tape, etc., shall be permitted on the site devoted to this use. The storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers or explosive materials, is defined in the fire protection code, or toxic materials are expressly prohibited. 
2.	Wireless communication facilities.
a.	Purpose and intent. The general purpose and intent of these regulations is to regulate the establishment of wireless communication support facilities (WCSF) in recognition of the public need and demand for advanced telecommunication and information technologies and services balanced against the impacts such facilities may have on properties within the City of Utica. It is the further purpose and intent of these regulations to: 
(1)	Provide for the appropriate location and development criteria for wireless communication support facilities and wireless communication antenna within the city; and 
(2)	Allow and encourage the location of wireless communication support facilities in industrial zoning districts; and 
(3)	Minimize the adverse effects of such facilities through careful design, siting and screening criteria; and 
(4)	Maximize the use of existing and future wireless communication support facilities and encouraging multiple uses on such facilities; and 
(5)	Protect the character of residential areas throughout the city from the effects of wireless communication facilities; and 
(6)	Promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
b.	Wireless communication antenna (WCA).
(1)	To encourage co-location and to minimize the number of WCSFs within the city, WCAs shall be considered a permitted accessory use when placed on or attached to any structure which constitutes a principle use, including existing WCSFs, provided that any WCA shall not extend more than ten feet above the tallest portion of the structure on or to which it is attached. Provided further that the location of any WCA shall not exceed 100 feet unless: 
(a)	Located on a lawfully existing or approved WCSF; or
(b)	Located on a structure existing prior to the adoption of this regulation; or
(c)	Located on a structure, which has received a height variance.
(2)	WCAs shall require no personnel on the premises except as necessary for maintenance and repair. 
(3)	If a WCA requires an accessory equipment storage structure located elsewhere other than at grade, it shall not be greater than ten feet in height and obscured from view, i.e., a roof top location; and if such a structure is located at grade, it shall not exceed the height of 15 feet and shall meet all zoning requirements. 
(4)	WCAs shall be allowed on any site zoned in a non-residential classification.
(5)	All WCAs shall be designed to blend into or meet the aesthetic character of the principal (primary) structure where reasonably practical taking into consideration the location of the WCA and the line of sight angle and distance from the right-of-way and neighboring uses. 
(6)	No accessory equipment structure or area shall be allowed in any rights-of-way.
(7)	The installation of a WCA in any zoning district must be reviewed by the planning commission. The planning commission shall review all such requests and shall approve such requests that meet the requirements of this section. Such review by the planning commission shall be without notice. 
(8)	A WCA proposed to be located on a historic landmark or in a designated historic district may be denied if the WCA would create an adverse impact on the historic character of the historic landmark or district. 
(9)	This section shall not exempt the applicant from such other government review and permitting procedures (i.e., FCC, FAA, etc.). 
c.	Wireless communication support (tower) facilities (WCSF).
(1)	General criteria.
(a)	All WCSF shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable construction codes, which include the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industry Association (EIA/TIA) Structural Standards of Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures. 
(b)	The WCSF shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements.
(c)	The WCSF shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signage except signage, which shall show the identity of the service provider and emergency telephone numbers. 
(d)	The WCSF may be located on an industrial or mixed use zoning lot containing other principal uses. The WCSF may be located within an area smaller than the minimum lot size of the applicable zoning district provided the zoning lot complies with the applicable minimum lot size for the existing principal use or is a legal nonconforming or grandfathered lot. The area within which the WCSF is located shall be the area subject to the requirements of this section, rather than the entire zoning lot, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(e)	The WCSF shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located which are not inconsistent with this section. Minimum yard requirements shall be measured from the boundary of the zoning lot to the closest portion of the WCSF of the accessory equipment structure or storage area, whichever is closer. 
(f)	The WCSF shall have a landscaped buffer so that the base of the WCSF and accessory equipment structure or storage area shall be screened from any right-of-way, residential use or residential zoning district. Such landscaped buffer may be placed on the site in a manner, which will maximize the aesthetic and environmental benefits while at the same time providing the visual buffer required hereby. Such landscaped buffer shall consist of hedges planted leaf to leaf which shall reach a height of not less than six feet at maturity and conifer trees planted on 15-foot centers along the approved buffer of a species approved by the planning commission unless safety requirements of the principal use requires otherwise (i.e., utility substations). 
(g)	The construction of the WCSF shall be of monopole design unless it can be demonstrated that such design is not feasible to accommodate the user or co-location. 
(h)	The application shall contain information showing the geographic search area within which the proposed WCSF must be located and shall also provide locations of all structures of similar height within and adjacent to the search area. 
(i)	If co-location is not part of the application then the applicant must demonstrate in the application as to why co-location is not possible. 
(j)	This section shall not exempt the applicant from such other government review and permitting procedures (i.e., FCC, FAA, etc.). 
(k)	WCSFs shall not have a shiny or metallic finish.
(2)	Replacement of existing WCSF. An existing WCSF which was lawful at the time of its construction may be replaced for purposes of accommodating co-location of additional WCAs or otherwise provided that: 
(a)	The replacement WCSF shall not exceed a total height of 150 feet or, if the existing WCSF has an approved height greater than 150 feet, the replacement WCSF shall not exceed the approved height. 
(b)	The replacement WCSF shall be located within the same zoning lot as the existing WCSF and shall be located so as to maximize compliance with existing minimum yard requirements. 
(c)	The applicant shall cause the existing WCSF to be removed within ninety days of completion of the replacement WCSF and the relocation or installation of the WAC. In any event, the existing WCSF shall be removed within 180 days of the city's final construction inspection of the replacement WCSF. 
(d)	If the location of the replacement WCSF is such that the existing WCSF must be moved before the replacement WCSF is constructed, temporary portable antennae support facilities may be used, but must be removed within 30 days of the completion of the replacement WCSF and the relocation or installation of the WCA. In any event, the temporary portable antennae facilities must be removed within 60 days of the city's final construction inspection of the replacement WCSF. 
(e)	The replacement WCSF shall meet all criteria and requirements in subsection c(1) hereof.
(f)	The installation of a replacement WCSF in any zoning district must be reviewed by the planning commission. The planning commission shall review all such requests and shall approve such requests that meet the requirements of this section. Such review by the planning commission shall be without notice. 
(3)	Review criteria for all new WCSFs, except replacement WCSFs.
(a)	A new WCSF shall not be approved unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant that there is a need for the new WCSF which cannot be met by placing WCA on an existing WCSF or on other structures or replacement of an existing WCSF. Information concerning the following factors shall be considered in determining that such need exists: 
i.	Insufficient structural capacity of existing WCSFs or other suitable structures and infeasibility of reinforcing or replacing an existing WCSF; 
ii.	Unavailability of suitable locations to accommodate system design or engineering on existing WCSF or other structures; 
iii.	Radio frequency interference or other signal interference problems at existing WCSF or others structures; 
iv.	The cost of using an existing WCSF or other structure exceeds the costs of permitting and constructing a new WCSF; 
v.	Other factors, which demonstrate the reasonable, need for the new WCSF.
vi.	The name, address and phone number of the persons to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the WCF is on the premises. 
(b)	The applicant must include a statement in the application of its good faith intent to allow the co-location of the WCA of other entities, provided that the cost of modifying the WCSF to accommodate the co-location WCA is borne by the co-locating entity. 
(c)	The applicant shall send a written notice to all potential users of the new WCSF offering an opportunity for co-location. The list of potential users shall be provided by the city based on those entities that have requested approval of WSCF in the past,current FCC license holders and any other entities requesting to be included on the list. Copies of the notice letters shall be provided to the city at the time the application is filed. If, during a period of thirty days after the notice letters are sent to potential users, a user or users request, in writing, to co-locate on the new WCSF, the applicant shall accommodate the request(s), unless co-location is not reasonably possible based on the criteria of this subsection. 
(d)	New WCSFs shall meet the following additional criteria:
i.	The WCSF shall not exceed 150 feet in height.
ii.	All WCSF's over 100 feet in height shall be designed for co-location.
iii.	All WCSFs which are located within 250 feet of a lot used for a residential use or a residential zoning district as measured from the base of the WCSF shall require Conditional Use Permit. 
iv.	The WCSF shall meet all criteria and requirements of subsection c(1).
v.	The installation of a WCSF must be reviewed by the planning commission. The planning commission shall review all such WCSFs and shall approve such WCSFs that meet the requirements of this section. Such review by the planning commission shall be without notice. 
(e)	Application requirements for new WCSFs:
i.	A site plan prepared in accordance with section 1800 (Review and approval of site plans) shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping. 
ii.	The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan (in accordance with section 1800 and paragraph c.(1)(f) above) where the support structure is being placed at a location which in not otherwise developed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the plan fencing which is required for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities, which may be unsafe. 
iii.	The application shall include a certification by a State of Michigan licensed and registered professional engineer of the applicant with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulation for the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure (WCSF) and other facilities. 
iv.	The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in paragraph c(5) below. In this regard, the security shall be in the form of cash, surety bond, letter of credit, or an agreement in a form approved by the city's attorney establishing the land in question as security for removal. 
v.	The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed WCFs within the City of Utica, and further showing existing and known WCFs within areas surrounding the borders of the city in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms of potential co-location or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. 
vi.	The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the WCF is on the premises. 
(4)	Additional criteria for special condition use approval and review. The installation of a WCSF in any zoning district other than a non-residential district shall be subject to the following: 
(a)	WCSFs shall also meet all criteria and requirements of subsections c(1) and (3) of this section. 
(b)	WCSFs shall be located on lots or parcels of not less than two acres.
(c)	WCSFs shall be accessory uses and shall be located on property owned and used by:
i.	Federal, state or local government entities.
ii.	Schools, colleges and universities.
iii.	Utility companies.
(d)	If the WCSF is not entirely surrounded by commercial or industrial uses, a written justification of the need for this site showing why other sites are not reasonable. 
(e)	WCSFs proposed to be located on a historic landmark or in a designated historic district may be denied if the WCSF would create an adverse impact on the historic character of the historic landmark or district. 
(f)	The planning commission may require a visual/line of site analysis to enable to city to assess impacts. Such analysis may require the applicant to provide visualization of the WCSF on-site which may include graphic representations or other acceptable methods to demonstrate the visualization. 
(5)	Removal of abandoned WCSFs. Any WCSF which is abandoned shall immediately be removed or demolished. For the purposes of this section, abandoned shall mean that no WCA or other commercial antenna has been operational and located on the WCSF for 180 days or more. Where a WCSF is abandoned but not removed or demolished as required hereby, the city may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected from the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the WCF or the city may place a lien on the property to cover costs for the removal of the WCF. A lien on the property shall be superior to all other liens except taxes. 
(6)	Variances and appeals. Variances from this section may be requested from the zoning board of appeals. Requests for additional height to any permitted or previously approved WCSF may be granted by the planning commission to provide for co-location of additional WCSF so long as such additional height does not exceed 30 feet. Appeals of a planning commission decision shall be taken to the zoning board of appeals. 
3.	Adult entertainment use subject to the following conditions:
a.	No adult entertainment use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment use nor within 500 feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)	All class "C" establishments licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
(2)	Pool or billiard halls.
(3)	Coin-operated amusement centers.
(4)	Teenage discos or dance halls.
(5)	Ice or roller skating rinks.
(6)	Pawn shops.
(7)	Indoor or drive-in movie theaters.
(8)	Any public park.
(9)	Any church.
(10)	Any public or private school having a curriculum including kindergarten or any one or more of the grades, one through 12. 
Such distance shall be measured along the centerline of the street or streets or address between two fixed points on the centerlines determined by projecting straight lines at right angles from the part of the above listed uses nearest to the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use, and from the contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use nearest to a use listed above. 
b.	No adult entertainment use shall be located within 500 feet of any area zoned residential. Such required distances shall be measured by a straight line between a point on the boundary line of a zoned residential area nearest to the contemplated structure or contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use to a point on the contemplated structure or contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use nearest to the boundary lines of a zoned residential area. 
c.	All adult entertainment uses shall be contained in a freestanding building. Enclosed malls, commercial strip stores, common wall structures, and multi-uses within the same structure do not constitute a freestanding building. 
d.	No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not regulated as an adult entertainment use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
e.	The provisions of city ordinance no. 120 shall also apply.
4.	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses.
(Ord. No. 129-18, 4-11-2006) 
Section 1103. - Required conditions. 
1.	Open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in manufacturing, compounding or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3, O-1, C-1, C-2, and MXD districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 1423. In I districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall shall not be less than four feet six inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight feet in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of article XIV, general provisions. The height shall be determined in the same manner as the wall height is above set forth. 
2.	All activities and uses within the district shall conform to the following performance standards. 
a.	Smoke. A person or industry shall not discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever any air contaminant for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in any one hour which is: 
(1)	As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 112 on the Ringelmann chart, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or 
(2)	Of such density as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the level of smoke described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)	At no time may smoke emissions be darker than Ringelmann No. 1.
b.	Open fires. A person or industry shall not burn any combustible refuse in any open outdoor fire within the district. 
c.	Noxious gases.No noxious or malodorous gases shall be allowed to escape into the atmosphere in concentrations which are offensive, which produces a public nuisance or hazard on any adjoining lot or property, or which could be detrimental to human, plant, or animal life. 
d.	Air contaminants. A person or industry shall not discharge from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material, including fly-ash, dust, vapor, or other air pollutants, which could cause injury or harm to health, animals, vegetation, or other property, or which can cause excessive soiling. Dust, dirt, smoke, or fly-ash shall not be in excess of 0.3 grams per cubic foot of flue gas at stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and not to exceed 50 percent excess air. 
e.	Glare and heat. Any operation or activity producing glare shall be so conducted that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half of one foot candle when measured at any adjoining residence or business district boundary line. Flickering or intense source of light shall be so controlled as not to cause a nuisance across any lot lines. 
If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it shall be so insulated as to not raise the temperature at any property line at any time. 
f.	Noise. No activity shall emit noise in excess of the standards specified in section 1427 
g.	Vibration. Vibrations from industrial operations and vehicular traffic in this district must be controlled to the extent that they cannot be felt past any property line. 
h.	Radio transmission. For electronic equipment required in an industrial operation, the equipment shall be so shielded that its operation will not interfere with radio, television, or other electronic equipment. 
i.	Storage of flammable materials. Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment and such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved. 
j.	Radioactive materials. No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or unreasonable electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 
k.	Water pollution. Pollution of water shall be subject to such requirements and regulations as are established by the Michigan State Department of Health, the Michigan Water Resources Commission, the Macomb County Health Department, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Such requirements and regulations shall apply in all cases except when they are less stringent than the following standards in which case the following standards shall apply: 
(1)	No wastes shall be discharged in the public sewer system which is dangerous to the public health and safety. 
(2)	Acidity or alkalinity shall be neutralized to a pH of 7.0 as a daily average on a volumetric basis, with a maximum temporary variation of pH 5.0 to 10.0. 
(3)	Wastes shall contain no cyanides and no halogens and shall contain not more than 10 ppm of the following gases: hydrogen sulfite, sulfur dioxide, and nitrous oxide. 
(4)	Wastes shall not contain any insoluble substance in excess of 10,000 ppm or exceeding a daily average of 500 ppm or fail to pass a No. 8 Standard Sieve, or have a dimension greater than one-half inch. 
(5)	Wastes shall not have chlorine demand greater than 15 ppm.
(6)	Wastes shall not contain phenols in excess of .005 ppm.
(7)	Wastes shall not contain any grease or oil or any oil substance in excess of 100 ppm or exceed a daily average of 25 ppm. 
Section 1104. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XIII, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
ARTICLE XII - P-1, VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14; stopping, standing and parking,  78-111 et seq. (Back)
Section 1200. - Intent. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
Section 1201. - Uses permitted. 
    Premises in such districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are hereinafter provided. 
Section 1202. - Required conditions. 
1.	The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
2.	Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an R-3, O-1, C-1, C-2, or I district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to said districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and above listed districts. 
3.	Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, for periods of less than one day and shall not be used as an off-street loading area. 
4.	No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
5.	No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
6.	No building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
Section 1203. - Distances and setbacks. 
1.	Where the P-1 district is contiguous to the side and/or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the wall, berm, or greenbelt shall be located along said lot line. 
2.	Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for said residential district. A required wall, berm, or greenbelt shall be located on this minimum setback line. 
Section 1204. - Parking space layout, standards, construction, and maintenance. 
    P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of section 1409. 
Section 1205. - Processing requirements. 
1.	Applications for P-1 district rezoning shall be made to the planning commission by submitting a dimension layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plan. 
ARTICLE XIII - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Section 1300. - Schedule, limiting height, bulk, density, and area by zoning district. 
    Scope. The following regulations regarding lot sizes, yards, setbacks, building heights, and densities apply within the zoning districts as indicated, including the regulations contained in section 1301, footnotes. No building shall be erected, nor shall an existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the regulations hereby established for the district in which such building is located. No portion of a lot used in complying with the provisions of this ordinance for yards, courts, lot area occupancy, in connection with an existing or projected building or structure, shall again be used to qualify or justify any other building or structure existing or intended to exist at the same time. 
Minimum Size
Per Zoning Lot (a)Maximum Building HeightMinimum Yard Setback Requirements Per Zoning Lot In Feet (b)Zoning DistrictArea In Square FeetWidth In FeetIn StoriesIn FeetMaximum Building Lot Coverage In PercentFrontEach SideRearMinimum Livable Floor Area Per Unit In (Square Feet)Gross Density In Units Per AcreR-1A, one-family residential7,500752.5 30 3525850 1,2005.8R-1B, one-family residential5,00050 2.5 30 35258401,2008.7 R-2, two-family residential8,800752.5 30 353510 30 800 10.0R-3, multiple-family residential10,000100 2.5 30 4025(c)25(c)25(c)-(d)(e)O-1, Office(f)(f)2.030 (f)20(g)15(h)(i)20--C-1, central business district(f)(f)3.040(f)(g)(h)(i)30(i) --C-2, general business district(f)(f)2.0(l)25(l)(f)25(g)15(j)30 --P-1, vehicular parkingRefer to Article XII, section 1203, 1 and 2 for design requirements. MXDRefer to article X, section 1004, 2 for area and bulk requirements. I, industrial district87,120150-45-25(k)25(j)30 -- 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Section 1301. - Notes to schedule of regulations. 
(a)	See section 1302, single-family cluster option, and section 1303, zero lot line developments regarding flexibility allowances. 
(b)	In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. In the R-1A and R-1B districts, "when buildings having the same setback have been constructed on the majority of parcels on the same block frontage at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, the required setback line shall be that line established by existing buildings. In the instance where variable setbacks are present for existing buildings, a setback of 25 feet shall be required." 
(c)	In the district, front, side, or rear yards need not refer to spacing between buildings for the planned development of two or more buildings on the same parcel. In such cases, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings and in no instance be less than 30 feet. 
The formula for regulating the required minimum distance between two buildings is as follows: 
S = LA + LB + 2 (HA + HB) / 6 
where; 
Sequals required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. LAequals total length of building A.The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. LBequals total length of building B.The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, the lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. HAequals height of building A.The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion of portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. HBequals height of building B.The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.  
(d)	In the district, the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining, and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the net area of the parcel, in square feet, (excluding public rights-of-way), divided by 1,200. 
(e)	For the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments shall control: 
Efficiency equals two rooms 
One bedroom equals three rooms 
Two bedroom equals four rooms 
Three bedroom equals five rooms 
Four bedroom equals six rooms 
Plans presented showing a den, library, or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
(f)	The minimum lot area and width, and the maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined on the basis of yard setbacks, screening, and off-street parking and loading areas as provided for the various use districts. 
(g)	Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed landscaped greenbelt buffer in accordance with section 1222 of ten feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the front lot line. 
(h)	No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise specified in the building code provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. 
(i)	Where a lot zoned C-1, central business district, abuts a residential district not separated by a street, the following minimum yard setbacks shall be provided along the property line(s) abutting a residential district: side yard ten feet, rear yard 20 feet. 
(j)	Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback, however, in no instance shall less than a five-foot setback be provided between the nearest point of the parking area or drive, and the side lot line. 
(k)	Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required by section 1206 may be permitted within the required front yard provided that such off-street parking is not located within 20 feet of the front lot line and provided further that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed greenbelt buffer of ten feet between the nearest point of the visitor parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the front lot line. 
(l)	The planning commission may recommend to waive the number of stories from 2.0 to not exceed 4.0 and building height in feet from 20 to not exceed 45 subject to the review and approval of a conditional use approval pursuant to the requirements found in section 1802 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Section 1302. - Single-family cluster housing option. 
1.	The intent of this section is to permit the development of single-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will introduce flexibility so as to provide for a more appropriate development in situations where the normal subdivision approach would otherwise be restrictive owing to the presence of environmentally sensitive lands on the site, or the configuration of the site. 
2.	The planning commission may approve the clustering and/or attaching of single-family dwelling units on parcels of land three acres or more in size, under single ownership and control. In approving an area for the cluster housing option, the planning commission shall find at least one of the following to exist: 
a.	The parcel to be developed has frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare and is generally parallel to said thoroughfare and is of shallow depth as measured from the thoroughfare. 
b.	The parcel has frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare and is of a narrow width as measured along the thoroughfare which makes platting difficult. 
c.	The parcel is shaped in such a way that it contains acute angles which would make a normal subdivision difficult to achieve and has frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare. 
d.	A substantial part of the parcel's perimeter is bordered by a major thoroughfare which would result in a substantial proportion of the lots of the development abutting the major thoroughfare. 
e.	The parcel contains a floodplain or poor soil conditions which result in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel being unbuildable. Soil test borings, floodplain maps or other documented evidence must be submitted to the planning commission in order to substantiate the parcel's qualification for cluster development under this subsection. 
f.	The parcel contains natural assets which could be preserved through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic features, or other natural assets which, in the opinion of the planning commission, should be preserved. Requests for qualification under these conditions must be supported by documented evidence which indicates that the natural assets would qualify the parcel under this option. 
The planning commission may, at its discretion, convene a public hearing held in accordance with Section 4a of Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended (MCL 125.584a), as part of its review, study, and approval of an area for the cluster housing option. 
3.	In areas meeting the above criteria, the minimum yard setbacks, heights, and minimum lot sizes per unit as required by the section 1300, may be waived and the attaching of dwelling units may be accomplished subject to the following: 
a.	The minimum floor area for all units constructed under this option shall be at least equal to the minimum floor area requirements for the single-family residential district in which the cluster is to be constructed. 
b.	The attaching of single-family dwelling units, one to another, may be permitted when said homes are attached by means of one or more of the following: 
(1)	Through a common party wall which does not have over 50 percent of its area in common with an abutting dwelling wall. 
(2)	By means of an architectural wall detail which does not form interior room space.
(3)	Through a common party wall in only the garage portion of an abutting structure.
c.	The maximum number of units attached in the above described manner shall not exceed four. 
d.	In a single-family cluster housing development, the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the total land area (inclusive of buildable and unbuildable areas) were to be developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for each single-family district under the section 1300 
4.	Yard requirements shall be provided as follows:
a.	Spacing between any grouping of four or less one-family units and another grouping of such structures shall be equal to at least 16 feet, measured between the nearest point of the two groupings. A grouping may include a single, freestanding unit. 
b.	All such groupings shall be so situated as to have one side of the building abutting onto a common open space. 
c.	Any side of a building adjacent to a private service drive or private lane shall not be nearer to said drive or lane than 20 feet. 
d.	This nature of development, when abutting a front yard of an existing recorded subdivision which is not a part of the site plan submitted under this section, shall cause all dwelling units facing such subdivision to relate through its front or entrance facade and shall treat said side of the grouping as a front yard. 
e.	No building shall be located closer than 30 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of the site. 
5.	The maximum height of buildings shall be 30 feet.
6.	In reviewing the plans and approving the application of this section to a particular site, the planning commission shall require the following: 
a.	A landscaped berm, at least three feet high, shall be provided along the entire property line abutting the major thoroughfare. This berm may be included within a required side or rear yard. The planning commission shall find that the slopes on said berms are gentle enough so as not to erode when planted in grass; and they shall review the design of the berm as it relates to street intersections, finding that the horizontal view of oncoming traffic is not obscured. 
7.	In submitting a proposed layout under this section, the sponsor of the development shall include, along with the site plan, typical building elevations and floor plans, topography drawn at two foot contour intervals, main floor grade elevations relative to the existing topography, all computation relative to acreage and density, details relative to the proposed berm, and any other details which will assist in reviewing the proposed plan. 
8.	Site plans submitted under this option shall be accompanied by information regarding the following: 
a.	The proposed manner of holding title to open land.
b.	The proposed method of regulating the use of open land.
c.	The proposed method of maintenance of property and financing thereof.
9.	All land not intended to be conveyed to individual dwelling unit owners shall be set aside for the use of all occupants of the development. All such lands shall be protected by restrictions or covenants running with the land and must be approved by the city attorney to ensure the following: 
a.	That title to the open space is held in common by the owners of all dwelling units in the detached single-family cluster development. 
b.	A permanent organization for maintenance and management of all such areas shall be ensured by legal documents prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
10.	The construction of a cluster housing development shall be subject to the engineering design standards of the City of Utica, as may be amended, except as may otherwise be provided by this ordinance. 
Section 1303. - Zero lot line developments. 
1.	The intent of the zero lot line concept is to:
a.	Promote the more efficient use of land, as compared to traditional single-family development, thereby making housing more affordable to a segment of the community. 
b.	Design dwellings that integrate and relate internal and external living areas resulting in more pleasant and enjoyable living facilities. 
c.	Permitting the outdoor space to be grouped and utilized to its maximum benefit by placing the dwelling unit against one of the property lines. 
2.	A zero lot line development is restricted for one-family developments only in the R-1A and R-1B districts, if approved after a public hearing held before the planning commission in accordance with Section 4a of Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended (MCL 125.584a). 
3.	The planning commission may approve an application for a zero lot line development which complies with the following development parameters: 
a.	Uses permitted are restricted to detached one-family dwellings on individually platted lots, including every accessory use customarily incidental therewith. 
b.	The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet. The minimum lot width required shall be 40 feet. 
c.	Each dwelling unit shall only be placed on one interior side property line with a zero setback as to abut the adjoining unit, and the dwelling unit setback on the other interior side property line shall be a minimum of 12 feet. Patios, fences, walks, trellis, garden features, and similar elements shall be permitted within the setback area provided, however, no structure, with the exception of fences and walks, shall be placed within required easements. 
A minimum 25 foot front yard and 25 foot rear yard setback shall be provided. The minimum side yard setback on the street side of a corner lot, or adjacent to any nonresidential district, shall be 20 feet. 
d.	The total lot coverage permitted for all buildings on the site shall not exceed 30 percent of the lot area. 
e.	Every part of a required setback shall be maintained as an open space, with no principal or accessory structure occupying any portion, except that overhead projections from the building face (such as soffits) and projection of architectural features (such as bay windows or awnings) may project not more than three feet into such space. 
f.	The maximum building height shall not exceed two stories and 25 feet in height.
g.	The wall of the dwellings located on the zero lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other type of openings, provided, however, that atriums or courts shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when the court or atrium is enclosed by three walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall of at least eight feet in height is provided on the zero lot line. Said wall shall be constructed of the same material as exterior walls of the unit. 
h.	A minimum of two off-street parking spaces, excluding the private garage or carport, shall be required for each dwelling unit. 
i.	All dwellings constructed on a zero lot line must be provided with a firewall as set forth by local ordinance. 
ARTICLE XIV - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1400. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this ordinance, then the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 
State law reference- Conflicts, MCL 125.586. 
Section 1401. - Building regulations. 
1.	Scope. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, used, reconstructed, altered or maintained, and no lot or land, or part thereof, shall hereafter be used or maintained and no new use made of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Unlawful building. In case any building, or part thereof, is used, erected, occupied or altered contrary to law or the provisions of this ordinance, such building shall be deemed an unlawful structure and a nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down or abated by any legal means, and shall not be used or occupied until it has been made to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. Public expenditures toward abating such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land. 
3.	Temporary building. No temporary building shall be erected unless a valid building permit exists for a permanent building or a new use of land on the same site. Any temporary building shall be removed from the site within 30 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The approval of a temporary building may not exceed one year; however, the city council, acting as the zoning board of appeals, may grant multiple extensions up to three months each for good cause shown, when the approval is due to expire. 
4.	Building occupancy. No basement shall be used or occupied as a dwelling unit at any time, nor shall a dwelling be erected in a nonresidential district, except for the living quarters of a watchman, caretaker, or resident manager. 
5.	Frontage on a public street. No building shall be erected on a lot unless said lot fronts no less than 80 percent its full width, as required by section 1300, upon a street or road that has been dedicated to the public. Multi-family developments, or commercial, office, or industrial centers need not front each such structure within the development upon publicly dedicated streets or roads, provided that adequate interior vehicular circulation and access can be ensured in a site plan submitted for approval to the city. 
6.	One lot, one building. In all districts, only one principal building shall be placed on a single lot of record, except as provided by section 1401.5 above. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
Section 1402. - Building appearance, structure completion, and personal construction authority. 
1.	Residential zones. In residential zones, after 25 percent of the lots and frontage on the side of the street on any block where the proposed improvement is contemplated have been improved by the erection on the residences thereon, if one-half or more of the residences built in any such block are of a certain type and style, the remainder of the residences built in any such block and to be constructed, altered, relocated, or repaired in such block shall be of a substantially similar type and style so that new or altered buildings will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood. Nothing herein shall prevent the upgrading of any residential block by installing an exterior finish having fire or weather resistance, which is greater than the minimum herein required, or by constructing in such block a residence having floor area greater than the average area of residences in such block; provided, however, such type and style shall be such as not to impair or destroy property values in the block. (See also section 1414.) 
2.	Nonresidential zones. In any case where a building or accessory building in a nonresidential district is erected or placed within 200 feet of the front lot line of any parcel of land fronting upon any public street, the front walls of said building or accessory building within said distance of 200 feet shall be constructed of stone, face brick or other ornamental materials approved by the planning commission consistent with neighboring property, and no building so situated shall be constructed of tarred paper, tin, corrugated iron, or any form of pressed board or felt or similar material within the limits herein specified, nor shall any occupant of such premises be permitted to place open stock, scrap, or junk piles within said 200 feet unless the same shall be obscured from view from the street by the existence of a building, solid wall, earth berm, or evergreen screen sufficient to properly obscure the same from view from the street. 
3.	Building completion period. All structures shall be completed within one year of the issue date of the building permit for such structure, unless an extension for not more than one additional year is granted for good cause by the building official. When a part of the building is ready for occupancy, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued, provided that the premises complies with health and fire standards required under this ordinance, or any other ordinance, regulation, or statute. 
4.	Personal construction authority. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting an owner, tenant, occupant, or land contract vendee from doing his or her own building, altering, plumbing, electrical installations, etc., provided the minimum requirements of the Electrical and Plumbing Codes of the State of Michigan, and the applicable county health department regulations are complied with. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
Section 1403. - Nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses of structures and premises. 
1.	Intent. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit existing, legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. 
It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this ordinance and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and use of land and structures which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendments. 
Such uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
2.	Nonconforming lots. In any single-family district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record which is under separate and distinct ownership from adjacent lots at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the board of appeals. 
3.	Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.	No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. 
b.	No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. 
c.	If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for this district in which such land is located. 
4.	Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.	No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. For example, existing residences on lots of a width less than required herein may add a rear porch provided that other requirements relative to yard space and land coverage are met. 
b.	Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
c.	Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for this district in which it is located after it is removed. 
5.	Nonconforming uses of structures and land. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.	No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
b.	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
c.	If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification provided that the board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use. 
d.	Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
e.	When a nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six consecutive months or 18 months during any three year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses (one season out of each year) shall be excepted from this provision. 
f.	Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
6.	Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
7.	Conditional use interpretation. Any conditional use as provided for in this ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
8.	Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses. 
9.	Acquisition. The city council may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming uses. The cost and expense, or a portion thereof, of acquiring the private property may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions relating to the creation and operation of special assessment districts for public improvements in cities. The elimination of the nonconforming uses and structures in a zoning district is declared to be for a public purpose and for a public use. The city council may institute and prosecute proceedings for condemnation of nonconforming uses and structures under the power of eminent domain in accordance with Act 149 of the Public Acts of 1911, as amended, being sections 213.21 to 213.41 of the Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL 213.21 et seq) or other applicable statute. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
State law reference- Nonconformities, MCL 125.583a. 
Section 1404. - Adaptive reuse projects. 
1.	Intent. Typically, various land use activities are provided for in one or more zoning districts. The criteria for such allocations is based upon similarities in the nature of uses and their relationship to other such uses and adjoining development. Zoning districts are also established to coordinate with and provide for the effectuation of the city's long range development plan. 
The city does, however, possess various existing specialized structures which have become functionally obsolete for their original purpose and whose redevelopment or conversion in conformance with the city comprehensive development plan would be unnecessarily burdensome. It is therefore, the intent of this section to set forth the basic qualifying criteria, project classification, development standards, and submittal requirements necessary to provide for the adaptive reuse of eligible properties within the city to support the local economic and employment base without adversely affecting the public health, safety, and welfare of the city as a whole. 
2.	Qualifying criteria. 
a.	The city council shall approve the adaptive reuse of nonresidential buildings and uses. In qualifying a site for adaptive reuse, the city council shall find the following conditions to exist: 
(1)	The subject site is zoned in compliance with the city's comprehensive development plan; 
(2)	The use can no longer be reasonably continued for its existing purpose by reason of market conditions or operational constraints (i.e., limited site size, floor area deficiencies, parking or loading area, etc.) 
(3)	Site redevelopment in accordance with local development codes would be unnecessarily burdensome by reason of ordinance compliance (restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot) or cost; and, 
(4)	The subject site has frontage on, or direct access to, an improved major or secondary thoroughfare. 
b.	The city council may not grant adaptive reuse status to any property whose principal structures are found to be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost. Any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
3.	Data required. 
a.	Application for adaptive reuse project as provided under the provisions of this ordinance shall be made to the city clerk by filing an application form; submitting required data, exhibits, and information; and depositing the required fee as established by resolution of the city council, and as may be amended from time-to-time. No portion of such fee shall be reimbursable to the applicant. 
b.	An application shall contain the following:
(1)	Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
(2)	Address and tax description number of the subject parcel.
(3)	A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the subject parcel, or is acting as the owner's representative. 
(4)	A certified survey drawing of the subject parcel.
(5)	Supporting statements, evidence, data, information and exhibits which address those qualifying criteria four assessing special condition use permit applications outlined in section 2 above. 
4.	Public hearing requirements. 
a.	Upon receipt of an application for an adaptive reuse project, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing, one notice of which shall be published not less than five nor more than 15 days prior to the public hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and sent by first class mail to the owners of the property for which an adaptive reuse project is being considered, to the owners of record of all real property and to the occupants of all structures located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property in question. The notice shall: 
(1)	Describe the nature of the adaptive reuse request.
(2)	Adequately describe the property in question.
(3)	State the date, time, and place of the public hearing.
(4)	Indicate when and where written comments concerning the request will be received.
5.	Project classification. 
a.	Upon holding a public hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the qualifying criteria have been met as set forth in paragraph 2 above. 
The planning commission shall within 30 days of making such determination forward to the city council its finding and recommendation. 
b.	The city council, upon receipt of the finding, may table action for purposes of further study or gaining additional information; deny the application for adaptive reuse upon finding that the criteria have not been met, or approve the application for adaptive reuse upon finding that the qualifying criteria have been met. 
c.	If the applicant for adaptive reuse is approved, the city council shall designate the applicant's property as either a class I or class II site. 
(1)	Class I sites permit the conversion of institutional or business uses in residential zones. Properties may be redeveloped/converted to offices, multi-family developments, care facilities and similar uses deemed no more objectionable then the forementioned uses. 
(2)	Class II sites permit the conversion of industrial uses in residential or commercial zones. Properties may be redeveloped/converted to any class I purpose, business uses, as well as less intensive industrial development in areas zoned for business. 
6.	Development standards. 
a.	In areas meeting the above criteria, development standards may be modified by the planning commission upon finding adequate evidence that the proposed use: 
(1)	Will be compatibly designed, constructed, and maintained with the existing and intended character of the vicinity; 
(2)	Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
(3)	Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities or the agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to adequately provide for such services; and, 
(4)	Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment, and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive smoke, fumes, glare, noise, vibration, or odor. 
b.	The planning commission may require such additional safeguards as deemed necessary for the protection of the general welfare and for insuring individual property rights and for insuring that the intent and objectives of this ordinance will be observed. 
7.	Site plan requirements. 
a.	Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with section 1800 of this ordinance and all applicable ordinances. 
(1)	The planning commission may, at its discretion, concurrently review the site plan at the time of its review of qualifying criteria. 
Section 1405. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
    Accessory buildings or structures, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.	Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this ordinance applicable to the main building. 
2.	Accessory buildings and structures shall not be erected in any side yard nor in any front yard. 
3.	An accessory building shall not occupy more than 25 percent of a required rear yard.
4.	No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall any accessory building or structure it [sic] be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. 
5.	Height of accessory buildings:
a.	Detached accessory buildings and structures in residential districts.
(1)	A detached accessory building or structure shall not exceed one story or 15 feet in height. 
(2)	The vertical exterior surface of a building, not forming part of the roof, shall not exceed a height of nine feet, measured from grade to the top plate of the wall. 
b.	Detached accessory buildings and structures in nonresidential districts.
(1)	Detached accessory buildings or structures in all nonresidential districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum building height in said districts, subject to board of zoning appeals review and approval, if the building or structure exceeds one story or 15 feet in height. 
6.	When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. 
7.	When an accessory building in excess of 150 square feet in any residence, business, or office district is intended for other than the storage of private motor vehicles, the accessory use shall be subject to the approval of the board of zoning appeals. 
8.	Household animal enclosures, dog runs, central air conditioning units, heat pumps, and other mechanical system components that could or are likely to produce noise, odors, and other nuisances, shall not be located adjacent to an adjoining property owner's sleeping area where windows and/or doors on the adjacent property would be exposed to the nuisance. 
Section 1406. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed. 
1.	Off-street parking spaces may be located within a rear yard or within a nonrequired side yard unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a front yard nor with a required side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
2.	Off-street parking shall be on the same lot of the building it is intended to serve, except as may be otherwise provided for by this ordinance. 
3.	Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveways, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and also subject to the provisions of section 1405, accessory buildings and structures for garages. 
4.	Minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless and until equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere. 
5.	Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use. 
6.	Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
7.	In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the board of zoning appeals may grant an exception. 
8.	The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
9.	For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a use which the planning commission considers is similar in type. 
10.	When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
11.	For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of usable floor area shall govern, and be defined as that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
12.	The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.Residential (1)Single- or two-family unitTwo per dwelling unit.(2)Multiple-family dwellingTwo per dwelling unit plus 0.25 parking spaces per unit for visitor parking.(3)Housing for the elderlyOne space per efficiency dwelling unit (no separate bedroom), 1.25 spaces per each one bedroom unit, and 1.5 spaces per two or more bedroom units. (4)Mobile home parkTwo for each mobile home site and one for each employee of the mobile home park.b.Institutional (1)Churches or templesOne for each three seats or six feet of pews in the main unit of worship.(2)HospitalsOne for each one bed.(3)Convalescent or nursing homesOne for each four beds.(4)Elementary and junior or high schoolOne for each teacher, employee, or administrator, in addition to the requirements of auditorium. (5)Senior high schoolsOne for each one teacher, employee, or administrator and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. (6)Private clubs or lodge hallsOne for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes. (7)Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs, or other similar usesOne for each two member families or individuals and one for each employee in addition to the requirements for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. (8)Golf courses open to general public, except miniature or "Par 3" coursesSix for each one golf hole and one for each employee, in addition to the requirements for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. (9)Fraternity or sororityOne for each five permitted active members or one for each two beds, whichever is greater. (10)Stadium, sports arena, or similar place of outdoor assemblyOne for each three seats or six feet of benches.(11)Theaters and auditoriumsOne for each three seats plus one for each two employees.(12)Nursery school, day nurseries or child care centersOne for each employee and one for each seven studentsin attendance at any particular time. (13)LibraryOne for each 2.5 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building or health codes, and one for each employee in the largest working shift. c.Business and commercial (1)Planned commercial or shopping centerFour per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for planned commercial or shopping centers having between 10,000 and 50,000 square feet of gross floor area. Planned commercial or shopping centers containing more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area shall provide five per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. When a restaurant, lounge, or other establishment whose primary business offers prepared food for sale or consumption on the premises, or carry-out, and is part of a planned commercial or shopping center, the parking for such use shall be computed separately, based on the need for a free standing use of this nature, and the resulting increase shall be added to the other uses in the center. (2)Auto wash (automatic)One for each one employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by 20. (3)Auto wash (self-service or coin operated.Five reservoir parking spaces for each washing stall.(4)Beauty parlor or barber shopThree spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber chairs, and 11/2 spaces for each additional chair. (5)Bowling alleysFive for each one bowling lane in addition to the requirements for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. (6)Dance halls, roller skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats One for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes. (7)Standard restaurantOne for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building or health codes, plus one for each two employees. (8)Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.) (9)Gasoline service stationsTwo for each lubrication stall, rack, or pit; one for each gasoline pump; and one for each 150 square feet of usable floor space devoted to retail sales. (10)Laundromats and coin operated dry cleanersOne for each two washing and dry-cleaning machines.(11)Miniature or "Par-3" golf courses.Three for each one hole plus one for each one employee.(12)Mortuary establishmentsOne for each 50 square feet of usable floor space.(13)Motel, hotel, or other commercial lodging establishmentsOne for each one occupancy unit plus one for each employee.(14)Motor vehicle sales and service establishmentsOne for each 200 square feet of usable floor space of sales room and one for each one auto service stall in the service room. (15)Retail stores except as otherwise specified hereinOne for each 150 square feet of usable floor space.(16)Establishments offering carry-out service, being establishments primarily serving customers over a counter or through a window, i.e., food carry-out, dry cleaner pick-up, meat markets, bakeries, shoe repair One parking space for each employee in the largest working shift and one parking space for each 30 square feet of usable floor area devoted to a customer assembly and/or waiting area. Parking needs for areas devoted to the consumption of food on the premises shall be computed separately for such seating areas. (17)Pool or billiard parlors, card rooms arcades or other similar establishmentsOne for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, countyor state fire, building or health codes. (18)Drive-in/through restaurantOne parking space for each employee in the largest working shift; one for each two seats provided; and one for each 30 square feet of usable floor area devoted to customer waiting area. (19)Mini-warehouse facilityOne parking space for each 2,000 square feet of gross building area. At a minimum, two parking spaces must be assigned to, and located conveniently to, each individual storage building. In addition, two spaces for the resident manager, and one additional space for each additional employee shall be provided adjacent to the rental office. d.Offices (1)BanksOne for each 100 square feet of usable floor space.(2)Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in the following item (3) One for each 200 square feet of usable floor space.(3)Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professionsOne for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in waiting rooms, and one for each examining room, dental chair or similar use area. e.Industrial (1)Industrial or research establishments, and related accessory officesThree plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift or three plus one for every 550 square feet of usable floor area whichever is greater. (2)Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory officesThree plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift, or three plus one for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater. Space on site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction.  
13.	Each parking lot that services a building entrance, except single two-family residential or temporary structures, shall have a number of level parking spaces for the physically handicapped as set forth in the following table, and identified by above grade signs as reserved for physically handicapped persons. 
Total spaces in parking lotRequired number of accessible spacesUp to 25126 to 50 251 to 75376 to 1004101 to 1505151 to 2006201 to 300 7301 to 400 8401 to 500 9501 to 1,000 2% of totalover 1,00020 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000 
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and must meet all other applicable requirements as to size as set forth in the building code. 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking,  78-111 et seq. 
Section 1407. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction, and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in section 1406, above require the building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations. 
1.	No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefore is issued by the building official. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the building department in such form as may be determined by the building official and shall be accompanied with two sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the municipal engineer. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 
2.	Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
Off-street Parking Layout Requirements 
Maneuvering Lane WidthParking Pattern(2-Way Movement)(1-Way Movement)Parking Stall WidthParking Stall Depth (90 Measure)Total Depth of One Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering LaneTotal Depth of Two Tiers of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane0 (parallel) parking24'12'8.0'22'20'40'4523'12'9.5'13'25'40'6024'16'9.5'16'32'56'9025'N/A9.5'18'43'61' 
3.	All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90 degree pattern shall permit two-way movement. 
4.	All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
5.	Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 
6.	Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
7.	A wall shall be provided on all sides of the off-street parking area abutting or adjacent to a residential district. The obscuring wall shall not be less than four feet six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. 
All land between the required obscuring wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may waive or modify the wall requirement by approving either an earth berm or evergreen screen in its place. The planning commission may also waive the wall requirement if in specific cases where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section. 
8.	All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
9.	In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
10.	Parking aisles shall not exceed 300 feet without a break in circulation.
11.	Except for those serving single- and two-family dwellings, all parking lots shall be provided with wheel stops or bumper guards so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the property line or into required landscaped areas or pedestrian ways. 
12.	No parking lot shall have more than one attendant shelter building. All shelter buildings shall conform to setback requirements for structures in the district in which it is located. 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking,  78-111 et seq. 
Section 1408. - Parking lot landscaping. 
    Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped as follows: 
1.	In off-street parking areas containing 20 or more parking spaces, an area equal to at least five percent of the total parking area shall be used for interior landscaping. Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping shall be arranged to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, and improve the appearance of the parking area, through the even distribution of the landscape effort across the total off-street parking area, rather than to concentrate all effort in one location. 
2.	Parking lot landscaping shall be not less than five feet in any single dimension and not less than 150 square feet in any single island area. Not more than two landscaped units of 150 square feet may be combined in plans designed to meet the minimum requirements. 
3.	The landscape plan shall designate the sizes, quantities, and types of plant material to be used in parking lot landscaping. 
4.	Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements. 
5.	A minimum of one deciduous tree shall be placated in each landscaped area.
Section 1409. - Off-site parking facilities. 
    Required parking for a development may be located off site under certain circumstances. Requests for off site parking must meet the following requirements: 
1.	Residential uses. Parking facilities accessory to dwelling units shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces accessory to uses other than dwellings (such as churches) may be located on a lot adjacent to or directly across a street or alley from the lot occupied by the use served; but in no case at a distance in excess of 300 feet from such zoning lot. 
2.	Nonresidential uses. Parking facilities accessory to nonresidential uses may be located on other than the same zoning lot as the use served (off site). All required parking spaces shall be within 500 feet of such zoning lot. No parking spaces accessory to a use in a business or industrial district shall be located in a residential district, unless authorized by the planning commission. 
3.	Agreement required. A written agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the city attorney and executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued availability of the off -site parking facilities for the use they are intended to serve. 
Section 1410. - Special parking districts, payment in lieu of providing required parking. 
    The provisions and requirements as set forth in sections 1406 and 1409, above shall apply to all areas within the city except as modified by this section. The city recognizes that special provisions should be considered for the downtown area including the reduction of required parking spaces due to the availability of public parking. To this end: 
1.	Portions of the City of Utica shall be contained within areas described as special parking districts as established by the city council with recommendation from the planning commission. 
2.	The boundaries of areas classified as special parking districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the special parking districts as shown on the zoning districts map, the rules as set forth in section 302, shall apply. 
3.	The number of off-street parking spaces and the size of loading and unloading areas required for any new use, expanded or intensified use of property located within, or partially within a special parking district shall be determined as set forth in sections 1409 and 1411 except as herein provided for: 
a.	Off-street parking. The determination of parking needs within a special parking district shall be based upon the standards specified below. For those uses not specified an adjustment may be made by the city council, following planning commission recommendation, when it is found that a reduction from the standards set forth in section 1406 would not adversely affect the retail, office and ancillary service facilities forming the commercial nucleus of these older core business areas. In this latter regard primary consideration shall be given to uses which are generally the object of special purpose trips and thereby have little or no interrelation with those business activities in the core business areas. The following standards reflect the gross floor area(s) actively used in day-to-day operations and shall exclude only vacant space and storage areas. 
(1)	Retail stores except as otherwise specified. One for each 350 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)	Furniture and appliance stores. One for each 1,800 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)	Business and professional offices except as otherwise specified. One for each 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(4)	Medical and dental offices. One for each 175 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)	Banks (excluding drive-in stations). One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(6)	Establishments offering food, beverages, or refreshments for sale and consumption on the premises. One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
(7)	Apartments. One for each dwelling unit plus one quarter for each bedroom. 
b.	Off-street loading. The planning commission shall have the right to modify or waive the requirement for off-street loading areas as specified in section 1411. Any such modification or waiver shall be based upon a review of a site plan and/or the surrounding area and a determination that there is satisfactory loading space serving the building or that the provision of such loading space is physically and/or functionally impractical to provide. 
4.	The owner or owners of the said new or expanded use may make application to the city clerk for the option of paying a dollar amount established by resolution of the city council per required parking space and loading and unloading space in lieu of providing said required spaces as per the provisions and requirements set forth in sections 1406 and 1411, of this ordinance. These monies would be paid in to the special parking district fund established by the city council specifically for the purpose of constructing and improving off-street parking areas to serve uses located within the special parking districts. The timing of parking spaces provided and their location shall be at the sole discretion of the city council. 
5.	The amount paid into the parking fund described above shall not apply against any present or future special assessments levied by the city for parking improvements. 
6.	This exception may only be granted by the city council. Granting of the exception shall be based upon evidence presented by the property owner or owners showing that the reasonable ability to provide any or all of the required parking spaces and/or loading and unloading areas as required in sections 1406 and 1411, does not exist. 
7.	A property owner or owners granted the exception of contributing to the parking fund will not receive an occupancy permit until said monies have been paid into said fund in full. 
8.	The provisions of this section also apply to any change in use of property located within a special parking district that would require parking spaces in excess of those required for the previous use. 
Section 1411. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
Total Floor Area of the BuildingOff-street LoadingSpace RequirementsOffice use0-10,000 square feetOne usable loading space 10'25' in area10,001-50,000 square feetOne usable loading space10'50' in areaOver 50,000Two usable loading spaces 10'50' in areaCommercial and industrial uses0-1,400 square feetOne usable loading space 10'25' in area1,401-20,000 square feetOne usable loading space10'50' in area20,001-50,000 square feetTwo usable loading spaces, each 10'50' in areaOver 50,000 square feetThree usable loading spaces plusone space for each 50,000 square feet in excess of 50,000 square feet each 10'50' in area  
1.	All loading spaces shall be in addition to the off-street parking area access drive, and maneuvering lane requirements. 
2.	Off-street loading space shall have a clearance of 14 feet in height.
3.	Off-street loading space may be completely enclosed within a building, or may occupy a portion of the site outside of the building, provided that where any portion of a loading space is open to public view, said space shall be screened in accordance with section 1423, screening walls. 
4.	All loading and unloading in the industrial or mixed use districts shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in said exterior side yard when the setback is equal to at least 50 feet. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Section 1412. - Open parking and storage in all districts except where permitted. 
1.	Intent. The regulations set forth in this section are intended to prevent the storage or accumulation of unusable, inoperable, or unsightly motor vehicles, machinery, or building materials that could be hazardous to the safety of children, encourage the propagation of rats or rodents, or detract from the orderly appearance of the city. 
2.	General requirements. 
a.	Motor vehicle parking and storage. No motor vehicle shall be kept, parked or stored in any district zoned for residential use, unless the vehicle is in operating condition and properly licensed or is kept inside a building. However, these provisions shall not apply to any motor vehicle ordinarily used but temporarily out of running condition for not more than 30 continuous days within a 90-day period. If a motor vehicle is being kept for actual use, but is temporarily unlicensed, the building official may grant the owner a period of up to one month to procure a license. 
b.	Machinery and building materials storage. Unusable, rusty, or inoperable machinery, equipment, or machines and/or equipment parts of machines or equipment not intended for use upon the premises, or old and/or used building materials shall not be kept or stored outside of a building. However, the temporary storage of building materials intended to be used to improve the premises may be stored outside if piled off the ground so as not to become a suitable environment for rats or rodents. The temporary storage of building materials to be used for the purpose of new construction shall also be permitted. In no case shall usable or unusable machinery, building materials, or other items be stored on a permanent basis in a truck trailer or other type of trailer, with or without its wheels. 
The storage of wood cut for the purpose of being used for fuel in fireplaces and/or wood burning appliances in any residential district shall be limited to one full cord with a cord being defined as cut fuel wood equal to 128 cubic feet in a stack measuring four by four by eight feet. In no case shall cut fuel wood be stacked higher than four feet in height in a residential district. 
c.	Commercial vehicle parking and storage. No commercial vehicle may be parked on residential property; upon public property including, but not limited to public streets, right-of-way, and planting areas between sidewalks and curbs; or within any designated off-street parking area, except under the following conditions: 
(i)	The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle on private property in any nonresidential district is permitted provided such commercial vehicle is used in conjunction with the principal use or accessory use of the property. In such events, said parking or storage must comply with other codes and ordinances of the city. 
(ii)	The temporary parking of any commercial vehicle in any district is permitted provided the vehicle is owned or operated by a contractor performing work in the immediate area, is being loaded/unloaded with merchandise or furnishings for or from a residence, or while an operator is actively engaged in performing a service to the adjacent property for the period of time necessary to complete such service. 
(iii)	The occasional parking of commercial vehicles in any district is permitted provided such vehicles are used in response to emergency or on-request service calls. 
In no instance shall commercial vehicles so stored or parked be occupied as sleeping quarters. 
d.	The open parking or storage of any commercially used or licensed vehicle shall be expressly prohibited from any residential district (single-family and multiple family), including private property, public property, public rights-of-way, parking lots and streets, except for the following: 
(1)	No more than one commercially used or licensed vehicle with a load limit rating under one ton may be parked upon privately owned residential property provided said vehicle is parked upon an improved (concrete or asphalt) driveway and is no closer than 20 feet from the front property or road right-of-way line. 
(2)	Delivery or service vehicles during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. No. 129-3, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 129-5, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 129-7, 2-9-1999) 
Section 1413. - Recreational vehicle storage. 
1.	The open parking or storage of tractors, boats, or similar vehicles not owned by the property owners or tenant of the city on lands not specifically designated for such parking or storage shall be permitted for a period of up to 72 hours. However, a travel trailer may be kept in the rear or side yard of a single-family lot for a period of up to four weeks provided a permit has first been secured from the building official. 
2.	Residents of the city may keep not more than one of their own trailer, boats, camper, motor home, and similar vehicles on their own property for an indefinite period of time, provided such vehicles are in operable condition and are not kept within 20 feet of the closest edge of any neighboring road surface area. Such vehicles shall be subject to all other applicable provisions concerning accessory buildings set forth in section 1405 
3.	A travel trailer, motor home, or camper parked or stored on a residential lot shall not be connected to sanitary facilities and shall not be occupied. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Section 1414. - One-family dwelling standards. 
1.	Every dwelling unit hereafter erected shall have a minimum of 1,200 square feet of floor space on the ground floor provided that dwellings with 11/2 stories or more shall have a minimum of 900 square feet on the ground floor. For the purpose of this paragraph, a basement or cellar shall not count as a story, and a breezeway or garage shall not be included in the computation of ground floor area. 
2.	It has a minimum width across any section of 24 feet and complies in all respects with the state construction code. Where as dwelling is required, by law, to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction, and where such standards or regulations allow standards of construction which are less stringent than those imposed by the state construction code then, and in that event, the less stringent federal or state standard or regulation shall apply. 
3.	It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the state construction code and co-extensive with the perimeter of the building, which attachment shall also meet all applicable building codes and other state and federal regulations. 
4.	It does not have exposed wheels, towing mechanism, undercarriage, or chassis.
5.	The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities approved by the county health department. 
6.	The dwelling contains storage area whether in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas or in a separate structure being of standard construction similar to, or of better quality than, the principal dwelling. Such storage shall be in addition to the space for the storage of automobiles and shall be equal to not less than 15 percent of the minimum square footage requirement of this ordinance for the zone in which the dwelling is located. In no case, however, shall more than 200 square feet of storage area be required by this provision. 
7.	The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, and with either a roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively with window sills and roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage along the sides of the dwelling; with not less than one exterior door being in the front of the dwelling and contains permanently attached steps connected to said exterior door area where a difference in elevation requires the same. 
The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the city building official upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling subject to appeal by an aggrieved applicant to the board of zoning appeals within a period of 15 days from the receipt of notice of said building official's decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the following standards: 
a.	Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to its surroundings. 
b.	Buildings shall have a good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring development. 
c.	(i)	Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings. 
(ii)	Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways. 
(iii)	Materials shall be of durable quality.
(iv)	In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings. 
d.	Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
e.	Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public ways. 
f.	The roof overhang and pitch shall be comparable to the overhang and pitch of homes typically found in the surrounding area, provided the pitch of the roof shall not be less than one foot of rise for each three feet of horizontal run. 
g.	Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth in this section, as compared against the character, design, and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks within 1,000 feet of the subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than 20 percent of the lots situated within said area; or where said area is not developed by the character, design, and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the city. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the standard designed home. 
8.	The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of mobile homes, the standards for mobile home construction as contained in the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regulations entitled "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as amended, shall apply. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
9.	The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the ordinance of the city pertaining to such parks. 
10.	All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with the applicable state construction code provisions and requirements. 
Section 1415. - Home occupations. 
1.	No article or service shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except as such is produced on the premises by such occupation. 
2.	The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit, (not counting areas of unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches) shall be used for purposes of the home occupation. 
3.	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the structure or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation. 
4.	The outdoor storage of goods and materials shall be prohibited. No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of a dwelling unit used for purposes of a home occupation. 
5.	No more than one home occupation per dwelling unit shall be permitted.
6.	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be provided by an off-street area, located other than in a required front yard. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. 
State law reference- Certain required home occupations, MCL 125.583c. 
Section 1416. - Bed and breakfast operations. 
    Any dwelling unit used for bed and breakfast operation shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.	Not more than 25 percent of the total floor area shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms. 
2.	There shall be no separate cooking facilities used for the bed and breakfast stay.
3.	Occupancy by guests shall be restricted from one to seven days.
4.	One additional parking space shall be provided for each guestroom, on-site; further, said parking shall not be permitted within a required front yard. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14. 
Section 1417. - Access to a major thoroughfare or collector street. 
    For uses making reference to this section 1417, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or planned major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street. Provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street is zoned for multiple-family use or any nonresidential uses, is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall apply only if the planning commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a thoroughfare. 
Section 1418. - Residential entranceway. 
    In all residential districts, so called entranceway structures including but not limited to walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 1300 provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the municipality, and shall be approved by the building department and a permit issued. 
Section 1419. - Corner clearance. 
    Except as may otherwise be provided in the ordinance, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of two feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
Section 1420. - Preservation of environmental quality. 
1.	Intent. It is the intent of this section to specify certain materials which must be prepared and submitted by land developers to assist the city in determining if the proposed development is in compliance with local ordinance and state and federal statutes, which are enacted to protect wildlife, preserve ecologically important features, and retain environmental resources. 
2.	Definitions. 
"Natural resources" shall include: 
a.	Archaeological finds.
b.	Endangered species habitat.
c.	Floodplain, 100-year. An area which has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any given year. 
d.	Hedgerow. A row of eight or more trees having a four inch or more diameter at four feet. (The drip-line of the trees defines the land area of a hedgerow.) 
e.	Ponds and lakes. A natural or artificial impoundment of water that retains water year-round.
f.	Wetlands. Land where standing water is retained for a portion of the year and does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh. 
g.	Woodlot. An area of one-quarter acre or more containing eight or more trees per one-quarter acre having a four inch or more diameter at a four-foot height. 
3.	Applicability. In any zoning district, no natural resource shall be altered, changed, transformed, or otherwise varied by any person except as may otherwise be provided by this ordinance, and such person having submitted to the building official the required data, exhibits, and information as hereafter required. 
4.	Information and data required. The submission of a site plan review as provided by section 1300 of this zoning ordinance shall be accompanied by a natural resources analysis, which shall be submitted by and at the expense of the petitioner. Submission shall be made concurrently with the payment of site plan review fees. 
The natural resources analysis shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.	Site conditions of the subject property indicating the location, size, and type of existing natural resources. Such information shall be displayed on a map in relation to the subject parcel's property lines and existing development pattern. 
b.	A project description which, in narrative form, shall describe the proposed development in terms of use, density, building coverage, height, gross floor area, number of units, parking, landscaping, internal site circulation, traffic to be generated, and other applicable design features. 
c.	The petitioner shall provide a full analysis and description of the proposed project's impact on the natural resources existing on the site. This analysis shall include an evaluation of alternatives to affecting the natural resources in terms of alternative site location or actions. The analysis shall also assess the impact of affecting the natural resource(s) in terms the natural environment (topography, habitat, hazards, etc.), social concerns (aesthetics, historic and cultural values, etc.), economic aspects (employment opportunities created, tax base, land use pattern, etc.), and legal constraints (permits required, intergovernmental review, conformance with local plans/ordinances, etc.). These factors shall be evaluated in terms of both positive and negative impacts, direct and indirect impacts, as well as longterm vs. short-term affects. 
d.	The applicant shall identify measures to mitigate or eliminate negative affects to natural resources identified in step 4(c) above. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26. 
Section 1421. - Landscaping. 
1.	Intent. Landscaping, greenbelts, and screening are necessary for the protection and enhancement of the environment and for the continued vitality of all land uses in the city. Landscaping and greenbelts are capable of enhancing the visual environment, preserving natural features, improving property values, and alleviating the impact of noise, traffic, and visual disruption related to intensive uses. The purpose of this section is to set minimum standards for the protection and enhancement of the environment through requirements for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and screening. 
2.	Scope of application. The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to all uses, lots, sites, and parcels which are developed or expanded following the effective date of this ordinance. No site plan shall be approved unless said site plan shows landscaping consistent with the provisions of this section. Furthermore, where landscaping is required, a building permit shall not be issued until the required landscape plan is submitted and approved, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless provisions set forth in this section have been met or a performance bond has been posted in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 1800.7. 
    In cases where the use of an existing building changes or an existing building is changed or otherwise altered or reoccupied, all of the standards set forth herein shall be met. 
    The requirements of this section are minimum requirements, and nothing herein shall preclude a developer and the city from agreeing to more extensive landscaping. 
3.	Landscaping design standards. Except as otherwise specified in the general requirements for each zoning district, all landscaping shall conform to the following standards: 
a.	General landscaping. All portions of the lot or parcel area not covered by buildings, paving, or other impervious surfaces shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover and other ornamental materials as required below, except where specific landscape elements, such as a greenbelt, berm, or screening are required: 
(1)	All portions of the landscaped area shall be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubbery, or other suitable plant material, except that paved patios, terraces, sidewalks and similar site features may be incorporated with planning commission approval. 
(2)	A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of landscaped open-space area. 
(3)	Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
(4)	On sites which are two acres or larger in size, the landscaped area shall include a greenbelt of a minimum ten-foot width, located and continually maintained along a public right-of-way. 
(5)	In consideration of the overall design and impact of the landscape plan, the planning commission may reduce or waive the requirements outlined herein for general landscaping, or for landscaping in greenbelt areas, on berms, or as part of a screen, provided that any such adjustment is in keeping with the intent of the ordinance, and more specifically, with the intent of section 1421.1. 
(6)	The total landscaped area shall be the basis for determining the required number of trees or shrubs, irrespective of the portion which is devoted to patios, terraces, sidewalks, or other site features. 
b.	Greenbelt buffer. Where required, greenbelts and greenbelt buffers shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	A required greenbelt or greenbelt buffer may be interrupted only to provide for roads or driveways for vehicular access. 
(2)	Grass, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material shall be planted over the entire greenbelt area, except that paving may be used in areas of intensive pedestrian circulation. 
(3)	A minimum of one deciduous tree or evergreen tree shall be planted for each 30 lineal feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt length. Required trees shall be at least five feet tall and may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. 
(4)	For each 50 linear feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt length, at least one ornamental spring flowering tree at least five feet in height shall be installed and maintained. 
(5)	Two 18-inch high or wide shrub shall be required for each 15 linear feet of greenbelt area. Required shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. 
(6)	For the purpose of determining required plant material, required greenbelt area length shall be measured along the exterior periphery of the greenbelt area inclusive of all driveways. 
c.	Berms. Where required, earth berms or landscaped berms shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	The berm shall be at least three feet above the grade elevation, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one foot vertical for each three feet horizontal. For the purposes of this provision, grade elevation shall be the ground elevation at the property line adjacent to the proposed berm. 
(2)	The berm area shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover to ensure that it withstands wind and weather and retains its height and shape. 
(3)	A minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each 30 linear feet or portion of required berm. 
(4)	Eight shrubs per tree may be planted as substitute for trees (see item "3" above).
(5)	Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
(6)	For the purpose of determining required plant material, required berm length shall be measured along the exterior periphery of the berm. 
d.	Evergreen screening. Where required, evergreen screening shall consist of closely spaced plantings which form a visual barrier that is at least eight feet above ground level within five years of planting. 
e.	Landscaping of rights-of-way and other adjacent public open-space areas. Public rights-of-way and other public open-space areas adjacent to required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover and maintained by the owner of the adjacent property as if they were part of required landscaped areas and greenbelts. 
f.	Regulations pertaining to landscaping areas used for sight distance. When a driveway intersects a public right-of-way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of public rights-of-way, all landscaping within the corner triangular areas described below shall permit unobstructed cross-visibility. Shrubs located in the triangular area shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than two feet above the pavement grade at the edge of the pavement. Portions of required berms located within sight distance triangular areas shall also not exceed a height of two feet above the pavement grade at the edge of the pavement. Trees may be maintained in this area provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of eight feet above the roadway surface. Landscaping, except grass or ground cover, shall not be located closer than three feet from the edge of a driveway. 
The triangular areas referred to above are: 
(1)	The area formed at the corner intersection of a public right-of-way and a driveway, two sides of the triangle [triangular] area being ten feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and driveway line and the third side being a line connecting these two sides. 
(2)	The area formed at a corner intersection of two public right-of-way lines, the two sides of the triangular area being 25 feet in length measured along the abutting public rights of-way lines and the third side being a line connecting these two sides. 
g.	Maintenance of landscaping. All required landscape areas shall be planted and maintained with living plant materials. All landscaping which is located more than 50 feet from a building site shall have an irrigation (water sprinkler) system installed to assist in maintaining plant materials in a healthy condition. Failure to maintain required landscaped areas, including the removal and replacement of dead or diseased plant materials, shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
Section 1422. - Plant materials. 
    Whenever in this ordinance planting is required, it shall be planted within six months from the date of completion of the building or improvement, and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials. Plastic and other nonorganic, nonliving plant materials shall be prohibited from use and shall not be in compliance with the spirit and intent of this ordinance. 
1.	Plant material spacing. 
a.	Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four feet from the fence line or property line except that shrubs may be planted no closer than two feet from the fence or property line. 
b.	Where plant materials are planted in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 
c.	Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers, except as provided in section 1222.3.d. 
d.	Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than three feet on centers.
e.	Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers.
f.	Tree-like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten feet on centers.
g.	Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four feet on centers.
2.Suggested Plant Materials Minimum Size a.Evergreen TreesSix feet in height(1)Hemlock(2)Fir(3)Pine(4)Spruce(5)Douglas-Firb.Narrow EvergreensFour feet in height(1)Column Honoki Cypress(2)Blue Columnar Chinese Juniper(3)Pyramidal Red-Cedar(4)Irish Yew(5)Douglas Arborvitae(6)Columnar Giant Arborvitaec.Tree-like ShrubsSix feet in height(1)Flowering Crab(2)Russian Olive(3)Mountain Ash(4)Dogwood(5)Redbud(6)Rose of Sharon(7)Hornbeam(8)Hawthorn(9)Magnoliad.Large Deciduous ShrubsFour feet in height(1)Honeysuckle(2)Viburnum(3)Mock-Orange(4)Forsythia(5)Lilac(6)Cotoneaster(7)Hazelnut(8)Euonymus(9)Privet(10)Buckthorn(11)Sumace.Deciduous TreesTwo to three inch caliper(1)Oaks(2)Hard Maple(3)Hackberry(4)Birch(5)Planetree (Sycamore)(6)Ginkgo (male)(7)Beech(8)Sweet-Gum(9)Honeylocust(10)Hop Hornbeam(11)Linden3.Trees Not Permitted. a.Box Elderb.Soft Maples (Red-Silver)c.Slippery Elmsd.Poplarse.Willowsf.Horse Chestnut (nut bearing)g.Tree of Heavenh.Catalpai.Ginkgo (female) 
4.	Existing plant materials. In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, the building official may adjust the application of the above standards to allow credit for such plant material if such an adjustment is in keeping with, and will preserve, the intent of this section. 
All existing plant materials must first be inspected by the building official to determine the health and desirability of such materials. In the event plant materials are to be saved, prior approval must be obtained from the building official before any delimbing, root pruning, or other work is done. 
If such existing plant material is labeled "To Be Saved" on site plans, protective techniques, such as (but not limited to) fencing placed at the drip-line around the perimeter of the plant material, shall be installed. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the drip-line of any plant material intended to be saved. 
In the event that healthy trees labeled "To Be Saved" on the approved site plan are destroyed or damaged, as determined by the building official, the owner, developer or contractor shall replace said trees with trees of comparable type. 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 86. 
Section 1423. - Screening walls. 
1.	For the use districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a single[-family] or two-family residential district an obscuring wall. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the parking area or land on the nonresidential side of the wall: 
UseMinimum Height Requirementsa.Off-street parking Area4'6? high wall (see also section 1409 b.R-3 (with 17 or more units), C-1, C-2, and O-1 districts4'6? high wallc.I and MXD districts4'6? high walld.Open storage areas and loading and unloading zones4'6? to 8'0? high wall or fence (see also sections 1412 and 1411 eTrash receptacles6'0? high wall (see alsosection 1425 f.Utility buildings, stations, and substations6'0? high wall or fence 
2.	In the case of the variable wall height requirement in (d)[1.d] above, the extent of obscuring wall shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of land usage, provided further that no wall or fence shall be less than the above required minimum, nor greater than the above required maximum height. 
3.	Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this ordinance requires conformance with yard setback lines. Upon review of the site plan, the planning commission may approve an alternate location for the wall, or may modify the wall requirement by approving either an earth berm or evergreen screen in its place. The planning commission may also waive the wall requirement if in specific cases where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served by the screening requirement. 
4.	Required walls shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except such openings as may be approved by the planning commission. All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials approved by the building official to be durable, weather resistant, and easily maintained. 
5.	The requirement for an obscuring wall between off-street parking areas, outdoor storage areas, and any abutting residential district shall not be required when such areas are located more than 200 feet distant from abutting residential district(s). 
Section 1424. - Fences. 
1.	Scope. The installation, erection, and/or maintenance of a fence is hereby prohibited except in strict compliance with this ordinance. A permit to be issued by the city clerk shall be obtained prior to installation or erection of any fence within the corporate limits of the City of Utica. Application shall be made upon a form provided by the building department and shall require such information as may be required by the city clerk. All applications for a fence permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee as may be established by city council resolution. 
2.	Calculation of fence height. The height of the fence shall be computed as the distance from the base of the fence at normal grade to the top of the highest component of the fence. 
3.	Design requirements. 
a.	Residential fences. All fences in areas zoned or used for residential purposes shall be of an ornamental type, and shall not be more than six feet in height, above the grade level. Any metal or masonry fence further shall not be more than four feet in height above grade level. 
b.	Business, office, or commercial fences. All fences in areas zoned or used for business, office, or commercial purposes shall be of an ornamental type, and shall not be more than six feet in height above grade level. 
c.	Industrial fences. All fences in areas zoned or used for industrial purposes shall not exceed eight feet in height above grade level. 
d.	Fences separating single[-family] or two-family residential property from multiple-family residential property. Areas zoned or used for multiple-family residential purposes, with five to 16 total number of units, which abut single[-family] or two-family property shall have erected upon said adjoining property line a fence or an ornamental type to be six feet in height above grade level. 
e.	Fences for parks, schools, public buildings, etc. The height and type of fences enclosing municipal parks, public and parochial school grounds, public building and church grounds or land used for playgrounds, parks, picnic groves, golf courses, golf driving ranges or similar facilities for outdoor exercise and recreation shall require the approval of the city council after receiving the recommendation of the building department. 
f.	Fences required for swimming pools and ponds. For the protection of the general public, any swimming pool, reflector pool, fish pond, lily pond, or artificially constructed body of water which contains 18 inches or more of water in depth at any point shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height above grade level. The gate(s) shall be of a self-closing and latching type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily accessible for children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is not in use for extended periods; provided, however, that if the entire premises is enclosed with a fence of not less than four feet in height above grade level, this provision may be waived by the building department. 
4.	Material specifications. Fences shall be constructed of wood, metal or masonry, and other acceptable materials, excluding plastic interwoven weave designs. Only new material shall be used, which has been manufactured and/or treated in a manner to prevent rust and corrosion, and/or rot and decay. 
a.	All fences shall be constructed of a minimum of:
(1)	Two-inch iron pipe; or
(2)	Two-inch angle iron; or
(3)	Four-inch wooden posts; or
(4)	Four-inch reinforced concrete posts; or any other member having equal stability. All posts shall be sunk in the soil to a depth of at least three feet. 
b.	No person shall erect or cause to be erected a fence which is:
(1)	Made with or upon which is fixed barbed wire; or
(2)	Has any protective spike, nail, or sharp pointed object; or
(3)	Charged with electric current;
Provided, however, that a fence in an industrial area may be erected with barbed wire on arms or brackets extending inward over such property upon application and approval by city council. 
5.	Location. 
a.	All fences must be located entirely on the private property of the person constructing the fence, provided that if the adjoining property owner(s) consent in writing to the construction of a fence on this property line, it may be so constructed. Such written consent shall be filed with the application for a permit. 
b.	No fence shall be erected between the front building line and the front property line of the premises, except decorative fences (does not include chain link fences) may be permitted in the front yard providing they do not exceed 30 inches in vertical height at the front property line (road right-of-way line) to a point (setback) of 15 feet from said property line. Decorative fences located beyond 15 feet from the front property line may not exceed 40 inches in vertical height. Decorative fences shall have openings of at least 30 percent of the total surface area, including all framing members, posts, and horizontal and vertical support members. Decorative fences, i.e., picket fences, shall not have pointed top ends. Said fences shall be designed with rounded or squared tops. Decorative fences in a front yard shall be subject to the requirements of section 1802, review and approval of conditional uses where appropriate; fees set by city council. 
c.	A fence may be erected parallel to the side street lot line of a corner lot provided it is located at least one foot inside the side street lot line and does not extend beyond the front building line into the front yard. 
d.	Privacy fences on private property and/or abutting a public street shall be constructed with the finished side (side with no framing materials, supporting posts, cross-members, etc. being visible) facing the property and/or properties adjacent to the property owner who is responsible for the fence. 
6.	Maintenance of nuisance. Fences must be maintained in a neat and safe condition, so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of repair, type of construction or otherwise, endangers life or property is hereby deemed a nuisance. The building department shall notify the owner, agent, or person in control of the property on which such fence is located of the existence of such nuisance and specify the required repairs or modifications to be made to render the fence safe or require that the unsafe fence or any portion thereof to be removed and shall provide a time limiting such repairs, modification, or removal. 
7.	Existing fences. 
a.	Fences presently in existence shall not be enlarged, rebuilt, or reconstructed without first having obtained a permit therefor from the building department. Such fences, when repaired or replaced, shall conform with all provisions of this ordinance. 
b.	Any newly rezoned property shall comply with all fence requirements for the newly zoned district. 
c.	Areas zoned or used for multiple-family residential purposes, with 17 or more total number of units shall comply with section 1423 upon a change in the nature of the property rights in the individual units, such as rental apartments to condominiums, cooperatives, or townhouses to rentals or condominiums, or any similar type of change. 
d.	In cases where the installation of a new fence is the replacement of an existing fence on the side street lot line of a corner lot, the fence may be installed in the same location as the existing fence provided that the fence remains entirely on the property for which it is intended. 
(Ord. No. 129-11, 4-9-2002; Ord. No. 129-12, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 129-19, 5-29-2007) 
Section 1425. - Screening of trash storage areas. 
1.	In all O-1, C-1, C-2, and MXD districts, there shall be provided an outdoor trash storage area. Any such area shall be limited to normal refuse which is collected on a regular basis and shall be maintained in a neat, orderly and sanitary condition. The requirement for such a trash storage area may be waived by the planning commission upon a finding that it is unnecessary due to the nature of the use, or owing to provisions for indoor trash storage. 
2.	In no instance shall any such refuse be visible above the required screening.
3.	A screen wall in accordance with section 1423 of six feet in height shall enclose three sides of the storage area. Bollards and/or other protective devices shall be installed at the opening and to the rear of any storage area to prevent damage to the screening walls. The surface under any such storage area shall be constructed of concrete which complies with local building requirements. 
4.	Any such storage area shall be located in a rear yard and/or be so located and arranged as to minimize its visibility from adjacent streets and uses. The planning commission may require an obscuring gate when the visibility of such a storage area, from a public street or adjacent use, is deemed to render an adverse influence. In no instance shall any such area be located in a front yard. 
5.	All trash storage areas and/or enclosures shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any building or structure. 
Section 1426. - Exterior lighting. 
1.	All outdoor lighting in all use districts other than residential shall be shielded so the surface of the source of the light shall not be visible from all adjacent residential districts, adjacent residences, and public rights-of-way. 
2.	Illumination guidelines shall be in accordance with the following standards:
a.	Street illumination. 
NonresidentialResidentialStreet HierarchyLuxFootcandlesLuxFootcandles"Major"121.2 60.6"Collector"80.840.4"Local"60.630.3 
Major. The part of the roadway system that serves as the principal network for through traffic flow. The routes connect areas of principal traffic generation and important rural highways entering the city. 
Collector. The distributor and collector roadways serving traffic between major and local roadways. These are roadways used mainly for traffic movements within residential, commercial, and industrial areas. 
Local. Roadways used primarily for direct access to residential, commercial, industrial, or other abutting property. They do not include roadways carrying through traffic. Long local roadways will generally be divided into short sections by collector roadway systems. 
b.	Parking illumination. 
Vehicular Use Area OnlyGeneral Parking and Pedestrian SafetyLevel of activityLuxFootcandlesLuxFootcandlesLow activity50.520.2Medium activity111.060.6High activity222.0100.9 
High activity. Examples include major-league athletic events, major cultural or civic events, regional shopping centers, and fast food facilities. 
Medium activity. Examples include community shopping centers, office parks, hospital parking areas, transportation parking (airports, etc.), cultural, civic or recreational events, and residential complex parking. 
Low activity. Examples include neighborhood shopping, industrial employee parking, educational facility parking, and church parking. 
3.	All illumination shall not be of a flashing, moving, or intermittent type other than used in connection with a sign for the conveyance of noncommercial information which requires periodic change, such as time, temperature, or stock average. 
4.	All illumination shall be constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.
Section 1427. - Noise. 
1.	No operation or activity shall be carried out in any district which causes or creates measurable noise levels exceeding the maximum sound pressure levels prescribed below, as measured on or beyond the boundary lines of the parcel on which the use is situated. 
Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Levels in Decibels 
PR-1Octave band(cycles per second) (H2)DayNight00 to 74 7670 75 to 14970 62 150 to 2996456300 to 599 5749600 to 1,199 51441,200 to 2,39945392,400 to 4,79938 334,800 and above3631 
  
Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Levels in Decibels (Post 1960 Preferred frequencies) 
PR-1Center Frequency(Cycles Per Second) (H2)DayNight31.577726373681256762 25062 57500 5550 1,0005146 2,00044394,00037328,0003328 
  
2.	Sounds of very short duration, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter, shall be measured by an impact noise analyzer; and the measurements so obtained may be permitted to exceed the maximum levels provided in the tables shown by no more than ten decibels. For purposes of this ordinance, impact noises shall be considered to be noises generated by sources that do not operate more than one minute in any one-hour period. 
3.	Where street traffic noises directly adjacent to the boundary line exceed these maximum permitted levels, the intensity levels permitted may then exceed those levels specified in the tables but may not exceed the level of the subject adjacent street traffic noise. 
4.	Sounds of an intermittent nature, or characterized by high frequencies, which the building official deems to be objectionable to adjacent land uses, shall be controlled so as not to generate a nuisance to adjacent land uses, even if the decibel measurement does not exceed that specified in those tables. 
5.	Noise resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
Section 1428. - Satellite dish antenna. 
1.	A ground mounted satellite antenna shall be located only in the rear yard and shall be subject to the accessory structures setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, as measured at the property line to the nearest edge of the dish. 
2.	Not more than one satellite antenna shall be allowed on any single residential lot of record. 
3.	Any satellite dish antenna shall be installed and maintained with a screen that shall not interfere with the reception but will obscure the view from adjacent lots or streets. 
4.	No satellite dish antenna shall exceed 12 feet in diameter.
5.	A roof mount location may be considered as an alternative to a ground mount for nonresidential structures. The maximum height of a roof mounted satellite antenna shall be not greater than 15 feet, including its base, nor shall the building and antenna exceed the maximum height permitted for a structure in its respective zoning district. 
6.	The satellite antenna and structural support shall be of noncombustible and corrosive resistant material. 
7.	All satellite antennas shall be grounded as required by the applicable building codes to alleviate electrical potential differences between exposed "dead" metal parts of the antenna and the premises A.C. electrical system. 
8.	Each satellite antenna shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 75 mph without the use of any supporting guide wires. 
9.	Wiring between a satellite dish and the receiver shall be placed at least 18 inches beneath the surface of the ground with a cable approved for direct burial. 
10.	Any driving motor shall be limited to 100v maximum power design and be encased in protective guards. Any motor with operating voltage of more than 60v A.C. nominal shall comply with Article 430 of the National Electrical Code, as may be amended. 
11.	A satellite antenna shall be permanently mounted. A satellite antenna may only be on wheels or temporarily installed when used to demonstrate and/or test the feasibility of use for no more than two weeks. 
12.	No satellite dish antenna permanently mounted shall be used, nor contain a commercial or residential advertisement, except signs indicating the manufacturer, sales or servicing agent, the total of which shall not exceed 20 square inches. 
Cross reference- Telecommunications, ch. 74. 
Section 1429. - Private swimming pools. 
1.	For permanent above[ground] or belowground swimming pools, and for portable pools with a diameter exceeding 12 feet or an area exceeding 100 square feet, a building permit must be obtained for its alteration, erection, and construction. Before a permit is issued, an application shall be approved by the enforcing official (building official or authorized representative). An application is not required for a wading pool. An application for a permit should provide the following information: name of the owner, plot plan specifying dimensions, site location of the pool, as well as nearby fences, buildings, gates, septic tanks, tile fields, public utilities, and easements. The application for a belowground pool must include plans and specifications to scale of the pool walls, slope, bottom, walkway, diving boards, type and rating of auxiliary equipment, piping, and valve layout. 
2.	Rear and side lot line setbacks shall not be less than ten feet between the pool outside wall and the side or rear property line, and not less than ten feet between pool wall and any building on the lot. 
3.	With regard to overhead electrical or telephone wires, a distance of not less than ten feet horizontally from the waters edge shall be enforced. Under no circumstances shall wire of any kind cross over the water surface. 
4.	A swimming pool shall not be less than 25 feet horizontally to any semi-public water well, unless a shorter distance is approved by the county health department. 
5.	A distance of at least three feet horizontally must be maintained from a permanent pool to any sewer. There shall be ten feet horizontally to a septic tank and tile field or other treatment facility, provided the water level in the pool is one foot or more above the ground surface elevation of such treatment facility. 
6.	A distance of three feet shall be provided from any portion of the pool to any underground water, electrical, telephone, gas, or other pipes and conduits, except for parts of the swimming pool system. 
7.	No yard containing a swimming pool or wading pool shall be constructed or maintained unless such swimming pool is entirely enclosed by a building, wall, and/or fence. The minimum height of all parts of the fence or wall, including gates, shall be four feet in height, and not more than six feet in height, measured from grade. The fence shall be designed and constructed so as to make the pool inaccessible to children by climbing or entering through the fence openings. The fence must be no closer than ten feet to the waters' edge. All openings in any such fence or building shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching gate or door which shall be securely locked with a tamper-proof lock when the pool is not in use. 
8.	A private swimming pool shall be located only in the rear yard.
ARTICLE XV - SIGN REGULATIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of Jan. 14, 2014, has been treated by the editor as superseding former Art. XV,  1500-1509, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 129; Ord. of 7-12-1994; Ord. No. 129-15, 7-6-2004; Ord. of 7-12-2011; Ord. of 7-31-2011; Ord. of 4-10-2012. 
Sec. 1500. - Statement of purpose. 
    The city finds that signs and other visual outdoor advertising tends to promote commerce and are related to the health, safety, and/or general welfare of the residents of the city, and that the preservation of the existing character of the community requires regulation of signs and of other visual outdoor advertising. The city finds that failure to regulate the size, location, and construction of signs and other outdoor advertising may have an adverse effect upon the promotion of business and commerce in the city, may lead to poor identification of businesses, may have an adverse effect upon the existing aesthetic character of the city, and may cause deterioration of business and residential areas of the community. Therefore, the purpose of this section and the subsections thereunder is to permit such signs and visual outdoor advertising as will not, by reason of their size, location, or manner of display, endanger public health and/or safety; confuse or mislead traffic; or obstruct vision necessary for traffic and pedestrian safety; and further, to regulate signs and other visual outdoor advertising in such a way as to prevent the placement of signs, and such other visual outdoor advertising in a manner that will conceal or obscure other signs and other visual outdoor advertising on adjacent businesses; to keep the number of signs and sign messages at a minimum level reasonably necessary to identify a business and its products; to keep signs within a reasonable scale with respect to the buildings to which they relate; and further, to prevent off premise signs from conflicting with business, residential and public land uses, and to prohibit signs and other visual outdoor advertising which will have an adverse effect upon the existing aesthetic character of not only the zoning district in which they are located, but also upon the overall existing aesthetic character of the city. Further, the city recognizes that electronic changeable message signs are an increasingly important feature for many businesses. Electronic signs provide an effective mechanism for informing the public of goods and services as well as promoting sales or special events. The use of electronic signs will reduce the need for temporary signs which detract from the visual appearance of the community. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 1501. - Exempt signs. 
    The following shall be deemed to be excluded from the definition of "sign" as it applies to this ordinance: 
1.	Any single sign with an area of one square foot or less limited to two per premises.
2.	Historic signs designating sites recognized by the state historical commission or local governmental body or agency. 
3.	Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal devices, or warnings at railroad crossings. 
4.	Building markers, memorial tablets, or similar signs.
5.	Signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule or regulation; provided that they do not exceed 48 square feet. 
6.	Signs directing traffic on private property, but bearing no advertising matter.
7.	Yard sale signs; provided that no person shall attach in any way posters, notices or advertisements to utility poles, meter posts, or trees in or along any street right-of-way within the city; and that no person shall put up any notice upon any building, wall or fence or other property of another person without having first obtained the consent of the owner of such property. The maximum time limit for all yard sale signs is three consecutive days within four calendar months. 
8.	Signs painted on, or affixed to, glass surfaces of windows or doors and pertaining to and identifying only the lawful business conducted therein. 
9.	Wall murals and similar graphics containing no direct advertisement, subject to the review and approval of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 1502. - Prohibited signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, relocate or keep any sign as defined in this section. 
1.	A sign which copies or imitates or in any way approximates an official highway sign or carries the words "stop" or "danger;" or any sign which obscures a sign displayed by public authority for the purpose of giving traffic instruction or direction or other public information. 
2.	A sign which displays flashing or intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees or intensity unless each interval in the cycle is eight seconds or more and the sign does not constitute a traffic hazard. 
3.	A sign which obstructs any window or door opening used as a means of egress or prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. A sign which interferes with an opening required for legal ventilation. 
4.	A sign or illumination that causes any direct glare into or upon any building other than the building to which the sign may be accessory. 
5.	Swinging signs.
6.	Except as may otherwise be provided in this section, no sign or any portion thereof shall be permitted which moves or assumes any motion constituting a nonstationary condition. 
7.	Abandoned signs.
8.	Signs which are of a size, location, content, coloring, or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal which obstruct the view in any direction at a street or road intersection. 
9.	Signs which contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene pornographic or immoral character. 
10.	Signs which are painted on or attached to any fence or any wall which is not structurally a part of a building, except to identify a residence. 
11.	Signs which emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter.
12.	Roof, projecting or marquee sign.
13.	Exterior string lights used in connection with a commercial premise, other than holiday decoration. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 1503. - General provisions 
    Except as otherwise provided, the following conditions shall apply to all districts and sign types: 
1.	Applicability and effect. Signs shall be permitted which are in accordance with: 
a.	The general provisions of the sign ordinance.
b.	Section 201. Definitions. 
c.	Section 1504. Schedule of regulations. 
d.	The sign regulations for the district in which the sign is to be located.
e.	All applicable provisions of the building and electrical codes of Utica as adopted, and all amendments thereto. 
2.	Interpretation. In this interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
3.	Existing agreements. This ordinance shall not abrogate any private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards than such private agreements, the provisions and requirements of this ordinance shall govern. 
4.	Substitution clause. Noncommercial signs are allowed in all districts and may be substituted for any sign expressly allowed under this ordinance. 
5.	Separability. In accordance with the following, it is hereby declared that the several provisions of this ordinance are separable: 
a.	If any court of competent jurisdiction determines any provisions of this ordinance to be invalid, such determination shall not affect any other provision of this ordinance, not specifically included in the court's judgment order. 
b.	If any court of competent jurisdiction determines any provision of this ordinance to be invalid as applied to any particular sign, such determination shall not affect the application of such provisions to any other sign not specifically included in the court's judgment order. 
6.	Sign permits. 
a.	Prior to the erection or structural alteration of any sign, a building permit shall be secured from the city. 
b.	Application for initial sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by city and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(2)	Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected. 
(3)	Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures. 
(4)	Detailed sign plan in paper or electronic files (Adobe Acrobat PDF format) detailing the plans, specifications, building materials, method of construction and attachment to the building or to the ground. 
(5)	Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the structure.
(6)	Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected. 
(7)	Any building, electrical or structural permits required and issued for said sign. Application requesting the permits for the proposed sign must accompany the sign application. 
(8)	Such other information as the city shall require showing full compliance with the city ordinance. 
c.	Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay to the city a permit fee for each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter as may be established, by resolution, by the city council. 
d.	It shall be the duty of the city, upon the filing of an application for an erection permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure, and if it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city, the city shall then issue the erection permit. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within 12 months after date of issuance, the said permit shall become null and void. 
e.	All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this ordinance or any amendment thereto are mere licenses revocable at any time by the city council. 
7.	Computations. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area (sign face), height, bulk, and placement. 
a.	Computation of area of individual signs. The area of any sign shall be calculated as the area that includes any shape, writing representation, emblem, or colors used to display the sign's intended message. This does not include any supporting structure, framework, bracing, or wall that otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
b.	Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any one point at the same time, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
c.	Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of 1) existing grade prior to construction; or, 2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zoning lot, whichever is lower. 
8.	Placement, height and number restrictions. 
a.	Except as may otherwise be provided herein, pylon and monument signs shall be set back a minimum of three feet back of the property line, except that signs shall not be located closer than a distance equal to its height to an abutting residential district. 
b.	No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof surface. This subsection shall not apply to displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observation of holidays on the roofs of residential structures. 
c.	No sign attached to a building may project more than 14 inches from the building wall.
d.	Pylon signs may not exceed a height of 20 feet. Pylon signs located on property which abuts both a controlled access highway and state or federal numbered highway may be erected above the plane of the pavement of the highest road at the intersection, provided such sign does not exceed a maximum of 40 feet in height. 
e.	Monument signs may not exceed a height of eight feet.
f.	Except as may be otherwise provided herein, there shall not be more than two signs allowed for anyone business with frontage on a single public street or three signs allowed for anyone business or planned grouping of structures with frontage on more than and one public street. Any business with a rear customer entrance is permitted an additional wall sign at said entrance not to exceed 8 square feet in area. 
9.	Building identification. All buildings shall have permanent conspicuous addresses. The city may require supplemental building identification or modify the size or location of such identification as deemed necessary to insure that each and every building is properly identified. 
10.	Changeable messaging center (electronic and non-electronic). The use of changeable messaging centers are permitted in the design of monument and pylon signs provided: 
a.	The changeable message component of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign area. 
b.	The electronic message or image shall not change more frequently than once every eight seconds. Changes between messages shall be accomplished within one second or less. 
c.	The sign shall not contain full motion video or moving images.
d.	The image or message shall not flash or scroll vertically or horizontally. Flashing, blinking or other visual effects are prohibited. 
e.	The LED or other light source of the electronic message board shall not be illuminated beyond the default settings of the manufacturer's brightness or dimming controls. 
f.	The sign shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust to the brightness of the sign to the ambient light levels at all times of the day and night. 
g.	No electronic sign shall create glare, or have characteristics that impair the vision of motorists, or create a nuisance for surrounding parcels. 
h.	Electronic message signs displayed at sites with multiple tenants shall be available to all of the tenants located at that particular site. 
11.	Gasoline station signage. Gasoline price signs may be permitted as part of the allowable sign area for any gasoline station. Signs on pump islands identifying self- or full-service options may be permitted provided that there are no more than two such signs for each island and that no individual sign shall exceed four square feet in area. A gasoline station may additionally display two wall signs of less than ten square feet each for every canopy structure providing coverage to pump islands. Electronic "point of sale" screens not to exceed 14 inches in width located at the pump islands displaying fuel product price, fuel product sale, driver information and advertising of products may be permitted provided there are no more than two screens per island. 
12.	Open and closed sign. A single "open" or "closed" sign may be allowed for each business establishment, provided that such sign does not exceed more than three square feet in area. Such signs may be illuminated. 
13.	Menu board signs. Menu board signs may be allowed for fast food restaurants with a drive thru lane. The number and size of menu board signs shall be determined by the city based on review of the size of the site and the vehicle circulation pattern. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 1504. - Schedule of regulations. 
    The following chart specifies those districts where the following signs are permitted. 
Sign TypesZoning DistrictsResidential
R1-A, R1-B, R-2, R-3Office
O-1Central
Business
District
C-1General
Business
C-2Downtown
Mixed
Use
DMXDMixed
Use
MXDIndustrial
IVehicular
Parking
P-1AnnouncementYYYYYYYYBillboardsNNNYNNYNCanopyNYYYYYYNChangeable CopyNYYYYYYNDevelopment/Commercial Real EstateYYYYYYYNDirectionalYYYYYYYYMonumentNYYYYYYNPoliticalYYYYYYYYPylonNYNYNYNNResidentialYNYNYYNNResidential Real EstateYNYNYYNNWallNYYYYYYNWindow NYYYYYYNTemporary Signs: BannersYYYYYYYYBeacon, Sandwich Board & InflatablesNYYYYYYNHuman DirectionalNNYYYYYNPennantsNNYYYYNNSpecial DecorativeYYYYYYYYSpecial EventYYYYYYYYVehicularYYYYYYYY 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 1505. - Permitted signs. 
    (As defined under Section 201, Definitions). 
1.	Announcement signs. 
a.	All district requirements.
(1)	Two wall or monument signs or combination thereof identifying a park, school, church, public building, other authorized use or lawful non-confirming use. 
(2)	The maximum sign area of each announcement sign shall not exceed 40 square feet.
(3)	The maximum height of an announcement sign shall be eight feet.
2.	Billboards (non-accessory signs). 
a.	General commercial (C-2 ) and industrial (I) district requirements.
(1)	Shall not exceed 250 square feet in area.
(2)	Maximum height of a billboard shall not exceed 50 feet.
(3)	Shall not be less than 250 feet from any residential district.
(4)	Shall be at least 500 feet from another billboard.
(5)	Digital/Electronic billboards shall comply with Section 1503 10 a-h governing Changeable Messaging Centers (electronic and non-electronic). 
(6)	Shall follow all Michigan Department of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration regulations where applicable. 
3.	Canopy signs. 
a.	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2), mixed use development (MXD), downtown mixed use development (DMXD), office (O-1) and industrial (I) district requirements. 
(1)	Canopies shall not project more than eight feet into the right-of-way but in no case closer than six feet to the curb line, or 18 feet from the pavement edge in case the pavement is not curbed. 
(2)	A minimum under clearance of the sidewalk of seven feet shall be maintained.
(3)	Canopies hereafter erected shall, whenever practicable, match the established under clearance, height and projection of canopies which exist on abutting parcels. 
4.	Development/commercial real estate signs. 
a.	Residential District Requirements
(1)	One temporary freestanding sign advertising a recorded subdivision or development not to exceed 20 square feet in area and four feet in height and placed no closer to any street right-of-way than one-third the minimum authorized front yard depth. The sign shall be removed upon the issuance of a temporary or final certificate of occupancy for 76 percent of the dwelling units for housing developments. 
b.	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2), mixed use development (MXD), downtown mixed use development (DMXD), office (O-1) and industrial (I) district requirements. 
(1)	One temporary freestanding sign showing names of building contractors, professional firms, and lending institutions on nonresidential sites under construction not to exceed 20 square feet in area and four feet in height and not located nearer than ten feet to a public right-of-way. The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction, construction shed, or trailer and shall be removed within 14 days of completion of the project. 
(2)	One temporary sign advertising the rent, sale, or lease of the lot or commercial building not exceeding 10 square feet in area on anyone lot. Such sign not to be placed in the public right-of-way, and shall be removed within 30 days from the date such land or building is rented, leased, and/or sold. 
5.	Directional signs. 
a.	All district requirements.
(1)	Total surface area not to exceed 6 square feet per sign on any lot or parcel.
6.	Monument signs. 
a.	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2), mixed use development (MXD), downtown mixed use development (DMXD), office (O-1) and industrial (I) district requirements. 
(1)	Shall not exceed a sign surface area of 75 square feet on lots with less than 200 feet of linear road frontage. 
(2)	Lots exceeding 200 linear feet of road frontage shall not exceed a sign surface area of 100 square feet. 
(3)	No use may have more than one monument sign unless the development is located on a corner lot that fronts more than one major thoroughfare. In such cases one monument sign may be permitted on each road frontage. 
7.	Political signs. 
a.	All district requirements.
(1)	Do not require a city permit.
(2)	Can be placed no more than 30 days prior to election.
(3)	Must be removed within three days of an election.
(4)	Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in residential districts and 32 square feet in all non-residential districts. 
(5)	Candidates for political office are limited to one sign per zoned parcel.
(6)	Political signs shall not be located in, project into or overhang any public right-of-way or be attached to any utility pole. 
(7)	Political signs shall be placed as to avoid obstructing the view of vehicular and pedestrian traffic areas. 
8.	Pylon signs. 
a.	General commercial (C-2) and mixed use development (MXD) district requirements, office (O-1). 
(1)	Shall not exceed a sign surface area of 50 square feet on lots with less than 200 feet of linear road frontage. 
(2)	Lots exceeding 200 linear feet of road frontage shall not exceed a sign surface area of 75 square feet. 
(3)	No use may have more than one pylon sign unless the development is located on a corner lot that fronts more than one major thoroughfare. In such cases one sign may be permitted on each frontage. 
9.	Residential signs. 
a.	Residential district requirements.
(1)	One unlighted nameplate, identifying the name of the occupant or permitted commercial message for goods and services legally offered on the premise, not to exceed two square feet in area. The nameplate shall be attached flat against the front wall of the building. 
(2)	Permanent residential development signs indicating only the name of the development and the management/developer thereof, subject to the following: 
(a)	The residential development signs shall be monument signs.
(b)	There shall not be more than two residential development signs for each major point of vehicular access to development. 
(c)	Residential development signs at any location shall not exceed 50 square feet in gross surface area for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of 100 square feet for the combined surface of all sign faces. 
(d)	Residential development signs shall not project higher than six feet, as measured from the base of the sign or grade of the nearest adjacent roadway, whichever is higher. 
(e)	Residential development signs may be located in any required yard but shall not extend over any lot line or within ten feet of any point of any public right-of-way. The location and arrangement of all residential development signs shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. A residential development sign(s), proposed to be located within a public right-of-way, is expressly prohibited. 
10.	Residential real estate signs. 
a.	Residential district requirements.
(1)	One temporary sign advertising the rent, sale, or lease of the lot or building not exceeding six square feet in area on anyone lot. Such sign not to be placed in the public right-of-way, and shall be removed within 30 days from the date such land or building is rented, leased, and/or sold. 
11.	Wall signs.
a.	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2), mixed use development (MXD), downtown mixed use development (DMXD), office (O-1) and industrial (I) district requirements. 
(1)	Flat wall signs may not project above the roof or parapet line and may not project more than 14 inches beyond the face of the wall of the building. 
(2)	Wall signs shall be attached to, and be parallel to, the wall of the building.
(3)	Wall signs shall be limited in number to one wall sign per business for each wall having an individual means of access. The maximum size of any such sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the building facade where so provided, however, that no such sign shall exceed 100 square feet. 
(4)	In the instance of several tenants utilizing a common public entranceway, a common wall sign shall be permitted provided any such sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the building facade where so provided, or 75 square feet in area for all tenants listed, whichever is more restrictive. 
(5)	Painted wall signs shall follow the following additional design standards:
(a)	The appearance, color, texture, and materials being used shall be compatible with the structure and other developments already existing in the immediate vicinity. 
12.	Window signs. 
a.	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2), mixed use development (MXD), downtown mixed use development (DMXD), office (O-1) and industrial (I) district requirements. 
(1)	Window signs shall be allowed on the inside or outside of window glass of nonresidential properties provided that they cover no more than 25 percent of the gross glass area on any one side of the building and they are not separately illuminated. 
13.	Temporary signs. 
a.	Permitting.
(1)	All temporary signs require a city issued permit.
b.	Special decorative sign or display.
(1)	All district requirements.
(a)	Special decorative displays or signs used for holidays, public announcements or promotion of civic welfare or charitable purposes when not used for a commercial purpose when authorized by the city. In considering such authorization, the city shall consider the following standards: 
i.	The size, character, and nature of the display or sign shall consider the proposed site of display for proper scale and relationship with the site and adjoining properties. 
ii.	The duration or time period during which the display or sign will be utilized shall coincide with the purpose for which it was approved. 
iii.	The purpose(s) for which the sign display is to be erected.
iv.	The arrangements made for the removal of the sign or display after the termination of its usefulness. 
v.	The effect of the proposed sign or display on light and air circulation for lots which are both adjoining and in the surrounding neighborhood of the proposed sign or display. 
vi.	Whether or not the sign or display will constitute a traffic hazard.
c.	Special event signs.
(1)	All district requirements.
(a)	A permit for a special event sign shall be issued not more than four times within any 12 month period. 
(b)	A permit for a special event sign shall be issued for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days. 
(c)	A special event sign shall be located only on the premises of the property upon which the special event is conducted. In a circumstance where more than one parcel of land is involved, only one special event sign shall be permitted. 
(d)	A special event sign shall be located so as not to project into or overhang any public right of way, driveway or sidewalk. 
(e)	The location of a special event sign shall not impede on-site or off-site vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(f)	A special event sign shall not be permanently fastened to a building or structure and shall be securely fastened to the ground. 
(g)	The maximum size of a special event sign shall be 20 square feet in display area.
(h)	The maximum height of a special event sign shall be eight feet.
d.	Banners.
(1)	All district requirements.
(a)	Street banners advertising a public event may be displayed 14 days prior to and through the completion of such event. 
(b)	Street banners shall be removed within seven days following such event.
(c)	Banners shall not be erected higher than 15 feet above grade.
(d)	Banners shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(e)	Banners may be connected to on site light poles, sign poles and/or buildings.
(f)	Banners may not be connected to any public utility or light pole.
(g)	Banner displays shall not interfere with sight distances for vehicular and pedestrian movements on site or with vehicles and pedestrians ingressing or egressing the site. 
(2)	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2), mixed use development (MXD), downtown mixed use development (DMXD), office (O-1) and industrial (I) district requirements 
(a)	Banners shall be permitted only to call attention to a special event or promotion.
(b)	Banners shall not exceed a display of 30 consecutive days.
(c)	No more than four banner displays shall be permitted for any one business during a period of 365 days. 
(d)	Banners are limited to two banners per commercial use when located in a general commercial (C-2) or mixed use development (MXD) district. 
(e)	One banner per commercial use when located in a central business district (C-1) or downtown mixed use development (DMXD) district. 
(f)	Banners shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(g)	Banners shall not be erected higher than 15 feet above grade.
(h)	Banners may be connected to on site light poles, sign poles and/or buildings.
(i)	Banners may not be connected to any public utility pole or structure.
e.	Pennants.
(1)	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2) and mixed use development (MXD) district requirements. 
(a)	Pennant displays shall be permitted only to call attention to a special event or promotion.
(b)	Pennant displays shall not exceed a display of 30 consecutive days.
(c)	No more than four pennant displays shall be permitted for any one business during a period of 365 days. 
(d)	Pennants displays shall not be erected higher than 15 feet above grade.
(e)	Pennant displays may be connected to on site light poles, sign poles and/or buildings.
(f)	Pennant displays may not be connected to any public utility pole or structure.
(g)	Pennant displays shall not interfere with sight distances for vehicular and pedestrian movements on site or with vehicles and pedestrians ingressing or egressing the site. 
(h)	Pennant displays in central business district (C-1) districts shall be limited in length so as not to exceed the width of the commercial use/building. 
(i)	Pennant displays in general commercial (C-2) or mixed use development (MXD) districts shall be limited in length so as not to exceed the width of the commercial use/building when attached to other commercial uses. 
(j)	Pennant displays for a single, freestanding commercial use located in a general commercial (C-2) or mixed use development (MXD) district shall not exceed the width of the property frontage in which a single, freestanding commercial use is located. 
f.	Beacon, sandwich board signs, and inflatables.
(1)	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2), mixed use development (MXD), downtown mixed use development (DMXD), office (O-1) and industrial (I) district requirements. 
(a)	Limited to four events per calendar year.
(b)	Display period not to exceed four consecutive days.
g.	Human directional signs.
(1)	Central business district (C-1), general commercial (C-2) and mixed use development (MXD) district requirements. 
(a)	Human directional signs shall be permitted only to call attention to a special event or promotion. 
(b)	Limited to 4 events per calendar year.
(c)	Display period not to exceed 15 consecutive days.
(d)	Human directional signs shall be limited to one individual per business.
(e)	Human directional signs shall be exclusively located on the establishment's property.
(f)	Human directional signs shall be positioned outside of the public right-of-way and shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
h.	Vehicular signs.
(1)	It shall be prohibited to park, place or store a vehicle or trailer on which there is a vehicular sign on private or public property for the purposes of advertising a business or products or for the purpose of directing people to a business or business activity. 
(a)	Presumption. There shall be a presumption that the above subsection (1) has been violated if the motor vehicle sign is visible from the street and one or more of the following circumstances exists: 
i.	The motor vehicle is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is unregistered or not operable. 
ii.	The vehicular sign is larger in any dimension than or extends beyond any surface of the vehicle or trailer to which it is attached. 
iii.	The vehicular sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is parked or stored in a public right-of-way or an area not designed, designated, or commonly used for parking. 
iv.	The vehicular sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is regularly parked or stored in a "front yard" or "side yard", as such terms are defined in section 201, that abuts a street, when there are other areas of the property designed or available for the parking or storage of the vehicle or trailer that are not visible from the street or do not abut streets. 
v.	The vehicular sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is regularly parked or stored within 50 feet of a street when there are other areas of the property designed, designated, or available for the parking or storage of the vehicle or trailer that are more distant from the street or not visible from the street. 
(b)	Rebuttal presumption. The presumption set forth in subsection (a) above, may be rebutted by evidence showing all of the following: 
i.	The vehicle is temporarily parked in a particular location in the course of conducting personal activities or business activities that involve loading or unloading of goods for customers, providing services to off-site customers, conducting off-site business, or engaging in work breaks. 
ii.	The activities in subsection (1) above, are being actively undertaken during such periods of parking. 
iii.	The activities in subsection (1) above, require the presence of the vehicle for purposes of transporting equipment, people, supplies and/or goods necessary for carrying out such activities. 
iv.	The activities in subsection (1) above, are not, other than incidentally, related to advertising, indentifying, displaying, directing or attracting attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 1506. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Subject to the remaining restrictions of this section, nonconforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this article may be continued. 
1.	No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such manner as to aggravate the nonconforming condition, nor may illumination be added to any nonconforming sign. 
2.	A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into complete conformity with this article. 
3.	If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity with all the provisions of this chapter, and the remnants of the former sign structure shall be cleared from the land. For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign is "destroyed" if damaged to an extent that the cost of repairing the sign to its former stature or replacing it with an equivalent sign equals or exceeds the value of the sign so damaged. 
4.	The message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this does not create any new nonconformities (for example, by creating an off-premises sign under circumstances where such a sign would not be allowed). 
5.	Subject to the other provisions of this section, nonconforming signs may be repaired and renovated so long as the cost of such work does not exceed 50 percent of the present day replacement cost of the sign. 
6.	If a nonconforming sign other than a billboard advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, that sign shall be consideredabandoned and shall be removed within 30 days after such abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign. 
7.	If a nonconforming non-accessory sign (billboard) remains blank for a continuous period of 90 days, that billboard shall be deemed abandoned and shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, be altered to comply with this article or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other person having control over such sign. For purposes of this section, a sign is "blank" if: 
a.	It advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted; or 
b	The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in whole or substantial part; or 
c.	The advertising copy paid for by a party other than the sign owner or promoting an interest other than the rental of the sign has been removed. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 1507. - Maintenance of signs. 
1.	All signs and all components thereof, including without limitation supports, braces, and anchors, shall be kept in state of good repair. With respect to pylon signs, components (supporting structures, backs, etc.) not bearing a message shall be constructed of materials that blend with the natural environment or shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the natural environment. 
a.	If the city finds that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is adversely impacting the health, safety and general welfare of the public, it shall give written notice to the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in the building or the premises on which such sign is located. Correction of the safety condition which caused the city to give such notice shall be effected within ten days after receipt of the notice. If such condition is not corrected after the conclusion of such ten-day period, the city may cause the sign to be removed forthwith at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in the building or premises on which such sign is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, the city may cause any sign to be removed summarily and without notice, at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial interest in the building or premises on which such sign is located, whenever the city determines that such sign is an immediate peril to persons or property. 
b.	If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the supporting structure of a sign, the owner of the property where the sign is located, or other person having control over such sign shall, within 30 days of the removal of the message portion of the sign, either replace the entire message portion of the sign or remove the remaining components of the sign. This subsection shall not be construed to alter the effect of section 1506 which prohibits the replacement of a nonconforming sign. Nor shall this subsection be construed to prevent the changing of the message of a sign. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
ARTICLE XVI - FP, FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Floods, ch. 34; stopping, standing and parking,  78-111 et seq. (Back)
Section 1600. - Intent. 
    The floodplain provisions are intended to protect the "floodplain area," as defined below, so that the reservoir capacity shall not be reduced, thereby creating a danger to areas previously not so endangered in time of high water, or to impede, retard, accelerate, or change the direction of the flow of water or carrying capacity of the river valley or to otherwise increase the possibility of flood. 
Section 1601. - Scope. 
    The requirements of this article shall apply to all lands within the City of Utica that are located within the FP, floodplain protection overlay district, as shown on the City of Utica Zoning Districts Map. The provisions and restrictions of this article shall be considered to apply in addition to and where applicable, in lieu of the provisions of the underlying zoning districts shown on the official zoning districts map, sufficient to fulfill the purpose of this article. 
    This article shall take precedence over any conflicting laws, ordinances, or codes. 
Section 1602. - Floodplain area boundaries. 
    "Floodplain area," as used herein, is deemed to mean that area defined within the 100-year flood boundary in the FEMA "Flood Insurance Rate Map" for the City of Utica dated February 18, 1981. 
    Where there is a question as to the exact boundaries and limits of a floodplain area boundary, the city building official shall determine the limits from the topographical data available. 
Section 1603. - Special permitted or prohibited uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in floodplain areas subject to any limitations described herein: 
1.	Gardening, general farming, horticulture, forestry, or any similar agricultural activity.
2.	Public and private open recreation areas such as parks, playgrounds, play fields, golf courses, and bridle paths. 
3.	Railroads, roads, bridges, dams, weirs, public utilities, when designed so as not to increase the possibility of flood or be otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
4.	Surface parking areas regulated by section 1407 of this ordinance. 
5.	Uses permitted by the zoning districts otherwise established for the parcel subject to the regulations of such district provided: 
(a)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood level. 
(b)	All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have either: 
(1)	The lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood level; or 
(2)	Be constructed such that below base flood level, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subparagraph are satisfied, and that the flood proofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood in the location of the structure. 
(c)	In the area below the upper limit of the floodplain area boundary, dumping or backfilling with any material in any manner is prohibited, unless through compensating excavation and shaping of the floodplain area its flow and impoundment capacity will be maintained or improved. 
(d)	Any filling on banks adjacent to a floodplain area boundary shall have approved erosion control to prevent soil from being washed into the floodplain. City council shall adopt erosion control standards to be enforced by the building official. 
Section 1604. - Applicant to provide technical data. 
    Where topographic data, engineering studies or other studies are required by any city agency to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed site, and/or the effect of a structure on the flow of water, the applicant shall submit such data or studies. All such required data or studies shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
    All submittals for constructing within and/or otherwise occupying a floodplain within the floodplain protection overlay district shall be accompanied by an approved permit issued by the governing agency of the State of Michigan. 
ARTICLE XVII - HP, HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 38; historic districts,  38-81 et seq. (Back)
Section 1700. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the intent of the HP, historic preservation overlay district to establish regulations to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of the community. More specifically, the purpose of this article is to: 
1.	Enable the city, as the steward for the preservation of the city's history, to protect and preserve the city's historic and cultural resources for future generations, inasmuch as they are considered to be treasured assets. 
2.	Promote, preserve, and protect the integrity of the city's historic areas, including the stabilization and enhancement of property values and the encouragement of compatible building development, inasmuch as these buildings individually and collectively represent an important era in the city's development and in Michigan history. 
3.	Protect and enhance historic areas to attract residents, tourists, and visitors to serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry. 
4.	Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.
5.	Strengthen the economy of the city.
Section 1701. - Scope. 
    The requirements of this article shall apply to all lands within the City of Utica that are located within the boundaries of an HP, historic preservation overlay district, as shown on the City of Utica Zoning Districts Map. The provisions and restrictions of this article shall be considered to apply in addition and to and where applicable, in the stead of the provisions of underlying zoning districts shown on the official zoning district map, sufficient to fulfill the purposes of this article. Uses and regulations otherwise applicable in existing zoning districts shall not be allowed unless also permitted in, and developed in accordance with, the following regulations. 
    This article shall take precedence over any conflicting laws, ordinances, or codes. 
Section 1702. - Special definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article in addition to those contained in article II of this ordinance. 
1.	Alteration. Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure or part thereof. 
2.	Construction. The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property. 
3.	Demolition. Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a structure within a historic area. 
4.	Design guideline. A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or area. 
5.	Exterior architectural appearance. The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color, and texture of the building material, and the type, design, color and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements. 
6.	[Reserved.]
7.	Moving. Any relocation of a structure on it [the] site or to another site. 
8.	Repair. Any change to the exterior architectural features of a structure that is not construction, removal, or alteration. 
Section 1703. - Administration and enforcement. 
1.	The historic district commission (HDC) is hereby established as an administrative body whose purpose is to assist city officials and the planning commission in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
2.	The HDC shall have the following powers and duties:
a.	To adopt its own procedural regulations.
b.	To review applications made under this ordinance for the construction, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of structures and affected sites within areas contained in the boundaries of an HP, historic preservation overlay district as shown on the official zoning district map; and further to take action on such applications in accordance with the procedures in section 1704 of this article. In reviewing such applications, the HDC shall apply the standards and guidelines as contained in section 1705 of this article. 
c.	To further define design review standards and guidelines as contained in this section subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
d.	To advise the planning commission on proposed zoning amendments and special approval uses within the boundaries of an HP, historic preservation overlay district, as may be requested by the planning commission. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; historic preservation, ch. 38. 
Section 1704. - Design review procedures. 
1.	Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any construction, reconstruction, demolition, moving, alteration or repair activity within an HP district, and prior to the undertaking of any repair, maintenance, or alteration activity not requiring a building permit, but which affects the exterior architectural appearance of a structure located with an HP district, including signs and appurtenances thereto, the person, individual, firm, or corporation proposing to undertake such activity shall file an application for design review approval with the city clerk. The application, together with all plans and exhibits pertaining thereto, shall be referred to the HDC to initiate the design review approval process. 
2.	Depending upon the nature and scale of the proposed activity, any or all of the following information may be required for HDC and planning commission reviews: architectural plans, site plans, landscaping plans, proposed signs and appropriate detail as to character, proposed exterior lighting arrangements, elevations of all portions of structures with important relationships to public view and indications as to construction materials, design of doors and window, ornamentation, colors and the like, photographs or perspective drawings indicating visual relationships to adjoining structures and spaces, and such other exhibits and reports as are necessary. 
3.	Upon receipt of all necessary applications and materials, the HDC shall review such applications and materials, and on the basis of the design review standards and guidelines contained in this article, shall either (1) approve, disapprove, or approve subject to such conditions as may be warranted, such applications for design review approval; or shall (2) make a recommendation to the planning commission for the approval, disapproval, or approval subject to certain conditions, of such applications, as set forth below. 
4.	There is herein established two levels of design review approval, which shall be determined by the type of the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, or maintenance activity. The first level of design review shall be applicable to the following activities proposed with an HP district: any alteration, repair or maintenance activity which affects the exterior architectural appearance of a structure, including signs and appurtenances thereto. Design review and approval for such activities shall be the sole responsibility of the HDC and its decisions on such matters shall be final unless appealed to city council. The second level of design review shall be applicable to the following activities proposed within an HP district: construction, demolition, or moving of any structure or part thereof. Design review for such activities shall be initiated by the HDC which shall receive all design review applications and materials from the city clerk, review such applications and materials according to the design review standards as set forth in section 1705 of this article, and make recommendations to the planning commission for the approval, disapproval, or approval subject to certain conditions, of such applications. Upon receipt of the HDC's recommendation, together with the design review application and pertinent materials, and shall approve, disapprove, or approve subject to certain conditions, the design review application. 
Following the approval of the design review application by the planning commission or the HDC as appropriate, the design review application shall be transmitted, along with approved plans and materials to the building official and a building permit shall be issued so long as all other applicable codes and ordinances have been met. If no building permit is required, the building official shall issue a notice to proceed. No building permit or notice to proceed shall be issued by the building official unless and until the design review applications has been appropriately approved. 
If planning commission approval is required for the design review application, the design review period shall not exceed 60 days unless mutually agreed upon by the planning commission and the applicant. If only HDC approval is required for the design review application, the design review period shall not exceed 30 days unless mutually agreed upon by the HDC and the applicant. Failure of the planning commission or the HDC to act within the time limits specified above shall be deemed to constitute approval. 
Section 1705. - Design review standards and guidelines. 
1.	Intent and application of the design review standards and guidelines. The following design review standards and guidelines are set forth to guide the HDC and the planning commission in their review of proposed construction, reconstruction, demolition, moving, or repair activities within an HP district as required under this article. The overall purpose of the design review process and the application of the design review standards and guidelines contained herein is to: (1) maintain the scale and visual harmony of historic districts as a whole; (2) preserve the architectural integrity of individual significant buildings; (3) protect the "edges" of the historic districts; and (4) enhance the entrances into such historic districts. Within this general framework, the specific application of the design review standards and guidelines shall be based upon the type of activity being proposed, as follows: 
a.	For construction of new buildings or expansion of existing buildings within an HP district, the design review standards and guidelines shall be applied so as to ensure the compatibility of the new construction with the existing character of the district. 
b.	For reconstruction, remodeling, and repair of structures within an HP overlay district, the design review standards and guidelines shall be applied so as to guide and encourage rehabilitation in line with the original character of the structure. 
c.	For the relocation of buildings to sites with an HP district, the design review standards and guidelines shall be applied so as to ensure that buildings moved to sites within the district are compatible with the surrounding buildings and are appropriately sited on the lot. 
d.	For the proposed demolition or removal of all or parts of existing buildings within an HP district, the design review standards and guidelines shall be applied so as to discourage the demolition of significant buildings within the district and to identify feasible alternatives thereto. 
2.	The standards to be applied as set forth above shall be The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings published by the U.S. Department of the Interior, as may be amended. 
a.	Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose. 
b.	The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed, altered, or covered-up. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
c.	All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged. 
d.	Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
e.	Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity. 
f.	Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
g.	The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken. 
h.	Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to any project. 
i.	Contemporary design for alterations and additions to commercially used properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, character of the property, neighborhood, or environment. 
j.	Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. 
k.	Protected architectural features include, but are not limited to, a structure's general shape; gables, dormers, and other roof features; cornices, brackets and eaves; size, shape, arrangement, number, and size of window panes and muntins; beveled, leaded and stained glass; door and window trim; ornamental moldings; distinctive siding, such as stone, stucco, brick, or patterned shingling; distinctive roofing, such as false thatch, slate, and Spanish tile. 
l.	Demolition of any historic or nonhistoric building or structure within a historic district shall be prohibited unless the historic district commission finds said demolition to meet the criteria outlined in section 1706 of this chapter. 
m.	The general shape of a building or structure's roof, including original dormers, gables, and cornice lines and chimneys shall not be changed. 
n.	New chimneys or soil stacks which extend more than one foot above the surface of the roof may be permitted provided they do not occupy more than one square foot in horizontal area or are invisible from the street. 
o.	Substitute siding may be permitted, provided: (i) the size and style of the new siding is substantially similar to the original; (ii) protected architectural features, including but not limited to window trim, patterned shingling, stucco, stone, or brick and decorative brackets and cornices are not covered, removed, or damaged; and (iii) the substitute siding is placed over the original siding to allow for restoration in the future. 
p.	Existing unpainted brick or stone exterior walls shall not be painted.
q.	Exposed wood surfaces on new work such as porches, railings, and fences shall be painted or stained to coordinate with the existing structure. 
r.	Paint or siding color selection shall not be regulated. The commission shall, however, make nonbinding recommendations for the use of historically accurate color schemes. 
s.	The shape, size, number, and arrangement of replacement windows and doors shall preserve the basic design and size of the originals. Replacement windows shall be substantially similar to the old windows and within ten percent of the original dimensions. Muntins on new windows must appear to be of the same width as the original muntins. Any material may be used for replacement, provided the new materials replicate the original in appearance. 
t.	Fences of all types shall be permitted where they have no visual impact on the streetscape. Metal chainlink fences shall be prohibited in front yards. In the case of schools, child care facilities and other uses where human safety concerns are paramount, the commission may approve any type of fencing necessary to effectively address the safety concerns of that use. 
u.	Driveways and other surface paving shall meet the standards contained in section 1407, off-street parking space layout, standards, construction, and maintenance. 
v.	Removal of street trees shall be allowed where such trees are dead, damaged, diseased, or constitute a threat to safety. Upon receipt of a letter from the DPW superintendent verifying that the reason for removal fulfills one of the above criteria, the building official shall immediately issue a certificate of approval. Removed trees shall be replaced within one year of removal with an appropriate substitute. The historic district commission, in consultation with the DPW superintendent, shall develop guidelines for tree replacement which take into account the contribution of specific species to the district history and character, the susceptibility of certain species to disease, and the specifications of any approved heritage neighborhoods plans. 
Section 1706. - Moving and demolition of structures. 
1.	No permit shall be issued to allow the moving of all or any portion of a structure into or out of an HP district without design review approval of the planning commission, in accordance with procedures and requirements as set forth in section 1704 of this article, and in accordance with design review standards and guidelines as set forth in section 1705 of this article. Structures being moved into such district shall be deemed to have the same impacts as new construction, while structures being moved out of such district shall be deemed to have the same impacts as demolition. 
2.	No permit shall be issued to allow the demolition of all or any portion of a structure in an HP district without design review approval of the planning commission, in accordance with procedures and requirements as set forth in section 1705 of this article. 
The HDC, in making its recommendation to the planning commission, and the planning commission in making its decision, shall give consideration to: (1) the contribution of the building to its immediate surroundings and to the district character as a whole; (2) the historical and architectural importance of the building; and (3) the building's structural condition. 
If, after its review of a design review application for demolition, the planning commission shall find that: (1) the structure does not contribute to the overall character of the district and is of no historical or architectural importance; and/or (2) the structure is a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and is beyond repair, the design review application shall be approved and a demolition permit shall be issued. 
If, after its review of a design review application for demolition, the planning commission shall find that the demolition of the structure would be detrimental to the district as a whole, and that the structure is physically feasible to repair, no demolition permit shall be issued unless and until the following conditions have been met: 
a.	The property owner shall be required to offer the property for sale, at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, and for a period of time to be determined by the planning commission, but which in no case shall be less than three months nor more than 12 months, to any party willing to preserve and restore the structure and the land pertaining thereto. 
b.	If, at the expiration of the time period specified by the planning commission, no bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto for the sale of the property shall have been executed, the property owner shall then offer the property for sale, at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, to the City of Utica which is [sic] the city council deems it to be in the public interest, may acquire such property for historical preservation purposes. The city shall have three months from the expiration date set by the planning commission to enter into a bona fide contract for the purchase of the property, at the expiration of which, if no such contract is executed, the demolition permit shall be issued. 
3.	Any property owner who shall, by willful means, allow a building to deteriorate to the point where rehabilitation is no longer feasible and the building must be demolished shall be deemed to have demolished a property without a permit and shall be in violation of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XVIII - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 

Section 1800. - Review and approval of site plans. 
1.	Application. Prior to the establishment of a new use, change of use, addition to an existing use, the reoccupancy of any building, or the erection of any building in a zoning district, subject to the conditions listed below, a site plan shall be submitted and approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved by the city planning commission in accordance with the ordinance requirements of this article. 
a.	Site plan reviews are required for all permitted principal uses and structures in all zoning districts (except for the single-family detached and two-family dwellings and their accessory uses) and all conditional approval uses in all zoning districts. 
b.	When the proposed new construction or remodeling constitutes an addition to an existing building, or use, site plan review procedures may be modified, at the discretion of the building official, to provide for an administrative review by the building official in lieu of a more formal review by the city planning commission. The building official may conduct an administrative review provided both of the following are true: 
(1)	No variances to the ordinance are required.
(2)	The proposed new construction would not increase the total square footage of the building greater than 25 percent or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
c.	For those cases requiring site plan review solely as a result of building reoccupancy, site plan review procedures may be modified, at the discretion of the building official, to provide for an administrative review by the building official in lieu of a more formal review by the city planning commission. The building official may conduct an administrative review provided all of the following are true: 
(1)	Such use is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(2)	Reoccupancy does not create additional parking demands, beyond 25 percent of that which exists. 
(3)	Reoccupancy does not substantially alter the character of the site.
d.	Every site plan submitted for review shall be in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. Administrative review procedures are not intended to modify any ordinance, regulation or development standard. 
2.	Copies required. Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. Twenty complete copies of all site plans shall be filed with the city clerk who shall place the request on the next planning commission agenda. 
3.	Information required. The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
a.	A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 inches if the subject property is less than three acres and one inch equals 100 inches if three acres or more. 
b.	Date, north point and scale.
c.	The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties and buildings within 100 feet. 
d.	Legal description of parcel.
e.	Existing and proposed topography with contours at two-foot intervals (based on U.S.G.S. datum) extending a minimum of 100 feet beyond site boundaries. 
f.	An inventory of existing vegetation on the site and an indication of any alterations.
g.	The location and nature of any streams, drains, swamps, marshes, and/or unstable soils.
h.	An indication of basic drainage patterns, existing and proposed, and including any structures, retention basins and fencing which are proposed. The applicant shall contact the municipality and municipal engineer to determine the adequacy of utility and storm water proposals, slope and sod erosion requirements to determine if any such requirements will adversely affect the site plan. 
i.	A schedule of parking needs. Separate drawings may be submitted to indicate usable floor areas, etc., for computation of parking needs. 
j.	A detailed planting plan and schedule of plant materials and sizes.
k.	Cross section drawings of any walls, berms, etc.
l.	The location and width of all existing and proposed sidewalks on or bordering the subject site. Where the subject site borders a public right-of-way, a concrete sidewalk five feet in width shall be provided within the public right-of-way one foot from the subjects site's property line. If a sidewalk in good condition exists within the public right-of-way, the above requirement may be waived by the building official. 
m.	The location of all existing and proposed structures of the subject property and all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject property. The setbacks to all existing and proposed structures to be retained or constructed on the site shall be indicated; this includes buildings, signs, trash storage areas, walls, fences, berms, parking areas, etc. The height of all proposed structures shall also be indicated. 
n.	The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas.
o.	The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys.
p.	The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the architect, planner, designer, engineer or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
q.	The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the developers.
r.	In addition to the above information, the applicant shall submit a supplementary explanation as to the specific type(s) of activities proposed. Such information shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Estimated number of employees, resident shoppers, etc.
(2)	Hours of operation.
(3)	Any changes anticipated in terms of dust, odor, smoke, fumes, noise, lights, etc.
(4)	Modifications to vegetative cover, drainage patterns, earth work, problem areas.
(5)	Any ancillary improvements that the applicant proposes to remedy or prevent problems created by the development. 
(6)	Estimated costs of proposed landscaping berms, walls, acceleration-deceleration lanes, or bypass lanes or any other required site improvement not covered in the building permit cost estimates shall be provided. 
4.	Content of site plan file. The site plan(s), all supplementary data, together with minutes of any meeting and/or hearings related to the proposed site plan shall become part of the official site plan file. 
5.	Standards for approval. In the process of reviewing the site plan, the planning commission shall consider: 
a.	Specific development requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance.
b.	The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
c.	The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking areas; and may make such requirements with respect to any matters as will ensure: 
(1)	Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic, both within the site and in relation to access streets. 
(2)	Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
(3)	Accessibility afforded to emergency vehicles.
d.	The arrangement of use areas on the site in relation to functional, efficient and compatible arrangements within the site and also to adjacent uses. 
e.	The planning commission may further require landscaping, fences, and walls in pursuance of these objectives and same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 
f.	In those instances wherein the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress and/or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, the planning commission may recommend marginal access drives. For a narrow frontage, which will require a single outlet, the planning commission may recommend that money be placed in escrow with the municipality so as to provide for a marginal service drive equal in length to the frontage of the property involved. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until the improvement is physically provided, or monies have been deposited with the clerk. 
g.	The cost estimates as required in this section shall be reviewed by the appropriate municipal official (i.e., building official, engineer or planner) for their compliance with current cost estimates. These reviews and recommendations shall be forwarded to the planning commission for inclusion in any approved site plan. 
h.	The planning commission may waive site plan information for topography, vegetation, problem soils, landscaping, employment data environmental considerations, etc., when such concerns are obviously not pertinent to the proposed development. 
i.	The planning commission, or building official as part of administrative review procedures, shall seek the input from local public safety officials as part of the site plan review process, prior to approving, disapproving, or approving with conditions, the site plan. 
6.	Planning commission actions. The planning commission, upon reviewing a site plan, shall take one of the following actions: 
a.	Approval. If the site plan meets all the zoning ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record such approval and the chairman shall sign three copies of the site plan filing one in the official site plan file, forwarding one to the building official, and returning one to the applicant. 
b.	Disapproval. If the site plan does not meet zoning ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record the reasons for denial. The applicant may subsequently refile a corrected site plan under the same procedures followed for the initial submission. 
c.	Conditional approval. If minor corrections to the site are necessary, which can be clearly noted, then the planning commission shall so note such conditions and the chairman shall sign three site plans as conditionally approved and stating the necessary conditions. One copy shall be retained in the official site plan file, one forwarded to the building official, and one returned to the applicant. 
d.	Table. If the site plan is found to be in violation of the requirements or incomplete with respect to necessary information, the planning commission may table action on the site plan until ordinance compliance is shown or required additional information is provided. 
7.	Performance guarantees. To ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance and any condition imposed thereunder, the planning commission may require that a cash certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for which site plan approval is sought be deposited with the city to ensure faithful completion of the improvements and also be subject to the following: 
a.	The performance guarantee shall be deposited prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. The city shall establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements will be made as work progresses. Any partial release of funds shall be less than ten percent which shall be retained by the municipality until all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved by the building official. This does not relieve the applicant from satisfying all applicable maintenance warranties and/or guarantees necessary to ensure the proper functioning of said public improvements. 
b.	This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited pursuant to Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended (the state subdivision control act (MCL 560.101 et seq)). 
c.	As used in this section, "improvements" mean those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, landscaping, and surface drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
8.	Period of completion. An approved site plan shall remain valid for a period of one year from the date of approval. In the event all improvements are not installed, then any such remaining improvements shall be completed no later than July 1 of the following construction season except that the planning commission may, at its discretion, upon application by the owner and for cause shown, provide for up to two successive 12-month extensions. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2006) 
State law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584c, 125.584d. 
Section 1801. - Review and approval of condominium developments. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all condominium developments within the City of Utica: 
1.	Initial information. Concurrently with notice required to be given the City of Utica pursuant to Section 71 of Pubic Act 59 of 1978, as amended (the condominium act (MCL 559.171)), a person, firm or corporation intending to develop a condominium development shall provide the following information: 
a.	The name, address, and telephone number of:
(1)	All persons, firms or corporations with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium development will be located together with a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for example, fee owner, optionee, or land contract vendee). 
(2)	All engineers, attorneys, architects or registered land surveyors associated with the project. 
(3)	The developer or proprietor of the condominium development.
b.	The legal description of the land on which the condominium development will be developed together with appropriate tax identification numbers. 
c.	The acreage content of the land on which the condominium development will be developed.
d.	The purpose of the development (for example, residential, commercial, industrial, etc.). 
e.	Approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel.
f.	Whether or not a community water system is contemplated.
g.	Whether or not a community septic system is contemplated.
2.	Information to be kept current. The information shall be furnished to the building official and shall be kept updated until such time as a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to section 2104 of this ordinance. 
3.	Site plans for new projects. Prior to recording of the master deed required by section 72 of Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, (MCL 579.172), the condominium development shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to section 1800 of this ordinance. In addition, the city shall require appropriate engineering plans and inspections prior to the issuance of any certifications of occupancy. 
4.	Site plans for expandable or convertible projects. Prior to expansion or conversion of a condominium development to additional land, the new phase of the project shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to section 1800 of this ordinance. 
5.	Master deed, restrictive covenants and "as-built" survey to be furnished. The condominium development developer or proprietor shall furnish the building official with the following: One copy of recorded master deed, one copy of all restrictive covenants and two copies of an "as-built survey." The "as-built survey" shall be reviewed by the city engineer for compliance with local ordinances. Fees for this review shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
6.	Monuments required. All condominium developments which consist in whole or in part of condominium units which are building sites shall be marked with monuments as provided in this subsection. 
a.	All monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half inches in diameter and 36 inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four inches in diameter. 
b.	Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the condominium development; at the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with the boundaries of the condominium development and at the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of the condominium development; at all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of compound curvature, points of reverse curvature and angle points in the side lines of streets and alleys and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. It is not intended nor required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the condominium development if the angle points can be readily re-established by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the streets. 
c.	If the required location of a monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the locating of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plans and referenced to the true point. 
d.	If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod, at least one-half inch in diameter shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight inches. 
e.	All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable.
f.	All unit corners and the intersection of all limited common elements and all common elements shall be monumented in the field by iron or steel bars or iron pipe at least 18 inches long and one-half inch in diameter, or other approved markers. 
g.	The city council may waive the placing of any of the required monuments and markers for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, on the condition that the proprietor deposits with the city cash or a certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit to the city, whichever the proprietor selects in an amount to the established by council, by resolution. Such cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. 
7.	Compliance with federal, state, and local law. All condominium developments shall comply with federal and state statutes and local ordinances. 
8.	The building official may allow occupancy of the condominium development before all improvements required by this ordinance are installed provided that cash, a certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit is submitted sufficient in amount and type to provide for the installation of improvements before the expiration of the temporary occupancy permit without expense to the city. 
9.	Single-family detached condominiums. 
a.	Single-family detached condominium project shall be subject to all requirements and standards of the applicable R-1A through R-1B, one-family residential districts. 
b.	The design of a single-family detached condominium project shall be subject to the design layout and engineering standards, as provided below, except as may otherwise be provided by this ordinance: 
(1)	Location arrangement and design of streets.
(a)	The street layout shall provide for the continuation of collector streets in the adjoining subdivisions or of the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the planning commission. 
(b)	The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
(c)	Should a proposed development border on or contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
(d)	Should a proposed development border on or contain a railroad, expressway, or other limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land, such as for parks, in residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
(e)	The minimum street grade shall not be less than 0.5 percent. The maximum street grade shall be 5.0 percent, except that the planning commission may modify this standard on the recommendation of the city engineers. 
(f)	Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to 90 degrees.
(g)	Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
(h)	Sight distances on horizontal or vertical curves and at intersecting roads shall be a minimum of 200 feet. Sight distance for intersecting streets shall be measured ten feet from the edge of the traveled portion of the road and from an eye height of 3.5 feet to an object height of 3.5 feet. 
(i)	Construction standards shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements:
Street TypeRight-of-Way WidthPavement WidthAll types of streets60 feet24 feetCul-de-sac60-foot radius45-foot radius 
(j)	The maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be 500 feet; however, the planning commission may approve a distance of up to 1,000 feet. 
(k)	All pavements shall be asphalt or concrete pavement with concrete curb and gutter on each side in accordance with the standards prescribed by the city engineer. 
(2)	Blocks. 
(1)	Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,300 feet in length, except where, in the opinion of the planning commission, conditions may justify a greater distance. 
(2)	Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout. 
(3)	Natural features. The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses, and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(4)	Walkways. Walkways shall be installed in all single-family detached condominium developments. Such walkways shall be a minimum of five feet in width and shall be constructed of concrete four inches thick. In addition, walkways shall be located on both sides of all interior roadways and so located as to provide access to all general common areas. Upon review of the site plan, the planning commission may approve alternative locations for the walkways or may waive the walkway requirement if it would not serve the purpose of providing adequate pedestrian circulation. 
(5)	Utilities. 
(a)	An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers, catchbasins, manholes, culverts, bridges, and other appurtenances shall be required in all developments. 
(b)	A public sanitary sewer system shall be required.
(c)	A public water supply system shall be required.
(d)	The proprietor shall make arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television, and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout the development area, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead lines may be permitted upon written recommendation of the city engineer and the approval of the planning commission at the time of site plan approval where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, design, and character of the development. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately held property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. 
10.	Final documents to be provided. After submittal of the condominium plan and by-laws as part of the master deed, the proprietor shall furnish to the city a copy of the site plan on a mylar sheet of at least 1316 inches with an image not to exceed 101/214 inches. 
Section 1802. - Review and approval of conditional uses. 
1.	Application. 
a.	The uses identified as special condition uses are recognized as possessing characteristics of such unique and special nature (relative to location, design, size, public utilities needs, and other similar characteristics) as necessitating individual standards and conditions in order to safeguard the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
b.	The city council, as provided herein, shall have the authority to approve conditional use permits, subject to such conditions of design, operation, and appropriate and reasonable safeguards as the city may require for any special condition use included in the various provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
2.	Data required. 
a.	Application for any conditional use permit as provided under the provisions of this ordinance shall be made to the building official by filing an official special condition use permit application form; submitting required data, exhibits, and information; and depositing the required fee as established by resolution of the city council, and as may be amended from time to time. No portion of such fee shall be reimbursable to the applicant. 
b.	An application for a conditional use permit shall contain the following:
(1)	Applicant's name, address and telephone number.
(2)	Address and tax description number of the subject parcel.
(3)	A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the subject parcel, or is acting as the owner's representative. 
(4)	A certified survey drawing of the subject parcel.
(5)	A complete site plan containing all of the applicable data outlined in section 1800, review and approval of site plans. 
(6)	Supporting statements, evidence, data, information and exhibits which address those standards and requirements for assessing special condition use permit applications outlined in section 1802.4 below. 
3.	Public hearing requirements. Upon receipt of an application for a use requiring conditional approval, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing, one notice of which shall be published not less than five nor more than 15 days prior to the public hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and sent by first class mail to the owners of the property for which special condition approval is being considered, to the owners of record of all real property and to the occupants of all structures located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property in question. The notice shall: 
a.	Describe the nature of the special condition use request.
b.	Adequately describe the property in question.
c.	State the date, time, and place of the public hearing.
d.	Indicate when and where written comments concerning the request will be received.
4.	Standards for approval. 
a.	The planning commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts applicable to each proposed special condition use in terms of the following standards and requirements and shall make a determination as to whether the use proposed to be developed on the subject parcel meets the following standards and requirements: 
(1)	Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objective of the future land use plan. 
(2)	Will be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, in harmony with existing and intended character of the general vicinity and so that such use will not change the essential character of that area. 
(3)	Will not be hazardous or detrimental to existing or future neighboring uses.
(4)	Will represent a substantial improvement to property in the immediate vicinity and general benefit to the community as a whole. 
(5)	Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities, such as highways, streets, drainage structures, police and fire protection and refuse disposal; or persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for such services. 
(6)	Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services, and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
(7)	Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive smoke, fumes, glare, noise, vibration or odors. 
(8)	Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this ordinance.
b.	If the facts regarding the special condition use being reviewed do not establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the standards and requirements set forth in this zoning ordinance will be met by the proposed use, the planning commission shall not recommend special condition approval to the city council. 
In recommending approval of a special condition use permit to the city council, the planning commission shall recommend imposition of such reasonable conditions of use as it deems necessary to protect the best interests of the city and the general vicinity, to achieve the objectives of this ordinance and to ensure that the general public health, safety, and welfare will not be infringed upon. 
The planning commission may recommend denial, approval or approval with conditions, on a request for special condition use approval. The recommendation on a special condition use shall be incorporated in a statement containing the conclusions relative to the special condition use under consideration which specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions recommended. 
c.	Upon holding a public hearing and review of the special condition use request, the planning commission shall within 30 days forward to the city council its finding and recommendation. The finding shall include a record of those conditions which are recommended to be imposed. The city council, upon receipt of the finding and recommendation, may deny, approve, or approve with conditions any request for a special condition use approval. Any decision on such a request shall state the findings of fact and specify the conclusions drawn therefrom and any conditions imposed thereon. Any conditions imposed shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of a majority of the city council and the landowner, and the city council shall maintain a record of all conditions that are changed. All records of proceedings hereunder shall be kept and made available to the public. 
d.	The conditional use review and site plan review may occur concurrently at the discretion of the planning commission. 
State law reference- Special land uses, MCL 125.584a. 
ARTICLE XIX - APPEAL PROCEDURES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Appeals, MCL 125.585 et seq. (Back)
Section 1900. - Intent. 
    An appeals procedure is herein established in order that the objectives of this ordinance may be fully and equitably achieved, that a means shall be provided for competent interpretation of this ordinance, that adequate but controlled flexibility be provided in the application of this ordinance, that the health, safety, and welfare of the public is secured, and that justice be done. 
Section 1901. - Membership. 
    The city council shall act as the board of appeals upon questions arising under this ordinance. In this capacity, it shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Section 5 of P.A. 207 of 1921, as amended (MCL 125.585). 
Section 1902. - Meetings. 
1.	All meetings shall be held at the call of the mayor and at such times as such body may determine. 
2.	All hearings conducted shall be open to the public. The city council shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member in question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions in the office of the city clerk, and shall be a public record. 
3.	The city council shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members are present. The concurring vote of a majority of the full membership of city council shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which they are required to pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance. 
4.	The city council shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
Section 1903. - Appeal and notice requirements. 
1.	An appeal may be taken to the city council by any person, firm or corporation, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau affected by a decision of the building official. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the city council by general rule, by filing with the building official, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the city council all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building official certifies to the city council, after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record. 
2.	The city council shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice of the appeal to the parties, and to whom real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of single- and two-family dwellings within 300 feet, the notice to be delivered personally, or by mail, addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment role. The city council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. If the tenants name is unknown, the term occupant may be used. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall also be given in the manner required by Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), and by insertion in a newspaper of general circulation in the city 15 days prior to said hearing date. Such notice shall contain the address, if available, and the location of the property for which the ruling of the city council is sought, as well as a brief description of the nature of the appeal. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. 
3.	No appeal shall be taken to the city council from a decision of the planning commission and city council in connection with a special condition use. 
4.	No appeal shall be taken to the city from a decision of the planning commission in connection with an approved site plan unless such appeal has first been reviewed by the planning commission and a recommendation on the variance is provided by the planning commission. 
Section 1904. - Jurisdiction. 
    The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision of determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance, the city council shall have the power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify any of its rules, regulations or provisions so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the city council the authority to make changes in the zoning ordinance or the zoning map acting under the authority of appeal board. The power and authority to rezone is reserved to the city council in the manner provided by Section 4 of P.A. 207 of 1921, as amended (MCL 125.584). 
Section 1905. - Powers and duties. 
    The city council shall have the following specified powers and duties acting as the appeal board: 
1.	Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the building official or any other administrative official in carrying out, or enforcing, any provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Interpretation. To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance: 
a.	Appeals for the interpretation of the provisions of the ordinance.
b.	Requests to determine the precise location of the boundary lines between the zoning districts as they are displayed on the zoning map, when there is dissatisfaction with the decision on such subject. 
3.	Variances. The city council shall have the power to authorize, upon appeal, specific variances from such dimensional requirements as lot area and width regulations, building height and square foot regulations, yard width and depth regulations, such requirements as off street parking and loading space, and sign regulations, and other similar requirements as specified in the ordinance. To obtain a variance, the applicant must show "practical difficulty," by demonstrating: 
a.	Whether strict compliance with area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, or density would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose, or would render the conformity unnecessarily burdensome; 
b.	Whether a variance would do substantial justice to the applicant, as well as to other property owners in the district, or whether a lesser relaxation would give substantial relief and be more consistent with justice to others; 
c.	Whether the plight of the owner is due to the unique circumstances of the property; and 
d.	Whether the problem is self-created.
4.	Approval of temporary uses. The city council shall have the power to grant permits authorizing temporary land uses for: 
a.	Seasonal sales of produce, firewood or Christmas trees, and similar uses; under the following conditions: 
(1)	Zoning districts where permitted. Temporary uses shall be restricted to nonresidential zoning districts. 
(2)	Application and submittal requirement. The application for a temporary use permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(i)	The shape, location, and dimensions of the lot, including the shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures already on the lot, off street parking layout, and the location of any designated fire lanes. 
(ii)	The materials to be utilized in and the shape, size, and location of all buildings and structures to be erected or moved onto the lot, including all tents, tables, stands, or display racks. 
(iii)	The anticipated automobile traffic flow to and from the lot and any adjacent thoroughfares, loss of off-street parking spaces, if any, as well as the anticipated flow of pedestrian traffic upon lot sidewalks. 
(3)	Time limitations. 
(i)	A temporary use permit for the sale of Christmas trees, seasonal items such as flowers and similar uses shall by its terms be effective for no longer than 30 days. No more than one temporary use permit for the sale of Christmas trees shall be issued for any given location within a single calendar year. 
(ii)	A temporary use permit for a vegetable, fruit or produce stand or for the sale of firewood or similar use shall, by its terms, be effective for no longer than three months. No more than one temporary use permit for such uses shall be issued for any given location within a single calendar year. 
b.	Permit uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature, not otherwise permitted in any district (such as art fairs, carnivals, and civic festival events), not to exceed 12 months. 
In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the city council shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of land; recreation developments, such as, but not limited to: golf driving range and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems, or sanitary connections. 
c.	The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said temporary permit. 
d.	No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this ordinance. Further, the city council shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning commission prior to the taking of any action. 
5.	Essential services. The city council shall review and approve, after a public hearing, the location of overhead or underground and necessary poles and towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the municipality. 
6.	Standards for approval for temporary uses and essential services. A temporary use permit shall only be granted if the city council determines that the proposed use, including the erection of any temporary building or structure, will: 
a.	Provide adequate light and ventilation between buildings and structures.
b.	Provide adequate automobile and pedestrian traffic flow and provide adequate off-street parking. 
c.	Provide adequate lot access for fire protection purposes.
d.	Not adversely affect the stability and integrity of the zoning plan prescribed by this ordinance or otherwise interfere with the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare. 
e.	Not be incompatible with or otherwise adversely affect the physical character of the community and, in particular, the surrounding area with a distance of 1,000 feet. 
f.	When the proposed temporary use is to be conducted on an otherwise vacant or unused lot, the use shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations for the district in which the temporary special use is to be located, including all requirements pertaining to lot size, height, setback, open space ratio, maximum percentage of covered lot area, and off street parking. 
Section 1906. - Prohibited variances. 
1.	No variance shall be made in connection with a condition attached to a special condition use approved by the city. 
2.	A use variance shall not be permitted, except as described under section 1905.4, approval of temporary uses. 
Section 1907. - Attachment of conditions. 
    The city council may impose conditions upon an affirmative decision. The conditions may include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do all the following: 
1.	Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as the social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents, and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use, or activity, and the community as a whole. 
2.	Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
3.	Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
4.	The conditions imposed with shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the landowner. The approving authority shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
Section 1908. - Fees. 
    The city council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeal proceedings. At the time an application is filed, said fee shall be paid to the city clerk. 
Section 1909. - Rehearing. 
1.	The decision of the city council shall be final. However, a person having an interest affected by the zoning ordinance may appeal to circuit court. 
2.	The city council is without general authority to reconsider a matter it has decided and from reversing its previous decision unless the facts and circumstances which actuated the decision have so changed as to vitiate or materially affect the reason which produced and supported it, and no vested rights have intervened. 
ARTICLE XX - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Section 2000. - Area, height, and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this ordinance shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions. 
Section 2001. - Essential services. 
    Essential services serving the City of Utica shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the municipality. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the municipality shall receive the review and approval, after a public hearing, of the city council acting in the capacity of appeal board. Such review shall consider abutting property and uses as they relate to easements, rights-of-way, overhead lines, poles and towers and further, shall consider injurious effects on property abutting or adjacent thereto and on the orderly appearance of the City of Utica. 
Section 2002. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
Section 2003. - Height limit. 
    The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles, public monuments or television antennae for personal use; provided, however, that the city council may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a conditional use. 
Section 2004. - Lot area. 
    Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of this ordinance may be used for any principal use permitted in the district which such lot is located, other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this ordinance, whether or not such lot complies with the lot area and width requirements of this ordinance. Such use may be made provided that all requirements other than lot area and width prescribed in this ordinance are complied with and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance for required lot area for each dwelling unit. (See also section 1403, nonconforming lots.) 
Section 2005. - Yard regulations. 
    When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified as determined by the city council, acting as appeal board. 
Section 2006. - Porches. 
    An open, unenclosed, and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 
Section 2007. - Projections into yards. 
    Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than three inches for each one foot of width of such side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet. 
Section 2008. - Access through yards. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this ordinance not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
Section 2009. - Canopies and awnings. 
    Canopies and awnings offering partial protection from the weather, but not fully enclosed, and which extend into a public right-of-way or required yard, may be considered for approval subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Canopies and awnings extending into a public right-of-way are subject to the following requirements: 
a.	Such approval shall only be granted by the city council following planning commission recommendation. 
b.	Any such structure shall not extend closer than 24 inches to any vehicular parking space or moving vehicle lane. 
c.	Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances for proper vehicular and pedestrian movements. 
d.	Any such structure shall not conflict with any existing or proposed: landscape features, traffic control device, adjacent properties and signs and pedestrian movements. 
e.	The height, location, materials, construction and signage involved in any such structure shall specifically be subject to review and approval by the city council. 
f.	The structure shall be maintained in such a manner as to continue its original appearance and provide proper safety to the persons and property it may affect. 
g.	The City of Utica, its officials, employees and any of its representatives shall be guaranteed full protection against any liability or damages resulting from the construction and existence of any such structure. The nature of such protection and its continuous effect shall be subject to city council determination. 
2.	Canopies and awnings extending into a required yard are subject to the following requirements:
a.	Such approval shall only be granted by the planning commission.
b.	Any such structure shall not extend closer than the height of the structure to any property line adjacent to a residential district. 
c.	Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances for proper vehicular and pedestrian movements. 
d.	Any such structure shall not conflict with any existing or potential development on adjacent property. 
e.	The height, location, materials, construction and signage involved in any such structure shall specifically be subject to review and approval. 
f.	The structure shall be maintained in such a manner as to continue its original appearance and provide proper safety to the persons and property it may affect. 
Section 2010. - Decks. 
    A deck which is associated with a residential structure shall maintain a distance of at least 15 feet from the rear lot line and shall not occupy any required side yard or front yard area, and shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.	The portion of a deck which occupies the required rear yard shall not be above the elevation of the first floor of the residence; 
b.	No more than 25 percent of any deck shall be covered with structures such as a gazebo or a screened porch and such structures shall be nonhabitable; provided that the portion of a deck which occupies the required rear yard shall not contain any such covered structures; 
c.	The portion of a deck which occupies the required rear yard shall not be converted into any enclosed habitable space. 
d.	A deck shall be subject to lot coverage limitations.
ARTICLE XXI - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. (Back)
Section 2100. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the building official or by such deputies of his department as the building official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 2101. - Duties of building official. 
    The building official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the building official to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this ordinance. 
    The building official shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of this ordinance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section 1403. 
    Under no circumstances is the building official permitted to make changes to this ordinance nor to vary the terms of this ordinance in carrying out his duties as building official. 
    The building official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this ordinance are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of said permit. 
Section 2102. - Plot plan. 
    The building official shall require that all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
1.	The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot.
2.	The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
3.	The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
4.	Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
Section 2103. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
1.	Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure, or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
3.	Permits for new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
4.	Permits required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the City of Utica Building Code, housing law, or this ordinance, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
Section 2104. - Certificates. 
    No land, building, or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
1.	Certificate not to be issue. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any buildings, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Certificates required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
3.	Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as required by the city building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this ordinance. 
4.	Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.	Record of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
6.	Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
7.	Application for certificates. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building official on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within ten days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid ten-day period. 
Section 2105. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any building, structure or part thereof shall notify the building official immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
Section 2106. - Fees. 
    Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be collected by the building inspector in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XXII - AMENDING THE ORDINANCE 
    All amendments to the zoning ordinance must be reviewed by the city planning commission. Amendments may take the form of the city council proposal, staff initiated recommendations or citizen petitions, for either zoning text or zoning district boundary changes. In any event, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing as provided in Public Act 207 of 1921 as amended (MCL 125.581 et seq). After the public hearing has been closed, the planning commission shall submit a report and recommendations to the city council on the proposed change. 
    Whenever the planning commission holds a public hearing to consider a proposed change in the zoning district boundaries, a written notice of such time and place for a public hearing shall be mailed to the owners, at the address given in the last assessment rolls, of all lots or parcels of land lying within 300 feet of the boundaries or within lots in every direction of the area proposed to be rezoned, whichever is the greater area. 
    Notices of public hearing shall also be sent to each public utility company and each railroad owning or operating within the districts or zones affected. Such notices shall be delivered personally or by first class mail, at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
    Citizen petitions for zoning ordinance amendments shall be submitted to the city clerk on standard forms provided at least 15 days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. At the next regularly scheduled meeting, the planning commission shall set a date for a public hearing to receive public comment. The standard forms shall be completed in the manner prescribed and such documents, as required by the ordinance, shall be filed with the clerk. A fee schedule, as provided by resolution of the city council, shall be levied against each petition to cover the cost of administering the application process and for advertising public hearings and other incidental costs relative to said petition. The city clerk shall transmit the application to the planning commission. 
    A petition for rezoning, once denied by city council, shall not be resubmitted for recommendation or action within one year from date of denial. 
    If the council does not take any action to resolve a petition for rezoning after public hearing within six months beginning with the initial day of filing, said petition shall be determined to have been denied. 
    Upon presentation of a protest petition, an amendment to a zoning ordinance, which is the object of the petition, shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the legislative body unless a larger vote, but not to exceed three-fourths vote, is required by ordinance or Charter. The protest petition shall be presented to a legislative body before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall be signed by one of the following: 
a.	The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included in the proposed change.
b.	The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included with an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of land included in the proposed change. 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Amendments, MCL 125.584. (Back)
ARTICLE XXIII - PLANNING COMMISSION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission,  2-246 et seq. (Back)
Section 2300. - Creation. 
    The planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in section 4 of Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921 (MCL 125.584), and shall perform the zoning duties of said commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this ordinance. 
Section 2301. - Approval. 
    In cases where the planning commission is empowered to approve certain use of premises under the provisions of this ordinance, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by said commission for the proper consideration of the matter. 
    The planning commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties, who may in its opinion be affected thereby, of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of procedure. 
ARTICLE XXIV - REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE 
    The zoning ordinance adopted by the City of Utica, known as Ordinance No. 62 and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
ARTICLE XXV - INTERPRETATION 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in anyway to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above described zoning ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Conflicts, MCL 125.586. (Back)
ARTICLE XXVI - VESTED RIGHT 
    Nothing in this ordinance should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 
ARTICLE XXVII - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES 

Section 2701. - Violations. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution or, in default of the payment thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the cost of such prosecution. 
Section 2702. - Public nuisance per se. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this ordinance and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.587. 
Section 2703. - Fines; imprisonment. 
    The owner of any building, structure or premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this ordinance shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 
Section 2704. - Each day a separate offense. 
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
Section 2705. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
ARTICLE XXVIII - SEVERANCE CLAUSE 
    Section of this ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph, or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance
Number DateSection Section
this CodeOrd. of 4- 1-19471-662-77 5426-2 2211- 6-1951A, B82-170 18 9- 7-19521-662-71-62-76 1710- 7-19521, 262-31, 62-32 362-42 4-1362-33-62-42 50-1 2- 3-1953A, B2-122 Ord. of 2- 3-19531-52-121-2-125 62-102 72-146 8, 92-126, 2-127 102-147 10(c)2-150 11, 122-148, 2-149 13, 142-171, 2-172 15, 162-151, 2-152 172-101 2512-15-19551, 262-1 30  3-13-1958286-1 37 9- 8-19591, 26-31, 6-32 3(A)-3(C)6-33-6-35 4-66-36-6-38 149 9- 8-19594-710-6 39(1) 7-12-1960art. I82-61 201-205 82-86-82-90 206-21982-92-82-105 220, 22182-64, 82-65 222, 22382-106, 82-107 22482-63 225, 22682-108, 82-109 227-23782-126-82-136 23882-66 301 82-62 39(2) 7-12-1960101-11982-161 201-204 82-164 301, 302 82-186 303-310 82-187-82-194 601 82-163 801 82-168 90582-220 1001, 1002 82-167 1101 82-162 39(3) 7-12-1960311-31482-195-82-198 39(4) 7-12-1960401-410 82-247-82-256 39(9) 7-12-1960901-904 82-216-82-219 906-91282-221-82-227 39A 9-13-19601, 278-7 40 9-13-19601-710-4 4510-11-19601-510-5 51 6-13-19612-101 59 7- 5-1961210-61 4(d)10-62 4(h)10-63 4(m)10-64 56 2-13-19622-246 58  7-10-19621-1958-1-58-19 6011-23-1962982-32 82-35, 82-36 1082-34 6410-20-19641, 282-252, 82-253 67 5-11-1965178-6 68 5-11-1965178-117 6512- 8-19651-378-115 74  7-11-1967126-31 2, 326-33, 26-34 60-69 4-23-1968182-36 1(a)82-35 75 7- 9-1968114-71 2, 314-73, 14-74 514-73 39-11 9-10-196882-247 76 9-10-1968arts. I-IV46-62 77 9-24-19681-646-237 81 4- 8-1969142-1 82  6- 9-1969 1-322-1 8510-15-1970126-1 82A 1-11-197122-1 59-1 4-11-1972110-61 39-B 4-17-197378-7 89 4-17-19731-414-332 514-333 39-C11-12-197378-7 95 9-10-1974VII, VIII46-1, 46-2 XII(b), XII(c)46-231, 46-232 XII(d)46-3 XII(e)46-196 XII(f)46-233 XII(h)46-197 XII(i)46-234 XII(j), XII(k)46-4, 46-5 XII(l)46-198 XIII(1)46-195 XIII(2)46-194 XIII(3)46-193 XIII(4)46-192 XIII(5)46-191 XIII(6)46-200 XIII(7)46-31 46-199 XIV(1)-(3)46-86 XIV(4)-XIV(7)46-87-46-90 XV(1)-XV(8)46-106-46-113 XVI46-199 XVII46-64 XVIII(1)46-291 XVIII(3)46-292 XIX(1)46-61 XIX(2)46-63 XX(1)46-162 XX(2)46-141 XX(3), (4)46-163 XX(6)46-161 XXI(2), XXI(3)46-257, 46-258 XXII46-235, 46-236 10111-11-19751-382-165 10212- 9-19751-370-1 82B10-12-197622-1 95A 2-14-1978146-4, 46-5 46-196-46-198 46-231-46-234 1(d)46-3 104 6-12-197916-2 2-438-51 106 7-18-19791-478-114 108 2-12-19801, 22-31, 2-32 32-3 39-3 3-18-198082-162 82-217 12-A 4- 8-1980254-31 354-38 4, 554-36, 54-37 654-40 7-954-33-54-35 39-E 9- 9-19801-678-8 110 1-13-19811-434-32-34-35 534-31 6-1134-36-34-41 1234-62 13-1834-61 19, 2034-63 21-2534-81 26-29 34-82 30 34-83 95-B 4-14-198146-108 112 7-14-19811-486-1 114 3- 9-19822-778-76-78-81 8(A)78-112 8(B)78-111 8(C)78-116 9, 1078-82, 78-83 1178-113 107 3-24-19822-1 38-2 2-2 38-1 2-3(a) 38-81, 38-82 2-3(b) 38-83 2-4, 2-538-52, 38-53 2-638-5, 38-6 2-738-5 2-838-7 2-1138-3 2-1238-55 115 8-10-1982art. 122-32 art. 1,  2,22-33, 22-34 art. 1,  3art. 222-31 art. 3,  1, 222-35 art. 4,  122-36 75A12-14-198214-73 116 7-12-1983114-361 2, 314-386, 14-387 514-389 6(A), 6(B)14-390 6(C)-(G)14-365 6(H)14-390 714-391 7(B)14-366 7(D)14-366 814-392 914-363 14-388 1014-364 88A 7-18-19841-878-51-78-58 107A 1- 8-1985I38-83 116A 1- 8-1985I14-388 11710- 8-19851, 22-1 4A 3-11-19861-446-142 95C 3-11-1986A46-162 11810-14-198622-76 3-82-78-2-83 92-77 120 3-10-1987214-104 314-101 414-103 514-126, 14-127 14-129 614-158 714-208 814-105 914-209 10, 1114-233, 14-234 1314-235 14 14-211 1514-236 1614-212 18, 1914-214, 14-215 2014-232 21, 22 14-206, 14-207 2314-106 2414-231 2514-127 31, 3214-146, 14-147 3314-127 33-3514-148-14-150 36, 3714-152, 14-153 38 14-160 39(1)14-154 39(2)14-159 40-4214-155-14-157 4314-159 44, 4514-163, 14-164 46-53 14-181-14-188 54-56 14-237-14-239 5714-161 5914-162 6714-128, 14-129 116B 7-12-1988I14-361 114A 7-18-198878-79 120A 8- 9-1988I(1)14-104 I(2)14-101 I(3)14-126 I(7)14-106 I(17)14-213 414-210 514-212 614-128 814-147 14-150, 14-151 914-154 122 3-14-19891-42-266-2-269 123 7-18-19891-330-82-30-84 124 8- 8-19892-818-31-18-37 12B 8-14-199054-39 75B 8-14-199014-73 126 3-12-19911-322-61-22-63 127 5-14-19911-318-61-18-63 5-818-64-18-67 82C 1-14-199222-1 82D 6- 8-1992 22-1 13110-12-19931-574-82 Ord. of 7-12-1994App. A,  1506 114B 9-13-19942, 378-76, 78-77 5-778-79-78-81 132 9-27-19942-446-238 13310-18-19941-478-31 134 4-11-19952.0122-91 2.01(E)22-93 3.0122-95 4.01-4.0622-116-22-121 5.01, 5.0222-96 6.01, 6.0222-98 7.0122-97 8.01-8.0322-141-22-143 9.0122-99 10.0122-122 11.0122-94 13.0122-92 4B 8- 8-199546-142 60B11-14-19959(B)82-91 9(D)82-169 9(F)82-33 9(G)82-67 113A11-14-19951-682-137 116C 2-13-199614-366 136 3-12-19962.0114-32 3.0114-31 4.01(A)-4.01(H)14-34-14-41 4.01(I)14-43 4.01(J)14-42 4.01(K)14-44 5.0114-46 6.0114-45 139 6-11-1996182-68 129-2 9-10-1996App. A,  401, App. A,  402 129-310- 8-1996App. A,  201 App. A,  1412 13811-12-1996art. I66-32, 66-33 66-35 art. II66-31 art. III66-36, 66-37 art. IV66-38 129-411-17-1996App. A,  1002 111A 2-11-19971-782-2 140 2-11-19971(2)74-32 1(3)74-31 1(4)(a), (b)74-56 1(4)(c)74-33 1(5)-1(8)74-57-74-60 1(9)-1(11)74-81-74-83 1(12)74-61 1(13), 1(14)74-84, 74-85 1(15)74-35 1(16)74-86 1(17)74-34 1(19)-(21)74-36 1(22)-1(25)74-106-74-109 100B 3-25-1997114-271 2(A)14-296 2(B)14-305 3(A), (B)14-297 3(C)-(E)14-298 3(F)14-300 3(G)14-302 3(H)14-304 3(I)14-303 3(J)14-299 414-301 5(A)-5(D)14-274-14-277 5(E)14-273 614-306 10-C10-14-1997150-32 250-31 50-42 3-650-38-50-41 750-35 9-1250-43-50-46 1350-34 14, 15 50-47, 50-48 16, 1750-36, 50-37 1850-33 129-5 9- 8-1998App. A,  1412 129-6 9- 8-1998App. A,  1003  9- 9-1998(Mo.)10-2 129-7 2- 9-1999App. A,  1412 123A 9-12-19992, 330-83, 30-84 10-D 3-14-200050-42 129-8 5- 9-2000App. A,  1003 144 5-16-20001-778-141-78-147 129-912-12-2000App. A,  902 147 3-13-20012(A), 2(B)30-56, 30-57 3(A)-3(C)30-33-30-35 3(D)(4)30-37 3(E)30-38 3(G)30-39 3(H)30-36 3(I)30-32 148 4-10-2001610-3 129-10 1-31-20021000(a) App. A, Art. X1001(a) App. A, Art. X1003(a) App. A, Art. X1004(a) App. A, Art. X1005(a) App. A, Art. X1006(a)App. A, Art. X129-11 4- 9-2002App. A,  1424 150 7- 9-2002(intro )78-171 (A)-(C)78-172-78-174 152 2-11-20031, 278-4 153 2-11-20031-378-3 151 3-11-2003130-55 2(A), 2(B)30-56, 30-57 3(B), 3(C)30-34, 30-35 3(D)(4)30-37 3(E)30-38 3(G)30-39 3(H)30-36 3(I)30-32 4C 5-13-200346-142 129-1210-14-2003App. A,  1424 129-13 7-11-2003App. A,  1003(8) 37 1-13-20046-39 129-14 7- 6-2004App. A,  1003(12) 129-15 7- 6-2004App. A,  1506 129-16 5-10-2005App. A,
 1005(a) 7. App. A,
 1002(a) 4.a. 129-17 5-10-2005App. A,  1002(6) 107D 6-14-200538-83(c), (d) 37B11- 9-20056-32 125B12-13-200582-246 153-A 2-14-20061, 2, 478-3 129-18 4-11-2006App. A,  200, 1102.210D 5-31-200650-40 134-A 6-21-200622-141 110A 7-18-2006134-31, 34-62 2     Added34-42 334-37 111B 7-18-200682-1, 82-2 155 9-12-20061-9     Added22-161-22-169 App. A     Added22-170 Ord. of11-14-2006App. A,  1300, 1301 Ord. of 11-27-2006App. A,  201, 1800.1 156 5- 8-20071-12     deleted2-2      Added2-271-2-282 129-19 5-29-2007     AddedApp. A,  1424.5.d157 2-12-2008130-55 230-56, 30-57 330-32-30-39 Ord. of 3-10-200814-71-14-74      Added14-75 82-E 3-11-200822-1 116D 7-14-200914-487(4)158 8-11-20091010-1180     Added14-421-14-438 Ord. of12- 8-200978-31 159 6-14-20111-3     Added42-2 Ord. of 7-12-2011App. A,  1507 160 3-13-20122     Added14-461-154-463, 14-471-14-477, 14-491-14-503 161 3-13-20122     Added14-531-14-534, 14-551-14-556, 14-571-14-574 Ord. of  4-10-2012     AddedApp. A,  1502.14162 6-12-20121-8     Added46-271-46-278 163 6-12-20121-346-142 160-A 4-16-2013214-462, 14-507 164 5-20-20131, 2     Added10-91, 10-92 163-A 7- 8-20132, 346-142 Ord. of 1-14-2014     Rpld1500-1509      Added1500-1507  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL). 
MCLSection 
this Code8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.3u1-9 8.4 1-4 8.4a1-4 8.4b1-3 8.5 1-8 14.301 et seq.Ch. 14, Art. VII 15.231 et seq.2-3 Char.  17.1 38-53 38-81 15.231-15.246Char.  17.1 15.2342-3 15.261 et seq.2-32 Char.  2.11 Char.  16.5 Char.  17.1 38-53 38-81 App. A,  1903 15.261-
15.275Char.  17.1 15.321 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III,
Div. 2 15.328Ch. 2, Art. III,
Div. 2 24.301 et seq.14-129 28.601 et seq.42-1 29.1 et seq.Ch. 30, Art. II 30.401 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. II 22-31 22-33 30.410Ch. 22, Art. II 35.441 et seq.Ch. 14, Art. VII 36.1 et seq.App. A,  201 38.108522-99 117.1 et seq.Char. Arts. I-XVIIChar.  13.1 117.3(a)Char.  2.1 
Char.  2.2 Char.  2.4 Char.  8.10 117.3(b)Char.  10.2 117.3(c)Char. Art. X117.3(d)Char.  2.1 Char.  2.4 Char. Art. IIIChar.  5.2 117.3(e)Char.  1.3 117.3(f)Char.  8.1 117.3(g)Char.  6.4 Char. Art. VIII117.3(h)Char.  6.4 117.3(k)1-7 Char.  2.10 Char.  2.14 Char. Art. XIVChar.  14.6 
Char.  14.7 78-3 117.3(l)Char.  2.11 Char.  16.5 117.3(m)Char.  2.5 117.3(n)Char.  3.14 117.4i(k)1-7 117.4(k)10-2 30-56 117.4a et seq.Char.  7.1 117.4l1-7 117.5b1-1 117.5cChar.  5.2 117.5h46-238 117.6 et seq.Char.  1.2 123.51 et seq.Ch. 50 123.1101 et seq.46-163 125.31 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. V,
Div. 2 2-246 125.32,
125.332-246 125.40114-75 125.523-125.52714-75 125.581App. A, Art. III125.581 et seq.App. AApp. A,  2106 125.583aApp. A,  1403 125.583cApp. A,  1415 125.584App. A, Art. XXIIApp. A,  1904 App. A,  2300 125.584aApp. A,  1302 
App. A,  1303 App. A,  1802 125.584cApp. A,  1800 125.584c(2)App. A,  602 App. A,  802 App. A,  902 App. A,  1102 125.584dApp. A,  1800 125.585App. A,  1901 125.585 et seq.App. A, Art. XIX125.586App. A, Art. XXVApp. A,  1400 125.587App. A,  2702 125.1415a(1)70-1 125.1415a(5)70-1 125.1501 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. II 125.151410-32 125.1651 et seq.Ch. 18, Art. II 18-31-18-34 18-36 18-62 125.165218-33 125.165418-35 125.1664 et seq.18-63 125.1664(2)18-62 125.1667(2)18-62 125.1669(1)18-62 125.167818-37 141.101 et seq.Char.  7.1 141.12182-36 141.421 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. IV Char. Art. VI141.2101 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. IV Char. Art. VIChar.  6.4 168.1 et seq.Char. Art. X168.322Char.  10.2 168.641 et seq.Char.  10.1 168.644fChar.  10.2 168.653aChar.  10.1 168.951 et seq.Char.  10.4 211.1 et seq.Ch. 70 211.10 et seq.Char.  8.1 
Char.  8.2 211.28 et seq.Char.  8.10 Char.  8.14 211.107Char.  8.10 Char.  8.14 211.741 et seq.58-5 213.21 et seq.App. A,  1403 213.21-
213.41App. A,  1403 213.51 et seq.Char.  12.1 257.1 et seq.Ch. 78 78-1-78-3 257.6078-6 257.252a et seq.Ch. 78, Art. II,
Div. 3 257.321a78-54 257.727c78-55 257.742, 257.74378-55 257.95178-4 287.261 et seq.Ch. 6, Art. II 6-31 287.265 et seq.6-31 287.290Ch. 6 287.321 et seq.6-35 324.8901 et seq.Ch. 54, Art. II 54-33 324.1110322-61 324.11501 et seq.Ch. 54, Art. II 324.20101 et seq.22-162 324.2130322-61 333.652346-196 333.7101 et seq.14-390-14-392 50-43 333.745146-256 333.745346-259 333.745746-260 333.16101 et seq.46-260 338.881 et seq.10-3 338.883f et seq.22-97 338.1051 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. IV 22-96 46-163 399.201 et seq.Ch. 38 399.201a38-1 399.20238-2 399.20338-81 399.205(1)-(6)38-5 399.205(7)-
399.205(9)38-53 399.205(10)38-54 399.205(11)38-7 399.205(12)38-6 399.206,
399.20738-31, 38-32 399.209(1), (2)38-33 399.21038-4 399.21138-55 399.21438-82 399.21538-3 400.271 et seq.Ch. 14, Art. VII 436.1101 et seq.46-236 436.170146-235 445.111 et seq.Ch. 14, Art. VII 445.371 et seq.Ch. 14, Art. VII 14-361 445.471 et seq.14-504 445.48214-531 445.551 et seq.14-504 446.201 et seq.14-501 480.11 et seq.78-5 559.171App. A,  1801 560.101 et seq.Ch. 66 66-36, 66-37 App. A,  1800 560.10566-37 560.105 et seq.66-36 560.111 et seq.66-36 560.131 et seq.66-37 579.172App. A,  1801 600.101 et seq.46-276 600.83022-281 600.8395Ch. 78, Art. II,
Div. 2 600.83962-271 600.8701 et seq.1-7 2-277, 2-281 600.8707(6)2-1 722.1 et seq.46-236 722.67346-238 750.49 et seq.Ch. 6 750.81 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. II 750.9246-1 750.11546-63 750.131-
750.13346-64 750.15746-195 750.167(1)(b)46-231 750.167(1)(d)46-3 750.167(1)(e)46-196 750.167(1)(i)46-234 750.167(1)(j), 750.167(1)(k)46-4, 46-5 750.167(1)(l)46-198 750.16946-194 750.21846-87 750.222 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. IV,
Div. 2 750.240Ch. 30 46-292 750.33746-199 750.36246-86 750.36446-88 750.36746-89 750.377a et seq.Ch. 46, Art. III,
Div. 3 50-38 750.377b30-38 750.381-750.38346-107-46-109 750.383a74-36 750.38546-110 750.39146-111 750.411a46-292 750.411h46-31 750.41646-112 750.47946-291 750.53546-90 750.536 et seq.Ch. 46, Art. III,
Div. 2 750.540e46-31 750.55246-61 750.170346-236 752.361 et seq.App. A, Art. XApp. A,  1003 752.36246-238 760.1 et seq.30-32 764.9b et seq.2-1 767.3946-2  
