CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF VASSAR, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
VASSAR, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
D. Joseph Hembling 
Mayor 
____________ 
Councilor Michael Blossom 
Councilor Shirley Seney 
Councilor Evart Stewart 
Mayor Pro-Tem Patricia Gawne 
City Council 
____________ 
Brian M. Kischnick 
City Manager 
____________ 
Michael J. Sauer 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City 
of Vassar, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1983 Code, as supplemented through 
July 8, 1985, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is 
included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note 
indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use 
of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 
1983 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various 
sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of 
the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law 
citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many 
state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The 
figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of 
the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first 
section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same 
time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For 
example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-
2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions 
may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter 
embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the 
subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may 
be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical 
arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the 
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter 
immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of 
codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding 
prefixes: 
CODE 
CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 
CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 
CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES 
SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 
CDi:1 
 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under 
several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still 
others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item 
in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Z. Paul, Supervising Editor, and Robert 
MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given 
to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the 
project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Brian M. Kischnick, City Manager, for his cooperation and 
assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the 
publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily 
accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's 
affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City 
of Vassar, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of 
contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law 
references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such 
material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vassar, Michigan. 
©?Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vassar, Michigan. 1997. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 97-105 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF VASSAR, 
MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED 
THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE 
MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS 
ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF VASSAR, TUSCOLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Vassar, Michigan," published by Municipal 
Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 86, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 23, 1996, 
and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance 
or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any 
provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be 
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 plus costs and/or imprisonment of not to exceed 90 days, or 
both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall 
occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is 
expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is 
reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may 
pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or 
permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention 
of the council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so 
the reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 28, 1996, that amend or refer to ordinances that have 
been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective December 3, 1997. 
    Passed and adopted by this council this 24th day of November, 1997. 

/s/ ?  
      D. Joseph Hembling, Mayor 
 
 
/s/ ?  
      Brian Kischnick, City Clerk 

 
 
First reading and public hearing by city council - November 10, 1997 
Second reading and public hearing by city council - November 24, 1997 
Adopted by city council - November 24, 1997 
Published in the Pioneer Times - December 3, 1997 
Effective Date - December 3, 1997 
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the 
city council of the City of Vassar, Michigan, held on the 24th day of November, 1997. 

/s/ ?  
      Brian Kischnick, City Clerk 
 
 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have 
been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent 
nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and 
permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
Ord. No. 
Included/  
Omitted 
Supp. No. 
Min. of 12-?3-07 
Included 
11 
42 
Included 
11 
2012-01 
Included 
11 
2012-02 
Included 
11 
2012-86 
Included 
11 
2012-03 
Included 
11 
2012-18 
Included 
11 
2013-01 
Included 
11 
2013-04 
Included 
11 
2013-05 
Included 
11 
Ord. of 11-?4-13 
Included 
11 
2013-06 
Included 
11 
2013-07 
Included 
11 
2013-08 
Included 
11 
2014-01 
Included 
11 
2014-02 
Included 
11 
2014-03a 
Included 
11 
2014-04a 
Included 
11 
2014-05 
Included 
11 
2014-06 
Included 
11 
2014-07 
Included 
11 
2014-08 
Included 
11 
2014-09 
Included 
12 
2016-01 
Included 
12 
2016-02 
Included 
12 
2016-03 
Included 
12 
2016-04 
Included 
12 
2017-04 
Included 
13 
2017-05 
Included 
13 
2018-01 
Included 
13 
2018-02 
Included 
13 
 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Vassar, 
Michigan." 
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2). 


Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of 
construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context 
clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Vassar, Michigan, adopted 
February 19, 1945, and shall include any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" shall denote the City of Vassar, Michigan. 
    City council. The term "city council" or "council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Vassar. 
    Code. The expressions "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Vassar, 
Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as hereafter modified by amendment, revision and by the 
adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any 
order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day 
and including the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and 
when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, 
shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Tuscola in the State of 
Michigan. 
    Gender. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter 
genders. 
    General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class 
enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more public officers or other 
persons, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless 
it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan 
Statutes Annotated respectively, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Municipal civil infraction. The words "municipal civil infraction" mean an act or omission that is 
prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other 
ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and 
costs, may be ordered as authorized by chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 
(MCL 600.101 et seq., MSA 27A.101 et seq.), as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser 
included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the 
singular. 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, 
employee, department, board, commission, or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference 
shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Vassar, Michigan." Whenever, by the 
provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other city agency of the 
city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, 
department, board, commission or agency shall mean and include such officer, employee, department, 
board, commission or agency, or any deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall include a natural person, 
partnership, limited liability company, trust, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of 
persons incorporated or unincorporated. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a 
penalty, the term "person" or "whoever," as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners 
or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers and directors thereof. 
    Shall, may. Whenever the word "shall" appears in this Code it shall be considered mandatory and 
not directory, except as otherwise provided. "May" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines or lateral 
lines and the right-of-way lines which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Street, highway and alley. The terms "street," "highway" and "alley" shall mean the entire width 
subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way 
or place of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of 
right for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a 
secondary means of ingress or egress from a property. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
State Law reference— Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq. 


Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, 
definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation 
of the Public Acts of Michigan. 


Sec. 1-4. - Application to territorial boundaries. 
    All provisions of this Code are limited in application to the territorial boundaries of the municipal 
corporation and any territory over which the municipal corporation shall have legal jurisdiction. 


Sec. 1-5. - Headings and catchlines. 
    Headings and catchlines used in this Code, such as the chapter, article, division and section 
numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any 
section and do not limit the subject matter. Any deficiency in a heading or any catchline shall not 
invalidate or otherwise affect any provision of this Code. 


Sec. 1-6. - References and notes; history notes. 
(a) ?Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes are by way of 
explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
(b) ?The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any 
legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 


Sec. 1-7. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances 
hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 


Sec. 1-8. - Rules of severability. 
    Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible, subsection of this Code, is hereby 
declared to be severable, and the invalidity of any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection, 
shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division, section or subsection of 
this Code. 


Sec. 1-9. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend 
and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless 
the subject matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 


Sec. 1-10. - Reference to offices. 
    Reference to a public officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the City 
of Vassar, exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any 
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 


Sec. 1-11. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following when not 
inconsistent with this Code: 
(1) ?Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of 
the Code; 
(2) ?Any ordinance levying annual taxes; 
(3) ?Any ordinance adopting a budget appropriating money; 
(4) ?Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money; 
(5) ?Any ordinance establishing utility rates; 
(6) ?Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons; 
(7) ?Any ordinance authorizing public improvements; 
(8) ?Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property; 
(9) ?Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory; 
(10) ?Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use; 
(11) ?Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, 
widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(12) ?Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(13) ?Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or 
employees; 
(14) ?Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(15) ?Any ordinance pertaining to zoning; 
(16) ?Any ordinance adopting any Downtown Development Authority development plan or tax 
increment financing plan, or any similar ordinance for such other public corporation as may be 
authorized; 
(17) ?Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as 
if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 


Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code. 
(a) ?Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by 
specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section 
_______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Vassar, Michigan, is hereby amended as follows:…." 
The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b) ?If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be 
used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Vassar, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a 
section, to be numbered _______, which section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be 
set out in full as desired. 


Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever 
authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive 
permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement 
and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that 
they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become 
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been 
inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in 
the supplement. 
(b) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be 
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or 
organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in 
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to 
embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1) ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2) ?Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the 
Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, 
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision 
numbers; 
(4) ?Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this 
article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting 
section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of 
the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance 
sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the 
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the 
Code. 


Sec. 1-14. - Enforcement official/agent. 
    If sections of this Code do not directly name a city official who is responsible for carrying out 
enforcement provisions, the city council may direct any one of its employees, officers or other agency to 
perform the stated enforcement provisions. 


Sec. 1-15. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there is a difference or conflict between other provisions of this Code, or those contained in 
lawfully adopted county, state, city, federal or other governmental agency rules, regulations, ordinances 
or laws, the most liberal interpretation of the most restrictive or the one imposing the most desirable 
standard shall prevail. 


Sec. 1-16. - Notice. 
    Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating 
nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the city may be assessed against the 
premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served: 
(1) ?By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his residence, office 
or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2) ?By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address; 
or 
(3) ?If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises for 
five days. 
No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard 
posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by such officer to remove such notice. 


Sec. 1-17. - General penalty. 
(a) ?Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, 
every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, or any rule, regulation or order 
adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and 
costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine, costs and 
imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such 
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b) ?The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the 
amendment of any section of this Code whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory 
ordinance. 
(c) ?The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any injunctive relief, or 
revocation of any permit or license. 
(d) ?The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as 
provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as 
authorized under chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et 
seq., MSA 27A.101 et seq.), as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(1) ?Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this 
Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and 
other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2) ?Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or 
provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" 
means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement 
or provision committed by a person within any six-month period, unless some other period is 
specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance, and for which the person admits 
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this 
Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a 
repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a. ?The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus 
costs. 
b. ?The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat 
offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(e) ?A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by 
this Code or any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code 
or any ordinance. 
(f) ?Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate 
offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(g) ?In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other 
process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this Code or any city 
ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 2(A), 11-13-95) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082. 


Sec. 1-18. - Effective date. 
    This Code shall take effect in accordance with the terms of the adopting ordinance. 


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 14; cemeteries, ch. 18; 
civil emergencies, ch. 22; community development, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 34; 
environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, 
ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; special assessments, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks 
and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; 
vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 2-31. - Vacancies. 
    Unless otherwise provided, any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission 
shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment. 
(Code 1983, § 1.201) 


Sec. 2-32. - Removal. 
    The appointing authority may remove any member of any board or commission for cause, but any 
member shall be entitled to a public hearing on such removal, on written demand filed with the appointing 
authority, within ten days after notice of removal has been given to such member. 
(Code 1983, § 1.202) 


Sec. 2-33. - Compensation. 
    Unless otherwise provided, all members of boards and commissions shall serve without 
compensation as members of such boards and commissions. 
(Code 1983, § 1.203) 


Sec. 2-34. - Salaries of mayor and city council. 
    The following salaries for the mayor and city council are established: 
(1) ?Mayor, $840.00 per year, up to 24 meetings. Additional meetings are to be paid at a rate not 
exceeding 12 meetings as $10.00 per meeting. The mayor shall not receive in excess of 
$950.00 per year. 
(2) ?Council members, $720.00 up to 24 meetings. Additional meetings are to be paid at a rate not 
exceeding 12 meetings as $10.00 per meeting. The council members shall not receive in 
excess of $830.00 per year. 
(Min. of 6-12-89, § IX; Min. of 12-3-07) 


Secs. 2-35—2-55. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— City, village and municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 


Sec. 2-56. - Membership. 
    The city planning commission is continued. The city planning commission shall consist of nine 
members. The members shall represent, as far as is possible, different professions or occupations and 
shall be appointed by the city council. All members of the planning commission shall serve without 
compensation and shall hold no other municipal office except that one of the members may be a member 
of the zoning board of appeals. The term of each member shall be three years except that three members 
of the first planning commission to be appointed shall serve for the term of one year, three for a term of 
two years and three for a term of three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are 
appointed, and terms shall expire on June 30. Members may, after a public hearing, be removed by the 
council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. Vacancies occurring otherwise than 
through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1.208; Ord. No. 29a, 3-12-84) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.33. 


Sec. 2-57. - Meetings; rules; records. 
    The planning commission shall elect its chair from among the appointed members and create and fill 
such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chair shall be one year, with eligibility for 
reelection. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, 
transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. A simple majority of the 
members present shall be required to conduct business. 
(Code 1983, § 1.209; Ord. of 3-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.34. 


Sec. 2-58. - Employees; contracts for special services; expenditures. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, 
whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as 
govern other corresponding employees of the city. The planning commission may also contract with city 
planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The 
expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for 
the purpose by the city council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary 
for the planning commission's work. 
(Code 1983, § 1.210) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.35. 


Sec. 2-59. - Master plan. 
    It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt a master plan for the 
physical development of the city, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the planning 
commission's judgment bear relation to the planning of the city. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, 
plats, charts and descriptive matter shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the 
development of such territory, including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of 
streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and 
open spaces, the general location of public buildings and other public property, and the general location 
and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated for water, light, 
sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, 
widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, 
ground, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout and 
extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the general character, extent and layout of the 
replanning and redevelopment of blighted districts and slum areas; as well as a zoning plan for the control 
of the height, area, bulk, location, and use of buildings and premises. As the work of making the whole 
master plan progresses, the planning commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts 
thereof, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the 
aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The planning commission may from time 
to time amend, extend or add to the plan. 
(Code 1983, § 1.211) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.36. 


Sec. 2-60. - Surveys for plan. 
    In the preparation of such plan the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive 
surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard to its relation 
to the neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and 
accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which 
will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, 
convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of 
development; including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from 
fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient 
distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient 
expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Code 1983, § 1.212) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.37. 


Sec. 2-61. - Adoption of plan. 
    The planning commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution or may by 
successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan. Such parts shall correspond with major 
geographical sections or divisions of the city or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the 
plan and may adopt any amendment or extension or addition thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or 
any such part, amendment, extension or addition the planning commission shall hold at least one public 
hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given, not less than 15 days prior to such 
hearing, by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by registered United 
States mail to each public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public 
utility or railroad within the geographical sections or divisions of the city affected. The adoption of the plan 
or any part or amendment or extension or addition shall be by resolution of the planning commission, 
carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six members of the planning commission. The resolution 
shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the planning commission 
to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and 
descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chair and/or secretary of the planning commission. 
An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to council and to the county register of 
deeds. 
(Code 1983, § 1.213) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.38. 


Sec. 2-62. - Public works; approval by planning commission and city council. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the master plan of the city, or of one or more 
major functions or districts thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, or 
public building or structure, shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in such planned section and 
district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the 
planning commission. In case of disapproval, the planning commission shall communicate its reasons to 
the council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than 
two-thirds of its entire membership. If the public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility is one the 
authorization or financing of which does not, under the law or charter provisions governing same, fall 
within the province of the council, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, 
commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be 
overruled by such board, commission or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The 
failure of the planning commission to act within 60 days from and after the date of official submission to 
the planning commission shall be deemed approval. For the purpose of furthering the desirable future 
development of the city under the master plan the city planning commission, after the planning 
commission shall have adopted a master plan, shall prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of 
public structures and improvements. The planning commission shall annually prepare such a program for 
the ensuing six years, which program shall show those public structures and improvements in the general 
order of their priority, which in the planning commission's judgment will be needed or desirable and can 
be undertaken within the six-year period. The above comprehensive coordinated programs shall be 
based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements, and, to that end, 
each agency or department of the city concerned with such improvements shall upon request furnish the 
planning commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public structures and 
improvements within the purview of such department. 
(Code 1983, § 1.214) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.39. 


Sec. 2-63. - Recision of action by the council. 
    Whenever the council shall have ordered the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or 
boulevard, or whenever the council shall have ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or 
enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such resolution shall not be 
rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the city planning commission for a report and 
until after a public hearing shall have been held. The council shall have power to overrule the 
recommendation of the city planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire 
membership. 
(Code 1983, § 1.215) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.40. 


Sec. 2-64. - Publicity and education; gifts; cooperation from officials. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of 
the plan and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ 
such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. Members of the planning commission, 
when duly authorized by the planning commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of 
the city planning institutes, or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the planning 
commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident 
to such attendance. The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate 
public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be 
part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies; public utility companies; civic, 
educational, professional and other organizations; and with citizens with relation to the protection or 
carrying out the plan. The planning commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the 
exercise of its functions. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within 
a reasonable length of time, such available information as it may require for its work. The planning 
commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon 
any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks 
thereon. In general, the planning commission shall have such power as may be necessary to enable it to 
fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning or carry out the purposes provided in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 1.216) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.41. 


Sec. 2-65. - Approval of plats; street system. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted that sort of a master plan relating to the 
major street system of the territory within its subdivision jurisdiction, or part thereof, and shall have filed a 
certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds of the county in which such territory 
or part is located, then no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or 
recorded until it shall have been approved by the planning commission. Such approval shall be entered in 
writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the planning commission. 
(Code 1983, § 1.217) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.43. 


Sec. 2-66. - Regulations governing subdivision of land. 
(a) ?Before exercising the powers referred to in section 2-65, the planning commission shall adopt 
regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for 
the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master 
plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, 
recreation, light and air and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width 
and area of lots. Such regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other 
ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping or 
other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations 
or practice of the planning commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to 
such installation. Any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. 
In lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the 
planning commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to the city the actual construction and 
installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by or in 
accordance with the regulations of the planning commission. The city shall have the power to 
enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
(b) ?All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and 
before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the 
planning commission to the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1983, § 1.218) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.44. 


Sec. 2-67. - Approval or disapproval of plats. 
    The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within 60 days after the 
submission thereof to it; otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to 
that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand. The applicant for the planning 
commission's approval may waive the requirement of this section and consent to an extension of such 
period. The grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning 
commission. Any plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of a 
person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent. No plat shall be acted on by the planning commission 
without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to the address by registered mail of the time and 
place of such hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed 
to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the 
county treasurer's office and their addresses appear in the directory of the city, or on the tax records of 
the city or county. Every plat approved by the planning commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be 
deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the city plan and a part thereof. Approval 
of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other 
open space shown upon the plat. The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the 
council amendments of the zoning ordinance or map, or additions thereto to conform to the planning 
commission's recommendations for the zoning regulations of the territory comprised within approved 
subdivisions. The planning commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, 
area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, 
provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning 
ordinance of the city. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval 
and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same sanctions and 
penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the 
zoning ordinance or map of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1.219) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.45. 


Secs. 2-68—2-90. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - HOUSING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651. 


Sec. 2-91. - Composition; term; compensation; vacancy. 
    The city housing commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city manager. The 
term of office of members of the housing commission shall be five years. Members of the first housing 
commission shall be appointed for the terms of one year, two years, three years, four years and five 
years, respectively, and annually thereafter one member shall be appointed for the term of five years. 
Members of the housing commission shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office 
by the city manager. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the city manager for the remainder of the 
unexpired term. 
(Code 1983, § 1.225) 


Sec. 2-92. - Meetings; rules of procedure and records; quorum; election and appointment of officers and 
employees. 
    The housing commission shall meet at regular intervals. Such meetings shall be public. It shall adopt 
its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Three members shall constitute a 
quorum for the transaction of business. A president and vice-president shall be elected by the housing 
commission. The housing commission may appoint a director who may also serve as secretary, and such 
other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The housing commission shall prescribe the duties of 
all of its officers and employees and may, with the approval of the city manager, fix their compensation. 
The housing commission may from time to time as necessary employ engineers, architects and 
consultants. 
(Code 1983, § 1.226) 


Sec. 2-93. - Funds. 
    Funds for the operation of the housing commission may be provided by the city council, but the 
housing commission shall as soon as possible reimburse the city for all moneys expended by it for the 
housing commission from revenues received from the sale of bonds. 
(Code 1983, § 1.227) 


Sec. 2-94. - Powers and duties. 
(a) ?Such housing commission shall have the following enumerated powers and duties: 
(1) ?Determine in what areas of the city it is necessary to provide proper sanitary housing facilities 
for families of low income and for the elimination of housing conditions which are detrimental to 
the public peace, health, safety, morals and/or welfare; 
(2) ?Purchase, lease, sell, exchange, transfer, assign and mortgage any property, real or personal, 
or any interest therein or acquire the same by gift, bequest or under the power of eminent 
domain; own, hold, clear and improve property; engage in or contract for the design and 
construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvements, extension and/or repair of any housing 
project or projects; 
(3) ?Control and supervise all parks and playgrounds forming a part of such housing development 
but may contract with existing departments of the city for operation or maintenance of either, or 
both; 
(4) ?Establish and revise rents of any housing project or projects, but shall rent all property for such 
sums as will make them self-supporting including all charges for maintenance and operation, for 
principal and interest on loans and bonds and for taxes; 
(5) ?Rent only to such tenants as are unable to pay for more expensive housing accommodations; 
and 
(6) ?Call upon other departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, but such 
departments shall be reimbursed for any added expense incurred therefor. 
(b) ?It shall have such other powers relating to such housing facilities project as may be prescribed by 
ordinance or resolution of the city council, or as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
chapter, or as may be authorized by or be necessary to carry out the purposes of Act No. 18 of the 
Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (Extra Session) (MCL 125.651 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1983, § 1.228) 


Sec. 2-95. - Conflicts of interest. 
    No member of the housing commission or any of its officers or employees shall have any interest, 
directly or indirectly, in any contract for property, materials or services to be acquired by the housing 
commission. 
(Code 1983, § 1.229) 


Sec. 2-96. - Reports. 
    The housing commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city council and shall 
make such other reports as the council may from time to time require. 
(Code 1983, § 1.230) 


Sec. 2-97. - Additional powers. 
    The housing commission shall have all powers of eminent domain; power to make deeds, contracts, 
leases and purchases; control housing projects; be subject to claims and damages; make estimates of 
costs; and provide for the issuance of revenue bonds and to exercise all powers permitted and authorized 
under Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (Extra Session) (MCL 125.651 et seq.), as 
amended. 
(Code 1983, § 1.231) 


Secs. 2-98—2-120. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to create a local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 


Sec. 2-121. - Relationship to Charter. 
    The procedures adopted in this division shall be in lieu of the existing Charter provision establishing 
the salaries or the procedure of determining salaries of elected officials of the city, and the restriction 
contained in the Charter with respect to changing salaries during term shall be inapplicable. 
(Code 1983, § 1.241) 


Sec. 2-122. - Members. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salaries of all elected officials of the 
city. The local officers compensation commission shall consist of five members who are registered 
electors of the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation by a majority of 
members of the city council. Members of the first local officers compensation commission shall be 
appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years commencing July 1, 1972, and thereafter the 
terms of office shall be five years. Members shall be appointed before July 1 of the year of appointment. 
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member or employee of the 
legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of 
such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the local officers compensation 
commission. 
(Code 1983, § 1.242) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a). 


Sec. 2-123. - Duties. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salaries of the elected officials of 
the city, which determination shall be the salaries unless the council by resolution adopted by two-thirds 
of the members elected to and serving on the council shall reject them. The determination of the local 
officers compensation commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the city clerk unless 
rejected by the council. In case of rejection, the existing salaries shall prevail. Any expense allowance or 
reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salaries shall be for expenses incurred in the course 
of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1.243) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(b). 


Sec. 2-124. - Meetings. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 days in every odd-
numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of 
the members of the local officers compensation commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the 
business of the local officers compensation commission. The local officers compensation commission 
shall take no action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members 
appointed and serving on the local officers compensation commission. The local officers compensation 
commission shall elect a chair from among its members. The term "session days" means any calendar 
day on which the local officers compensation commission meets and a quorum is present. The members 
of the local officers compensation commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their 
actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1983, § 1.244) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(c). 


Secs. 2-125—2-155. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL 


Sec. 2-156. - Authority for adoption of policies. 
    The city council shall adopt written personnel policies and employment agreements as it shall deem 
advisable. 
(Code 1983, § 1.31) 


Secs. 2-157—2-190. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - FINANCES 


Sec. 2-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Account means the line item budget set by the city manager and not appropriated by the city council. 
This is the last three account numbers of the nine-digit account numbers set by the state uniform 
accounting manual. 
    Activity means the middle three numbers of the nine digit account number set up by the uniform 
accounting manual. 
    Appropriation means an authorization granted by the city council to incur obligations and to expend 
public funds for a stated purpose. 
    Contract means an oral or written contract to purchase goods or services. 
(Code 1983, § 1.162) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 2-192. - Payment of accounts receivable. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the Charter of the city or by this Code, all accounts receivable by the 
city shall be paid in full within 30 days from and after the first day that such accounts are due. 
(Ord. No. 93A, § 1(1), 5-12-86) 


Sec. 2-193. - Delinquency charge. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the Charter of the city or by this Code, a delinquency charge of 1½ 
percent per month shall be added to all accounts receivable not paid within the 30-day period as required 
by section 2-192. 
(Ord. No. 93A, § 1(2), 5-12-86) 


Sec. 2-194. - Computation of delinquency charge; payment. 
    The delinquency charge required by section 2-193 shall be computed on the total amount of such 
account receivable, including accrued and unpaid delinquency charges. The delinquency charge shall be 
added to an account receivable on the 31st day after the first day such account receivable was due, and 
monthly thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 93A, § 1(3), 5-12-86) 


Secs. 2-195—2-197. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of Sept 13, 2004 repealed sections 2-195—2-197 in their entirety. Former 
sections 2-195—2-197 pertained to spending authorization, purchasing and contracts, 
respectively, and derived from the Code of 1983, §§ 1.163—1.165. 


Sec. 2-198. - Fees and charges. 
(a) ?All fees and charges shall be set by city council resolution, except for parks and recreation and 
library fees. 
(b) ?Fees for parks and recreation and library activities shall be set by the parks and recreation 
commission, and library board, respectively. 
(c) ?Citizens of the city 65 years of age or older shall be eligible for a 50 percent reduction of the 
following fees, upon presentation of satisfactory proof of age: sewer cleaning and mowing of weeds. 
(Code 1983, § 1.166) 


Sec. 2-199. - Budgetary control. 
(a) ?Expenditures in excess of account appropriations shall not be approved by the department head, 
unless authorization is received from city manager. 
(b) ?The treasurer shall not sign checks in excess of the activity appropriation. 
(c) ?The city council shall appropriate the general fund expense budget by activity totals. All other funds 
shall be appropriated by fund totals. The city manager shall not authorize spending in excess of 
these appropriations. In the event of an emergency, the city manager shall be authorized to exceed 
these appropriations, subject to the subsequent approval of the city council. 
(d) ?Transfers between funds must be authorized by a council resolution and approved prior to transfer 
by the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 1.167) 


Sec. 2-200. - Checks. 
(a) ?All checks shall be signed by two persons including either the city clerk or city treasurer and the city 
manager, mayor or mayor pro tem. 
(b) ?All checks shall become null and void 60 days after the date shown thereon, and shall have a 
statement to that effect printed on the face of the check. 
(Code 1983, § 1.168) 


Sec. 2-201. - Financial reports. 
(a) ?At the first regular council meeting of each month, the city treasurer shall submit a report of the cash 
position of the city including: 
(1) ?Projected cash at the end of the current month. 
(2) ?Balances in all checking and savings accounts, as of the end of the preceding month. 
(3) ?Balances in long term investments, the interest rate, and due date of each, as of the end of the 
preceding month. 
(b) ?At the second regular council meeting of each month the city manager shall submit a report 
comparing appropriations to actual expenditures and income. A fund balance report shall also be 
submitted by the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 1.169) 


Sec. 2-202. - Inventory. 
    On or before the last day of the fiscal year, each department head shall submit to the city manager a 
complete inventory of all department property, the original purchase price of which exceeds $200.00. 
(Code 1983, § 1.170) 


Sec. 2-203. - Local purchasing. 
    In awarding contracts for purchases or services, the city council and department heads may take into 
consideration the proximity of the bidder to the city. The contract may be awarded to a bidder, whose bid 
was not the lowest, if the difference in cost is only slight and that bidder has shown significant support of 
the city, by way of donations or payment of city taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 1.171) 


Sec. 2-204. - Uniform chart of accounts. 
    The city chart of accounts, account numbering system, budget and other financial records shall 
conform to all applicable state and federal laws, including Act No. 621 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 
1978 (MCL 141.421a), as amended. 
(Code 1983, § 1.172) 


Sec. 2-205. - Property assessments. 
(a) ?The taxable status of persons and real and personal property for each tax year shall be determined 
as of December 31 of the preceding year, which shall be deemed the tax day in the city. 
(b) ?On or before the first Monday in March in each year the city assessor shall make and complete the 
assessment roll. 
(c) ?The city council shall annually, in the month of February each and every year, appoint three 
qualified freeholders who are electors of the city to serve as members of the board of review, and 
shall set their compensation at the time of their appointment. 
(d) ?The board of review shall meet on at least three days during the month of March in each and every 
year, at such time and place as shall be designated by the city council each year. 
(e) ?This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the general property tax act as amended by 
Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 211.2 et seq.), as amended. The provisions 
of this section shall be effective, any provision of the city Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, as 
authorized by such Act No. 285. 
(Code 1983, § 1.173) 


Secs. 2-206—2-230. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 


Sec. 2-231. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.), as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer, the city manager or other personnel of the city 
authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil 
infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by this article. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be 
responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city 
official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil 
infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city 
official, directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine 
and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as 
authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the act (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)). 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1(130.1), 11-13-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 2-232. - Action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official 
of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court, or a municipal civil 
infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations 
bureau. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1(130.2), 11-13-95) 


Sec. 2-233. - Citations; issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1) ?The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the 
citation is issued. 
(2) ?The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(3) ?Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state 
court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the 
citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 
8705 of the act (MCL 600.8705). 
(4) ?A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as 
made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official 
signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the 
date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements 
above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief." 
(5) ?An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall 
prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and 
required copies of a citation. 
(6) ?An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a. ?Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is 
responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b. ?Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person 
commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the 
person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney 
approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7) ?Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a. ?Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized city official shall 
personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b. ?If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or 
other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the 
alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or 
structure by posting the copy of the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. 
In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, 
building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1(130.3), 11-13-95) 


Sec. 2-234. - Contents of citations. 
(a) ?A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the 
municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the 
telephone number of the court and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b) ?Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1) ?Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at 
or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2) ?Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation," by mail by the time 
specified for appearance, or in person or by representation. 
(3) ?Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a. ?Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, 
without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before 
a judge is requested by the city. 
b. ?Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being 
represented by an attorney. 
(c) ?The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1) ?If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by 
representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or 
by representation with the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time 
for an appearance. 
(2) ?If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court 
in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance 
and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified 
on the citation. 
(3) ?A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged 
violator of the city. 
(4) ?At an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district 
court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5) ?At a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the 
opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d) ?The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear 
within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a 
misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the 
municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1(130.4), 11-13-95) 


Sec. 2-235. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a) ?Established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau (bureau), as 
authorized under section 8396 of the act (MCL 600.8396), to accept admissions of responsibility for 
municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served 
by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code 
or any ordinance. 
(b) ?Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at Vassar City 
Hall, and shall be under the supervision and control of the city clerk. The city clerk, subject to the 
approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and 
appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c) ?Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for 
which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice, as 
compared with a citation, has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular 
violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter 
shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or 
from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to 
dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and any person may have the violation 
processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of 
any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, 
privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(d) ?Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall 
be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and 
retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment 
of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only 
with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or 
falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e) ?Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued 
and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as 
provided for citations as provided in section 2-233(6) and (7). In addition to any other information 
required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the 
alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the 
address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the 
amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation and the consequences for failure to appear 
and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f) ?Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction 
violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time 
specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be 
made by mail, in person or by representation. 
(g) ?Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official 
issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not 
made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not 
paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court, and a copy 
of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last 
known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the 
requirements for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of the act (MCL 600.8705, 
600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal 
ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1(130.5), 11-13-95) 


Sec. 2-236. - Schedule of civil fines established. 
(a) ?A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served 
with municipal ordinance violation notices is hereby established. The fines for the violations listed 
below shall be as follows: 
?Code  
Section(s) 
Offense  
(Violation) 
Fine 
(1) 
Chapter 82 
Violation of chapter 82, Vegetation 
$??50.00 


First Repeat Offense 
?250.00 


Second (or subsequent) Repeat Offense 
?500.00 
(2) 
Chapter 86 
Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 86 (Zoning) 
??50.00 


First Repeat Offense 
?250.00 


Second (or subsequent) Repeat Offense 
?500.00 
 
(b) ?A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1(130.6), 11-13-95; Ord. No. 45C, § 2, 10-28-96) 


Secs. 2-237—2-250. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - ETHICS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-02, adopted September 8, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; 
hence, inclusion as article VI, §§ 2-251—2-261 is at the discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 2-251. - Declaration of public policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the official policy of the city that all public servants must avoid conflicts 
between their private interests and those of the general public they serve. To enhance the faith of the 
people in the integrity and impartiality of all public servants, it is necessary that adequate rules be 
provided for separating public servant roles from the roles of public servants as private citizens. Where 
government is based on the consent of the governed, every citizen is entitled to have complete 
confidence in the integrity of his or her government. Each public servant must help earn and honor that 
trust by his or her integrity and conduct in all official duties and actions. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business entity means a corporation, a partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated 
association, trust or other business form. 
    Confidential information means information that has been obtained by a public servant in the course 
of acting as a public servant, that is not available to members of the public pursuant to the Michigan 
Freedom of Information Act, being MCL 15.231 et seq., or pursuant to other law, regulation or procedure 
recognized by law, and that the public servant is unauthorized to disclose. 
    Interest means any right, title or share in something, either personal, financial, legal or equitable, 
which is owned, held or controlled, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by a public servant. 
    Public body means the city council and any board, authority, commission, committee, department, 
office or other agency of the city, and includes the city. 
    Public servant means the mayor, member of the city council, officer, full-time or part-time city 
employee and any person elected or appointed to any public body of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-253. - Intent and purpose. 
(a) ?It is the intent of this article that a public servant, regardless of whether or not specifically prohibited 
by this article, shall avoid any action, which might result in or create the appearance of: 
(1) ?Using public office or employment for private gain. 
(2) ?Giving improper preferential treatment to any person or organization. 
(3) ?Impeding government efficiency or economy. 
(4) ?A lack of independence or impartiality of action. 
(5) ?Making a government decision outside of official channels. 
(6) ?Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the city. 
(b) ?It is not the intent of this article to in any way limit the right or ability of any public servant to exercise 
his or her discretion in making legitimate policy decisions which are within his or her discretion so 
long as such action does not provide a special benefit to that public servant, relieve the public 
servant of a particular duty, or treat that public servant differently than other similarly situated city 
residents. 
(c) ?This article should not be construed to interfere with or abrogate in any way the provisions of federal 
or state statutes, the City Charter, or any rights or remedies guaranteed under a collective bargaining 
agreement. This policy is also not intended to apply to political campaign contributions, which are 
governed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-254. - Fair and equitable treatment. 
    No public servant shall request, use or permit the use of any consideration, treatment, advantage or 
favor beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. All public 
servants shall treat all citizens of the city with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-255. - Matters requiring disclosure of actual or potential conflicts of interest. 
    The following disclosure requirements are established to avoid both actual and potential conflict 
between the private self-interest and the public interest of public servants: 
(1) ?Self interest. No public servant, either on his or her behalf or on behalf of any other person, 
shall have an interest in any business transaction with any public body of the city, unless the 
public servant shall first make full public disclosure of the nature of such interest. 
(2) ?Disclosure and disqualification. Whenever the performance of official duties shall require a 
public servant to deliberate and vote on any matter involving his or her financial or personal 
interest, that public servant shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and is 
disqualified from participating in the deliberations and voting on the matter. 
(3) ?Dual employment. No public servant shall engage in employment with, or render services for, 
any person or entity, which has business transactions with any public body of the city, without 
first making full public disclosure of the nature and extent of the employment or services. 
(4) ?Dual representation. A public servant shall make full public disclosure of business involving the 
city when attempting to use his or her official position to secure special privileges or exemptions 
for self or others. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-256. - Prohibited conduct. 
    All public servants are prohibited from engaging in the following conduct: 
(1) ?Divulging confidential information to any person not authorized to obtain such information in 
advance of the time prescribed for its authorized release to the public. 
(2) ?Benefiting financially from confidential information. 
(3) ?Representing his or her individual opinion as that of the city. 
(4) ?Misusing city personnel resources, property, funds or assets for personal gain or benefit. 
(5) ?Violation of City Charter or enacted ordinance. 
(6) ?Soliciting or accepting a gift or loan of money, goods, services or other things of value which 
may tend to influence the manner in which the public servant or another public servant performs 
his or her official duties. 
(7) ?Engaging in a business transaction other than with a public body, which may cause the public 
servant to derive a personal profit or gain directly or indirectly as a result of his or her official 
position. 
(8) ?Engaging in or accepting employment or rendering services that are incompatible or in conflict 
with the discharge of his or her official duties or that tend to impair his or her independence of 
judgment or action in the performance of official duties. 
(9) ?Participating in the negotiation or execution of contracts, making of loans, granting of subsidies, 
rate-fixing or issuing permits or certificates, or other regulation or supervision involving a 
business entity in which he or she has a substantial interest; however this provision shall not 
apply to the negotiation or execution of a contract where: 
a. ?The contract is awarded pursuant to sealed bids; 
b. ?The public servant is not involved directly or indirectly or otherwise refrains from 
participation in the decision on the award of the contract; and 
c. ?The city council, after reviewing the circumstances, determines the award of the contract 
would be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-257. - Public disclosure, contents. 
    Whenever a public disclosure is required by this article, it may be made orally on the record at a 
meeting of the public body involved, or in a writing filed with the city clerk, in both of which cases it shall 
be made a part of the record of the public body meeting, and in either event shall include: 
(1) ?The identity of all persons involved in the interest. 
(2) ?The source and amount of income derived from the interest that may be considered as 
resulting from employment, investment or gift. The person required to file a disclosure statement 
in accordance with the provisions of this article must verify, in writing, under penalty of perjury, 
that the information in the statement is true and complete as far as he or she knows. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-258. - Duties of the city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall examine all disclosure statements filed pursuant to this article and report 
irregularities immediately to the person filing the statement, the city manager, and the city attorney. 
Acceptance of a statement by the city clerk shall not constitute approval of the statement. The city clerk 
shall maintain a current list of all disclosure statements required to be available for public disclosure. The 
city clerk shall preserve all disclosure statements for at least three years after the date on which they are 
filed. The city clerk shall make available to the public all statements that are required to be available for 
inspection during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-259. - Request for opinion from the city attorney. 
    Any public servant may request that the city attorney provide an advisory opinion interpreting the 
effect or application of this article generally, or on questions directly relating to the propriety of their 
conduct in a particular situation. All such requests shall be through the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-260. - Delivery of copies of ethics code to public servants. 
    The city clerk shall deliver a copy of this article to each public servant as soon as practicable after 
the enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives, and to each new public servant at the time 
of employment or taking office. The city clerk shall also request that each such person sign and return an 
acknowledgement of receipt of a copy of this article, and such acknowledgement shall be placed on file in 
the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Sec. 2-261. - Violation. 
    Any person found to have violated the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of misconduct 
and may be subject to termination of employment or removal from appointment to a public body. Every 
person convicted of a violation of this article by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punished with a 
fine of not more than $500.00 or by a sentence of not more than 90 days in jail, or both at the discretion of 
the court. The penalty or penalties imposed are not exclusive remedies under this article and any and all 
statutory and Charter penalties or forfeitures may also be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 9-8-08) 


Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290, MSA 12.541. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 6-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a) ?No person shall cruelly treat, beat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse any animal. No 
owner of an animal shall neglect or fail to provide such animal with adequate shelter or care. 
(b) ?Inhumane treatment. No person shall cause any animal to be subjected to cruel or inhumane 
treatment, including, but not limited to: 
(1) ?The unnecessary separation of a female animal from its offspring before such time as the 
offspring can survive such separation; 
(2) ?Painting, dyeing, or otherwise coloring any animal as a novelty or for purposes of sale, 
exchange or adoption; 
(3) ?Promoting, inciting, or conducting animal fights of the intentional killing of animals for wagering 
or entertainment; 
(4) ?Keeping an animal in any container or other enclosed area without sufficient food, water, light, 
ventilation and care for an unreasonable length of time so as to cause undue discomfort or 
suffering; 
(5) ?The transporting of any living animal on the running board, fenders, hood, or other outside part 
of any vehicle unless suitable harness, cage, or enclosure is provided so as to protect such 
animal from falling, being thrown, or otherwise being injured there from. 
(Code 1983, § 9.171; Amd. of 8-4-03) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, MCL 752.21 et seq., MSA 28.161 et seq. 


Sec. 6-2. - Poisoning animals. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place 
wherein it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird. 
(Code 1983, § 9.172) 


Sec. 6-3. - Birds and birds' nests. 
    No person, except a public officer acting in his official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture 
any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 9.173) 


Sec. 6-4. - Harboring of domestic animals and fowl. 
(a) ?Animal means any living reptile or mammal and shall include, but not limited to: pigs, cows, cats, 
dogs, sheep, goats, ducks, ponies, horses, snakes, geese, livestock and fowl. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or house any domestic animals or fowls, whether 
licensed or unlicensed, except dogs or cats, commonly classified as pets. It shall also be unlawful to 
harbor or have charge of any domestic animal when any one or more of the following facts exist: 
(1) ?The animal has a vicious disposition, shows vicious habits and/or has molested any person or 
animal lawfully in or upon any public or private street or place; 
(2) ?The domestic animal has attached or bitten any person who was peaceably conducting 
themselves in any place they may lawfully be or has destroyed any property or other domestic 
animal; 
(3) ?The domestic animal appears to be suffering from rabies, mange or other infectious or 
dangerous disease; 
(4) ?The domestic animal, by destruction of property or trespassing upon the property of others, has 
become a nuisance in the vicinity where kept as witness by a police officer, ordinance officer, 
animal control officer or any two persons from two separate households in the vicinity where the 
domestic animal is kept; or 
(5) ?The domestic animal, by loud barking, howling, yelping, whining, meowing or other sound has 
become a nuisance in the vicinity where kept, as witnessed by a police officer, ordinance officer, 
animal control officer or any two persons from two separate households in the vicinity where the 
domestic animal is kept. 
(Code 1983, § 9.174; Amd. of 8-4-03; Ord. No. 2014-07, 6-2-14) 


Secs. 6-5—6-35. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - DOGS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 6-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means every person in possession of any dog who shall suffer such dog to remain on or 
about his premises for a period of five days. 
(Code 1983, § 9.182) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 6-37. - Dogs running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any dog in his charge or keeping, whether 
licensed or unlicensed, to run at large or stray beyond the premises of such owner unless such dog is 
under reasonable control of some person and is accompanied by its owner or custodian. Every dog shall 
at all times between sunset of each day and sunrise of the following day be confined upon the premises 
of its owner or custodian except when the dog is under reasonable control of its owner or custodian. 
(Code 1983, § 9.184; Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-38. - Female dogs in heat. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any female dog to permit or allow such dog to go 
beyond the premises of such owner or custodian when she is in heat. 
(Code 1983, § 9.185) 


Sec. 6-39. - Keeping of dangerous animals. 
    No person shall permit any dangerous, fierce, savage or vicious animal, or an animal that has been 
bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies or other infectious disease to be on any 
private or public property. Any person who shall have in his possession a dog which has contracted, been 
exposed to or is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall, upon demand, 
surrender such dog to the police department of the city or county animal control department to be held for 
observation as provided in this section. It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a animal 
which has been attacked or bitten by another animal having or showing symptoms of rabies to 
immediately notify the police department of the city, and no person shall destroy or dispose of the animal 
without the permission of the police department of the city. Whenever an animal is impounded for having 
bitten a person, the police department may, if deemed necessary and advisable, and after having held the 
dog for a sufficient length of time to meet the requirements and investigations of the health department, 
cause such animal to be destroyed as a vicious or dangerous animal. Whenever an police officer or 
animal control officer upon personal observation or investigation that an animal is a dangerous animal as 
defined in this chapter, the officer shall notify the owner of the animal in writing of this determination, the 
reasons for the determination and the requirements of this section regulating the keeping of dangerous 
animals. Any dangerous animal running at large which cannot safely be taken or impounded may be 
destroyed by a police officer or animal control officer, however in all cases where an animal has bitten a 
person or other animal as to cause a puncture or abrasion of the skin or where the animal is suspected to 
be rabid or have another infectious disease, no injury should be done to the head of the animal. 
(Code 1983, § 9.186; Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-40. - Other at-large animals. 
    No person shall cause or permit any animal kept by him to run at large within the city. Animals which 
are off the owners property, whether public or private, without being under the control of the owner or 
other responsible party, shall be deemed to be running at large. It shall be unlawful to permit any animal 
to run at large on the property of another without the permission of the owner of that property. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-41. - Animal waste. 
    The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any fecal matter 
deposited by his animal on public property, public easements, or private property, before leaving the 
immediate area. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-42. - Keeping of wild animals. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild animal such as, but not limited to, 
bear, dear, exotic or poisonous snakes, large reptiles, large members of the cat family, or any animal 
specifically prohibited from domestic housing by the state as a pet or for display or exhibition purposes 
without obtaining all of the necessary and required licenses and permits from the state or federal 
authorizing agency. Housing of non-ordinary domestic animals must be done in accordance with the 
enacted zoning ordinance. Person(s) found violating this section must immediately surrender such animal 
to the proper animal control officer, or agency as authorized by the state or federal government to house 
such wildlife. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-43. - Diseased animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit a domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease to 
run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of any other animal or person may 
be affected. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-44. - Abandoned or unwanted animals. 
    It shall be unlawful to abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned, in any place, without 
making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless the premises are temporarily vacated for the 
protection of human life during a disaster. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while traveling, 
walking, hiking, or hunting shall not be regarded as abandoned under this section when the owner or 
custodian has made, or is making a reasonable effort to locate the animal. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-45. - Order to show cause why animal should not be destroyed. 
    A police officer or animal control officer may issue a citation for a violation of this section or a 
complaint may be filed in the district court of this county, and the district court shall issue a summons to 
the owner of such animal to show cause why the animal should not be killed or otherwise disposed of. 
Upon hearing, the district court judge, upon finding that one or more of the facts as set forth in this 
chapter exists, shall order the animal to be killed or otherwise disposed of as ordered by the court. The 
owner shall pay all costs incurred for the disposition of the animal. Such action shall be in addition to any 
penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Secs. 6-46—6-60. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 


Sec. 6-61. - Required. 
    All dogs within the city shall be licensed in conformity with the provisions of the state dog law, and 
this article shall in no way be construed to affect the application of the provisions of the state dog law 
within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the state dog law, the 
provisions of the state dog law shall govern. The city clerk is hereby authorized to perform the duties 
imposed upon the city treasurer under section 14 of the state dog law, Act No. 339c of the Public Acts of 
Michigan of 1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq., MSA 12.511 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1983, § 9.183) 


Sec. 6-62. - Tag to be worn. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess, harbor or have the care or charge of any dog, 
male or female, of the age of four months or over, within the city unless such dog shall wear a collar or 
harness to which is attached the license tag provided for by Act No. 339 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 
1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq., MSA 12.511 et seq.), as amended, more commonly known as the Dog Law 
of 1919. 
(Code 1983, § 9.181) 


Secs. 6-63—6-85. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 


Sec. 6-86. - Pound; establishment and use. 
    The city may provide a pound, and it may be the duty of the police department, and every other 
person who may be employed by the city manager for that purpose, to promptly seize, take up and place 
in such pound all dogs found running at large or being kept or harbored in any place within the city, 
contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 9.187) 


Sec. 6-87. - Pound records. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department or other person designated by the city manager to keep 
a record of the breed, sex, age, color and markings of every dog impounded, together with the date and 
hour of impounding, and to serve notice in writing upon the owner or custodian, if known, that the dog is 
impounded. 
(Code 1983, § 9.188) 


Sec. 6-88. - Release from pound. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to release any dog which is in the custody of the 
police or health department. 
(Code 1983, § 9.189) 


Sec. 6-89. - Pound fees. 
(a) ?Dogs impounded for the first time during any fiscal year, July 1 to June 30, under the provisions of 
this article, may be claimed by their owners or custodians upon the payment of $5.00 per day for 
each day or part of a day that the dog is in custody, plus $20.00 impounding fee, provided that a 
proper license for the dog is produced. 
(b) ?If the dog is again impounded during the same fiscal year, under the provisions of this article, it may 
be claimed by its owner or custodian upon payment of $5.00 for each day or part of a day that the 
dog is in custody, plus $40.00 impounding fee, provided that a proper license for the dog is 
produced. 
(c) ?The police department or other authorized person, when delivering a dog to the owner, custodian or 
purchaser, shall make out a receipt in triplicate describing the dog as to breed, sex, age, color and 
markings and state thereon the hour and date of delivery and the amount collected for impounding 
fees or purchase, or both, as the case may be, and provided further, that the original receipt shall be 
given to the owner, custodian or purchaser, and one copy shall be kept in the files of the police 
department, and one copy shall be filed with the city clerk, together with all the money collected. 
(Code 1983, § 9.190; Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 6-90. - Disposition of impounded dogs. 
    All dogs placed in custody in accordance with this article shall be kept for 48 hours, except dogs 
suspected of having rabies, which dogs shall be kept in accordance with the laws of the state, and if the 
owners cannot be ascertained or do not claim their dog it shall be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1) ?If the dog is diseased and is not being held under the provisions of the laws of the state, it shall 
be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(2) ?If the dog is a mixed breed, it may be held for sale for a period of five days, and if not sold, then 
it may be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(3) ?If the dog appears to be a thoroughbred, it may be kept for a period of two weeks, and if not 
sold, it may be destroyed in a humane manner. The sale of any and all dogs shall be subject to 
the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 9.191) 


Sec. 6-91. - Penalties. 
    Violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction subject to a civil fine of not less than 
$100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 26; floods, ch. 42; streets, 
sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE 


Sec. 10-31. - Adoption of Michigan State Construction Code. 
    The Michigan State Construction Code as established by Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan 
of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), as amended, is hereby adopted. Such code includes the building, 
electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes. 
(Code 1983, § 8.1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 


Sec. 10-32. - Enforcing agency. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code the building official of the city is hereby 
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under Act No. 230 of the 
Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), as amended. The city hereby assumes 
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Code 1983, §§ 8.1, 8.2) 


Sec. 10-33. - Board of appeals. 
    Pursuant to section 14 of Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), 
known as the State Construction Code Act of 1972, there is hereby established a construction board of 
appeals, to perform the duties of the construction board of appeals under such act within the city. The 
board shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. Appointments in the first instance shall 
be for a period of one, two and three years, respectively, so as nearly as may be to provide for 
appointment of an equal number each year, and thereafter each member shall hold office for a full three-
year term. If qualified, members of the zoning board of appeals may also be appointed to serve as 
members of the construction board of appeals. 
(Code 1983, § 8.3) 


Secs. 10-34—10-65. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of July 9, 2007 amended the Code by repealing former art. III, §§ 10-66—
10-68, in its entirety. Former art. III pertained to the National Property Maintenance Code, and derived 
from the Code of 1983, §§ 6.1 and 6.2. 


Secs. 10-66—10-80. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - BLIGHT PREVENTION 


Sec. 10-81. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight in the city by the prevention or 
elimination of contributing factors and causes of blight which exist or which may in the future exist in the 
city. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 1, 12-8-97) 


Sec. 10-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words or terms, when used herein, shall be deemed to have the meanings set forth 
below: 
    Blighted structure. Any dwelling, garage, accessory or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, office 
building, warehouse, or any other structure or part of a structure which: 
(1) ?Because of fire, wind, other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as 
a dwelling or useful for the purpose for which it was originally intended; 
(2) ?Is partially completed and which is not presently being constructed under an existing, valid 
building permit issued by or under the authority of the city; 
(3) ?Is not structurally sound, weathertight, waterproof or vermin-proof; or 
(4) ?Is not covered by a water resistant paint or other waterproof building material as to protect said 
structure from the adverse effects of the elements or from physical deterioration. 
    Building material. Shall mean all items used or useful in the construction or repair of a building or 
structure including, but not limited to, any lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks, plumbing materials, 
electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, cement, nails, screws, sand 
and gravel. 
    Enforcement officer. The zoning administrator and/or any police officer or the city manager's 
designee. 
    Inoperable, junk, or abandoned vehicles. Vehicles exhibiting any of the following characteristics: 
(1) ?Lacks any or all of the necessary component parts to make it operative and serviceable, such 
as missing or deflated tires, lack of an engine or vital operating parts; 
(2) ?Any motor vehicle which has remained on the premises of another person for a period of 48 
consecutive hours without consent of that property owner; 
(3) ?Any vehicle abandoned by its owner; or 
(4) ?Is not currently licensed for use upon the highways of the state or is without attached license 
for a period of 72 hours or more unless special approval is granted by the zoning administrator. 
    Junk. Any abandoned, discarded, unusable objects or equipment, any object or equipment unused 
for its originally intended purpose, including but not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, 
cans, implements, parts of motor vehicles, machinery, cloth, rubber, iron, steel, and other ferrous or 
nonferrous materials, batteries, remnants of wood, and, bottles, any metals, boxes, cartons, crates, signs, 
perishable items, tires or in general, any other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not the same 
could be put to any reasonable use. 
    Nuisance. Any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting 
any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(1) ?Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others; 
(2) ?Offends decency; 
(3) ?Is offensive to the senses; 
(4) ?Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any 
public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch, or drainage; 
(5) ?In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(6) ?Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate 
the value of the property of others 
    Person. Any natural person, firm association, partnership, limited liability company or corporation. 
    Unsecured building. Any building which is not securely locked, the windows glazed or of which is not 
securely boarded up and/or protected against the elements, from vandals, and/or from rodents and/or 
other animals. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. of 11-3-03(1)) 


Sec. 10-83. - Prohibited conduct. 
    Except as may otherwise permitted by the holding of a specific business license or by other 
ordinances of the city or state or federal law, no person in the city shall: 
(1) ?Keep or permit the existence of any unsecured building on property owned, leased, rented or 
occupied by him/her. 
(2) ?Keep or permit the existence of any blighted structure on property owned, leased, rented or 
occupied by him/her. 
(3) ?Store or permit the storage of firewood on property owned, leased, rented or occupied by 
him/her except in a neat, orderly stack to a height no greater than four feet, a width no greater 
than eight feet, and a length no greater than 16 feet. The storage of firewood shall be restricted 
to the rear yard or side yard of the premises. The number of stacks of wood shall not exceed 
three separate stacks of wood. 
(4) ?Any inoperable vehicle, except in a completely enclosed building or concealed with a securely 
fastened fitted cover manufactured for that purpose. 
(5) ?Any abandoned vehicle. 
(6) ?The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, residential and non-residential, including 
fences, shall be maintained by the owner, occupant or person authorized to use same, in good 
repair and all exterior surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or covered with exterior siding 
material intended for that use by the manufacturer for purposes of preservation and 
appearance. All windows skylights, and doorframes must be in good repair, working order, and 
weather tight. The same shall be maintained by the owner, occupant or person authorized to 
use same, free of broken or missing siding, shingles or exterior woodwork, crumbling stone or 
brick, excessive chipped, peeling, or lack of paint, missing, broken or deteriorating steps, 
porches, handrails and guardrails or any other conditions reflective of deterioration and/or 
inadequate maintenance or as may tend to depreciate property values in the area or create a 
nuisance hazard. 
(7) ?Store on residential and non-residential premises in the city, any junk, debris or condition, 
including, but not limited to: wood, bricks, concrete rubble, cinder blocks or other building 
materials, scrap metal, tree limbs or brush, tree stumps with a height greater than their 
diameter, diseased or dead trees or other yard waste, household garbage or refuse not properly 
contained or stored, inoperable vehicles, or parts thereof and inoperable machinery or parts 
thereof (except when housed inside out of the public view), refrigerators, stoves, washing 
machines, hot tubs, dryers, or other appliances, water heaters, dilapidated dog houses and 
animal cages, animal waste, upholstered furniture, mattresses, bedsprings or other furniture not 
intended for exterior use by the manufacturer and used or stored on open porches or in yards, 
rutted lawns or driveways or any other unsightly conditions as may tend to depreciate property 
values in the area or create a nuisance, hazard, or eyesore, shall not be allowed on any 
property by the owner, occupant or person authorized to use same. Lots of residentially 
developed areas shall be kept free by the owner occupant or person authorized to use same of 
dirt piles, rubble and any other materials or conditions which might hinder maintenance of the 
property, except that dirt piles used for landscaping purposes shall be leveled and said areas 
seeded with grass within 30 days of the date of delivery of the dirt. Dirt piles in industrially zoned 
areas shall be removed within one year of the date of deposit on the property, except those 
used in conjunction with properly zoned landscaping businesses or contractor's yards. 
(8) ?Park any motor vehicle in any required setback area or in a front, side, or read yard area of a 
residential lot except on an improved driveway or parking pad. An improved driveway or parking 
pad can be of cement, brick, asphalt, paver, crushed limestone, etc. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. of 11-3-03(1); Ord. No. 2018-01 , 5-7-18) 


Sec. 10-84. - Enforcement. 
    Before commencing prosecution under this article, the enforcement officer shall give notice to the 
person charged with violating this article. Such notice shall be in writing, and shall be served upon said 
person or, at the option of the enforcement officer, by posting a copy of this notice on the land or 
attaching a copy of the notice to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by 
first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. The 
notice shall specify that failure to remedy the violation within 15 days of the date of personal service or 15 
days from the date of mailing shall result in the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. of 11-3-03(1)) 


Sec. 10-85. - Penalty. 
    Failure to comply with the notice given by the enforcement officer within the time specified shall 
constitute a municipal civil infraction which shall be processed in accordance with chapter 2 of this Code 
and the penalty for which shall not exceed $100.00 for failure to comply with this article, $250.00 for the 
first repeat offense and $500.00 for the second or subsequent repeat offense and any additional fines or 
costs which may be assigned by the district court. 
    In addition to the foregoing fines, the court may assess as costs, the damages and expenses 
incurred by the city in the enforcement of this article against the violator including the costs of 
prosecution. The assessment and collection of these fines and costs shall be in accordance with MCLA 
600.8701 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. of 11-3-03(1)) 


Secs. 10-86—10-100. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - WATER WELL ABANDONMENT AT DEMOLITION SITES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of October 7, 2002, amended the Code by adding a new art. IV, § 10-80. In 
order to avoid duplication of article numbers, the editor has redesignated the article as art. V, and the new 
section as § 10-101. 


Sec. 10-101. - Abandonment required. 
    The owner of an existing water well serving a structure that is to be removed or demolished shall 
abandon and plug the water well in accordance with the requirements as Part 127 of the Michigan Public 
Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, as amended, and the administrative rules adopted pursuant thereto, being 
Michigan Administrative Code R325.1601 et seq., as amended. Such a water well shall be abandoned 
and plugged no later than 30 days after the commencement of the removal or demolition activities. The 
owner shall provide advance written notice of the well abandonment and plugging to the water 
department of the city and ensure that the water department of the city inspects the abandonment and 
plugging work. 
(Ord. of 10-7-02) 


Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, 
ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    License means any license, permit, certificate or any other type of approval required by this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 7.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Secs. 14-2—14-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 


Sec. 14-31. - Required. 
    No person, as owner, agent, manager, employee or otherwise, shall operate, conduct, maintain or 
otherwise be engaged in the carrying on of any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, 
activity or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining a 
license from the city in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7.2) 


Sec. 14-32. - Multiple licenses required. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting, maintaining or otherwise 
carrying on or engaging in any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement or privilege required 
by this Code to be licensed shall not relieve the person so licensed from the necessity of securing such 
other licenses or permits as may be required by this Code, except as specifically provided elsewhere in 
this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 7.3) 


Sec. 14-33. - State licensed business. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the 
operation of, conduct or carrying on of any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity 
or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if 
such a license or permit is required by this Code. No license required by this Code shall be issued to any 
person who is required to have a license or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence 
of having obtained the required state license or permit. 
(Code 1983, § 7.4) 


Sec. 14-34. - Application. 
    Unless otherwise provided for by law or ordinance or in this Code, every person required to obtain a 
license as provided for in this Code shall make application to the city clerk for such license on forms 
provided or prescribed by the city clerk. The application shall require such information to be provided as 
will enable the clerk to determine whether the applicant, if licensed, will serve the public in a fair, honest, 
safe and competent manner and in compliance with the requirements of this Code and all other 
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The person making application 
for any license shall state under oath or affirmation that the information provided on such application is 
true and shall provide, under oath or affirmation, such other information relative to the granting of the 
license or to the applicant's qualifications as the clerk may require. No person shall make a false 
statement or false representation on any license application or in connection with the application for any 
license provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 7.5) 


Sec. 14-35. - Term and fees. 
(a) ?The license year applicable to all annual licenses shall begin on July 1 of each year and shall end 
on June 30 of the following year. 
(b) ?Any license not issued prior to the beginning of a license year shall be issued for the balance of the 
license year. The fee charged for each license whether for a full or partial license year, shall be the 
fee provided for in article III of this chapter. 
(c) ?Where provision is made in article III of this chapter or elsewhere in this Code for the issuance of a 
license for a period of less than one year, the effective date of such a license shall be as provided on 
the face of the license by the city clerk, and such a license shall be in effect only for the period 
provided on the face of the license by the clerk. In the absence of a provision by the clerk on the face 
of a license, the license shall be valid only on the date upon which it is issued. 
(Code 1983, § 7.6) 


Sec. 14-36. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant has complied with all the provisions of 
this Code and all provisions of the laws of the state applicable to the trade, business, profession, 
occupation, amusement, activity or privilege for which the license is sought have been complied with. 
(Code 1983, § 7.7) 


Sec. 14-37. - Agreement by applicant. 
    All licenses are issued subject to the following conditions, which shall be noted on the application 
form: 
(1) ?The applicant agrees to permit inspection of the licensed premises and/or activity at reasonable 
times for the purpose of personal property tax assessment, building occupation and occupancy 
permit reasons, for ascertaining conformity to any zoning requirements, for effective police and 
fire services or for purposes of ascertaining whether the business must be accounted for in any 
fire department plan for dealing with toxic materials in conformity with Act No. 154 of the Public 
Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 408.1001 et seq., MSA 17.50(1) et seq.), as amended, with 
regard to hazardous chemicals. Inspection will be done by a properly identified appropriate 
official or his designee as defined in section 14-38, i.e., fire chief, police chief, health officer or 
building official. 
(2) ?The applicant agrees to the temporary suspension of the license without prior notice or hearing 
when, in the judgment of the appropriate officials, such a suspension is necessary to preserve 
the public health, safety or welfare. When the situation is corrected, the owner will contact the 
appropriate official for a reinspection in order to have the suspension lifted. 
(3) ?The applicant agrees that he will keep aware of and comply with all applicable federal, state 
and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations during the term of the license. 
(4) ?The applicant agrees that he will not engage in the licensed trade, business, profession, 
occupation, amusement, activity or privilege at any time after the license has expired, without 
having been reissued, or at any time when the license is suspended or revoked. 
(5) ?No license shall be issued unless the applicant has paid all personal property taxes assessed 
him and unless the applicant has paid all other debts due and owing to the city. 
Each applicant shall sign a statement indicating that he has read this section and agrees with its 
provisions prior to the issuance of any license. 
(Code 1983, § 7.8) 


Sec. 14-38. - Certification required. 
    In each case where the certification by any of the following officials or employees shall be required 
prior to the issuance of the license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon such inspection 
or investigation as may be deemed appropriate by the officer or employee named and shall indicate a 
determination that the requirements following the official's or employee's title have been complied with. 
(1) ?Fire chief: The provisions of the fire code and all other applicable regulations and requirements 
of the city and the state relative to fire safety have been complied with. 
(2) ?Police chief: The criminal history of the applicant, if any, has been checked and that there is no 
indication that the applicant cannot serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and 
open manner. 
(3) ?Health officer: All applicable health and sanitary requirements of the city, county and state have 
been complied with. 
(4) ?Building official: The building requirements of this Code and of the state have been complied 
with and that the zoning and other land use provisions of this Code will permit the licensed 
activity at its proposed location. 
(Code 1983, § 7.9) 


Sec. 14-39. - Bonds. 
(a) ?Where a provision of this Code requires that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, 
such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the 
amount thereof is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds set out in article III of this chapter or 
elsewhere in this Code, in the amount so required. The form of such bond shall be acceptable to the 
city attorney. 
(b) ?In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance 
in the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond. Any such 
policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the city official issuing the license or 
permit and as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1983, § 7.10) 


Sec. 14-40. - Exemption from fee. 
    No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such 
persons shall comply with all other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 7.11) 


Sec. 14-41. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a) ?Any license issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk for cause as 
described in this section. Any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing 
officer or authority for cause as described in this section. In either case, the city manager will 
schedule a hearing with the license review board. This board will need to be initiated and should be 
comprised of three to five people. This board will take the place of the city manager in the appellate 
process. Depending upon the necessity for prompt action, the hearing shall be held in accordance 
with one of the following provisions: 
(1) ?If there is no immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the hearing shall be held 
to determine whether the license or permit should be suspended or revoked. The holder of the 
license or permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be notified 
of the reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation. The license or permit holder shall be 
entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross examine testifying 
witnesses, and to make arguments concerning the factual and legal issues. The hearing officer 
or body shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(2) ?If there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the license or permit may 
be suspended prior to the hearing. If a license or permit is suspended prior to the hearing, the 
hearing shall be commenced as soon as is practical, but in no case more than ten days after the 
suspension. The hearing shall be held to determine whether to terminate or extend the 
suspension or whether the suspension should be converted into a revocation of the license or 
permit. The holder of the license or permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the 
hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the already-imposed suspension and 
for any contemplated future action. The license or permit holder shall be entitled to be 
represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross examine testifying witnesses, and to make 
arguments on factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body shall render a written 
decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(b) ?In any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this article, the rules of evidence shall be followed 
as far as practicable, but a hearing officer or body may admit and give probative effect to evidence of 
a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent people in the conduct of their affairs. Irrelevant, 
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. Notice may be taken of facts within the 
general knowledge of the community. 
(c) ?Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the license review board or other appropriate hearing 
officer or body may appeal to the city council, provided that a written request for such an appeal shall 
be filed within seven days of the date of the decision to be appealed. The city council shall schedule 
a hearing on the appeal within 15 days of the receipt of the request for appeal by the city clerk. The 
hearing shall be scheduled and held before the entire city council or a committee thereof, as the city 
council shall determine. The factual record made in the hearing below shall constitute the basic 
record for the appeal. The city council may, but need not, allow the presentation of additional 
evidence by a majority vote. Argument as to relevant factual and legal issues shall be permitted. The 
decision of the city council shall be by majority vote. The council may affirm, reverse or modify any 
action taken relative to a license. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1983, § 7.12) 


Sec. 14-42. - Issuance. 
    Where proper application is made for a license or permit and the conditions, requirements and 
prerequisites for the issuance of the license or permit have been met, the license or permit applied for 
shall be issued by the city clerk, provided that no cause, as that term is defined in section 14-54, exists for 
denial of the license. 
(Code 1983, § 7.13) 


Sec. 14-43. - Hearing. 
    The hearing provided for will be conducted by the license review board or the review board's 
designee, and it shall be conducted as provided for in section 14-41 except that the issue to be 
determined is whether the denial of the license was proper. The person conducting the hearing shall 
render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(Code 1983, § 7.14; Ord. of 1-28-91, § 7.14) 


Sec. 14-44. - Fees. 
    Fees required by this Code for license applications shall be paid to the city clerk with submission of 
the application. Fees required by this Code for the issuance of a license shall be paid to the city clerk 
prior to the issuance of the license. Except as otherwise provided for by law or in this Code, fees required 
by this Code shall be as set out in article III of this chapter. No fees shall be refunded. 
(Code 1983, § 7.15; Ord. of 1-28-91, § 7.15) 


Sec. 14-45. - Renewal. 
    To assist in the reissuance of licenses to license holders, the city clerk shall send a license renewal 
application and invoice for the license fee to license holders prior to the end of a license year. Upon 
receipt of the completed application and the appropriate fee, and after such investigation as he deems 
necessary, the clerk may issue a license for the following year. 
(Code 1983, § 7.16; Ord. of 1-28-91, § 7.16) 


Sec. 14-46. - Display. 
    The license shall be promptly displayed upon the request of any police officer or appropriate official 
as described in section 14-38. 
(Code 1983, § 7.17; Ord. of 1-28-91, § 7.17) 


Sec. 14-47. - Exhibition on vehicle and machine. 
(a) ?Each license granted for the operation of a vehicle as required under this Code shall include the 
issuance of a tag, insignia, license plate or number. This tag, insignia, license plate or number shall 
be prominently displayed on the vehicle in a place where it can readily be seen and read at all times 
when the vehicle is being used in the licensed activity. 
(b) ?Every person who owns or operates any vending machine, amusement device or other coin-
operated device which is required to be licensed under this Code shall conspicuously display on 
each such machine or device his name, address and city license number, in a form approved by the 
city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 7.18) 


Sec. 14-48. - Surrender of invalid license. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensee, or any employee, agent or representative of a licensee, to 
surrender to any properly identified appropriate official, or his representative, upon demand, any license 
which is expired, suspended, revoked, altered, amended, modified, changed or damaged or any license 
for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Ord. of 1-28-91, § 7.19) 


Sec. 14-49. - Transfer, alteration or misuse. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable or assignable unless 
specifically and explicitly authorized by this Code. No person shall transfer or assign or attempt to transfer 
or assign any license and no person shall receive or attempt to receive a transferred or assigned license. 
No person shall, except as authorized by this Code or by the city clerk, write upon, alter, amend, modify, 
change or damage any license. 
(Code 1983, § 7.20) 


Sec. 14-50. - Automatic revocation. 
    In addition to any other penalties or actions permitted or authorized by this Code, any transfer or 
assignment of a license, or any attempted transfer or assignment, shall be void and shall result in the 
automatic revocation of the license. 
(Code 1983, § 7.21) 


Sec. 14-51. - Curbstands. 
    No person, whether licensed pursuant to this article or not, shall park at the curb for the purpose of 
conducting business, nor shall any person establish a stand, booth or other place of business on any 
street, curb, sidewalk, public right-of-way or thoroughfare without having obtained permission to do so 
from the city manager. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit parking for the purpose of making 
deliveries or for the purpose of consummating sales to persons waiting at the curb, provided that the 
seller leaves the curb immediately after such deliveries or sales are completed. 
(Code 1983, § 7.22) 


Sec. 14-52. - Curb service. 
    No person shall engage in the giving of curb service. For purposes of this section, curb service is 
defined as the use of a public street, highway, thoroughfare or right-of-way by a person operating from a 
store or other fixed location for the sale, solicitation for sale, or delivery of any goods, services or 
property. 
(Code 1983, § 7.23) 


Sec. 14-53. - Responsibility. 
    Any person who aids, abets, counsels, procures, commands or assists in the commission of any 
violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a principal. 
(Code 1983, § 7.24) 


Sec. 14-54. - Cause defined. 
    The term "cause" as used in this article shall include the doing or omitting of any act, the permitting 
of any condition to exist in any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege 
for which a license is provided under the provisions of this Code, or upon the premises or facilities used in 
connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1) ?A violation of this Code. 
(2) ?A violation of any other applicable federal, state or local law, ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(3) ?Unlawful or fraudulent in nature. 
(4) ?Beyond the scope of the license granted. 
(5) ?Abandonment of the licensed trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or 
privilege. 
(6) ?An unfair or deceptive act or practice as defined in section 2 of the state Consumer Protection 
Act (Act No. 331 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 445.901 et seq., MSA 19.418(1) 
et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1983, § 7.25) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 14-55. - Late application penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall fail to file an application for a license at or prior to the time required by this 
Code shall be assessed a late application fee of ten percent of the fee provided for in article III of this 
chapter for each calendar month or fraction thereof that the person should have been licensed or $25.00, 
whichever is greater. No new or renewal license shall be issued until such fee shall have been paid. Any 
application filed after the beginning of a license year shall be treated as an application for a new license, 
and no such license shall be issued until the fees for a new license, as provided for in article III of this 
chapter, shall have been paid. The provisions of this section shall be cumulative to the penalty provisions 
of section 1-17 and to the provisions of this Code relating to the suspension, revocation and denial of a 
license. 
(Code 1983, § 7.26) 


Secs. 14-56—14-85. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - FEES AND BONDS 


Sec. 14-86. - Schedule established. 
    The fee required to be paid and the amount of any bond required to be posted, or insurance required 
to be carried, to obtain any license to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, 
profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by the provisions of this Code shall be as 
established by the city council by resolution from time to time. No license shall be issued to any applicant 
unless he first pays to the city clerk the fee and posts a bond or evidence of insurance coverage in the 
amount required for the type of license desired. 
(Code 1983, § 7.31) 


Secs. 14-87—14-120. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 


Sec. 14-121. - Entry without invitation. 
    The practice of going into and upon private residences in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, 
itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise or services not having been requested or invited 
so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of such private residences for the purpose of 
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or service and/or disposing of and/or peddling 
or hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as prescribed in section 1-17. 
(Code 1983, § 7.51) 


Secs. 14-122—14-150. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS 


Sec. 14-151. - Statutes applicable. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article the provisions of Act No. 350 of the Public Acts of 
Michigan of 1917 (MCL 445.401 et seq., MSA 19.711 et seq.), as amended, and the provisions of Act No. 
231 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945 (MCL 445.471 et seq., MSA 19.740(1) et seq.), as amended, 
shall apply to licensees under this article. Any licensee who shall violate any provision of such statutes 
shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and punished as prescribed in section 1-17. 
(Code 1983, § 7.72) 


Sec. 14-152. - License—Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of dealer in secondhand goods or junk dealer without first 
obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be issued by the mayor in accordance with the provisions 
of Act No. 350 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1917 (MCL 445.401 et seq., MSA 19.711 et seq.), as 
amended. The fee for such licenses shall be as specified in this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 7.71) 


Sec. 14-153. - Same—Application. 
    Application for a license under this article shall be made in writing to the city clerk. It shall be referred 
to the chief of police for investigation and certification. Such application shall contain the names of the 
applicant and the place proposed to be operated as a junk shop, junkyard or place for the dismantling of 
automobiles, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers. 
(Code 1983, § 7.73) 


Sec. 14-154. - Same—Issuance. 
    If the city manager is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to engage in the business of a 
junk dealer or a dealer in secondhand goods, he shall grant such license. If the business of the junk 
dealer is to be conducted on a vacant lot or in a partially enclosed structure, no license shall be granted 
until the applicant therefor shall have enclosed such property with a properly painted tight board fence at 
least eight feet high and erected in such a manner as to obliterate the premises from view, which fence 
shall at all times be properly maintained by the licensee. 
(Code 1983, § 7.74) 


Sec. 14-155. - Unlawful purchases. 
    No licensee under this article shall buy or receive any article or automobile from anyone under the 
age of 18 years without the written permission of the parent or guardian of such minor, which writing shall 
be kept on file, nor shall he buy any article from an intoxicated person nor an habitual drunkard, nor from 
any person whom he suspects or knows to be a thief or an associate of thieves, or a receiver of stolen 
property. Upon the finding of any stolen property in possession or on the premises of a licensee, stolen 
with his knowledge, his license may be revoked by the mayor. No licensee or his clerk or employee shall 
receive any article by way of pledge or pawn, nor loan or advance any sum of money on the security of 
any article or thing. 
(Code 1983, § 7.75) 


Sec. 14-156. - Conditional license. 
    The mayor may impose as a condition for the granting of a license to operate a junkyard or junk 
shop, or a place for the dismantling of automobiles, that such place, yard or shop shall be so conducted 
as not to create a nuisance by reason of noise or disagreeable odors or fumes, that no loads of iron or 
other heavy materials may be unloaded or loaded nor break-up hammers used between the closing hours 
in the evening and the opening hours in the morning. No licensee shall burn rubber or other junk, nor 
shall the junk dealer obstruct or cause to be obstructed the sidewalks, alleys or rights-of-way, nor place, 
nor cause to be placed, outside of his property lines any secondhand articles, used parts, wheels, tin, iron 
or metal of any kind or nature, and the mayor shall impose such other regulations and restrictions as may 
be necessary to prevent the business of the licensee from being conducted in such manner as to be a 
nuisance or a noisome and offensive business. The license shall be subject to suspension and revocation 
as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 7.76) 


Secs. 14-157—14-190. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - POOL ROOMS 


Sec. 14-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pool room means any public place where pool, billiards and/or snooker may be played for hire, and 
containing more than two tables. 
(Code 1983, § 7.91) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 14-192. - License required. 
    No person shall operate a pool room in the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city 
clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 7.92) 


Sec. 14-193. - Juveniles; hours. 
    No person under the age of 16 years or in high school shall be permitted by the owner or proprietor 
to enter or remain in a pool room between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following day or 
during school hours. 
(Code 1983, § 7.93) 


Sec. 14-194. - Closing hours. 
    No person shall be permitted by the owner or proprietor to enter or remain in a pool room for the 
purpose of playing pool, billiards, snooker, cards, pinball machines or other games between the hours of 
2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Code 1983, § 7.94) 


Sec. 14-195. - Unlawful conduct. 
    No person shall be permitted by the owner or proprietor of a pool room to gamble or consume 
alcoholic beverages therein. 
(Code 1983, § 7.95) 


Sec. 14-196. - Open view of premises required. 
    Every pool room licensee shall so arrange his windows, window displays, furniture and partitions 
therein so that all portions thereof available to the public, except restrooms, shall be exposed to public 
view from the street upon which the pool room is located; provided, however, that any arrangement 
approved by the chief of police shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 7.96) 


Sec. 14-197. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any fraternal, religious or other organization which 
maintains billiard or pool tables for use of its members as merely incidental to its principal activities, nor 
shall it apply to establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1983, § 7.97) 


Secs. 14-198—14-230. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VII. - TAXICABS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 14-231. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means as defined in chapter 74. 
(Code 1983, § 7.151) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 14-232. - Vehicle condition. 
    The vehicle to be licensed shall be inspected by a certified automobile mechanic located in the city 
or vicinity, and a certificate signed by the mechanic certifying that the vehicle is safe for the transportation 
of passengers shall be filed with the application. 
(Code 1983, § 7.154) 


Sec. 14-233. - Change of ownership. 
    Change of ownership shall automatically revoke any license previously issued under this article, and 
the new owner shall not operate the vehicle as a taxicab until he has applied for and has been granted a 
license in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7.160) 


Sec. 14-234. - Periodic mechanical inspection. 
    The owner or operator of each taxicab licensed under this article shall examine and inspect or cause 
to be examined or inspected each taxicab as to its mechanical condition at such intervals as to ensure 
safety and dependability to patrons and public. 
(Code 1983, § 7.163) 


Secs. 14-235—14-255. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 


Sec. 14-256. - Required. 
    No person shall hereafter operate a taxicab on the streets of the city without first obtaining a license 
as provided in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7.152) 


Sec. 14-257. - Application. 
    All applications for license to offer and maintain taxi service for hire shall be made in writing on forms 
supplied by the city. The application shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall contain the following 
information: 
(1) ?The applicant's name, residence address, business address and date of birth. 
(2) ?If the applicant is a partnership, association or corporation, the names and addresses of all 
partners, managers, officers and directors. 
(3) ?The make, body style, year, serial and engine number, state license plate number and the 
seating capacity of each taxicab. 
(4) ?The number of taxicabs to be operated. 
(5) ?Whether the applicant is the owner of the vehicles, and if not, the name and address of the 
owner. 
(6) ?Schedule of rates of fare. 
(7) ?Such other information as the council may require. 
(Code 1983, § 7.153) 


Sec. 14-258. - Approval; granting. 
(a) ?The city clerk shall transmit each application for a license to the city manager, who shall cause an 
investigation to be made of the character, fitness and qualifications of the person applying for such 
license. 
(b) ?The city manager shall transmit the application together with his recommendations thereon to the 
city council. 
(c) ?The city council, upon sufficient showing of public convenience and necessity, may grant a license 
therefor, upon the fulfillment of all of the requirements as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7.155) 


Sec. 14-259. - Issuance. 
    Licenses granted by the council shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the fees required in 
section 14-260, and the deposit with the city of a policy of liability insurance as required in section 14-264. 
(Code 1983, § 7.156) 


Sec. 14-260. - Fee. 
    Each person to whom a taxicab license is granted shall pay to the city therefor the sum of $10.00 for 
each taxicab licensed. Such fee and bond amount may be changed by resolution of the city council from 
time to time. 
(Code 1983, § 7.157) 


Sec. 14-261. - Transferal. 
    Licenses issued under this article shall be nontransferable as between persons. 
(Code 1983, § 7.158) 


Sec. 14-262. - Transfer to another vehicle. 
    The owner of any taxicab licensed under this article may have the license transferred to another 
vehicle by filing with the city clerk a request therefor, giving the make, body style, year, serial and engine 
number, state license plate number and seating capacity of the vehicle to which he proposes to have the 
license transferred. No transfer of license shall be made until the new vehicle has been inspected and a 
certificate of inspection, together with a policy of liability insurance, has been filed with the city. No 
transfer of license shall be made unless the vehicle originally licensed is retired from taxicab service in 
the city. 
(Code 1983, § 7.159) 


Sec. 14-263. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Licenses granted under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons in 
addition to those set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(1) ?If the information contained in the application was false or misleading. 
(2) ?If the owner, operator or any driver in his employ repeatedly has failed to operate the taxicab in 
accordance with the provisions of this article, the traffic ordinance of the city, or the laws of the 
state. 
(3) ?If the owner or operator shall cease to operate the taxicab for a period of 30 consecutive days 
without having obtained permission for cessation from the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 7.161) 


Sec. 14-264. - Insurance policy required. 
(a) ?No license shall be issued under this article until the person applying therefor shall obtain and file 
with the city clerk a policy of liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the 
state, covering the taxicab for which the license is requested, and such policy of insurance shall 
insure against liability for injuries to passengers in such taxicab, or any persons, or any damage to 
property resulting from accidents in which such taxicab may be involved. The policy shall provide 
minimum insurance protection for each licensed taxicab in the amount of $500,000.00 for injury or 
death of one person and $1,000,000.00 for injury or death of more than one person resulting from a 
single accident, and $15,000.00 damage to property as the result of one accident. Such fee and 
bond amount may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b) ?The policy shall further provide that it shall not be cancelled, surrendered or revoked by either party 
except after ten days' written notice to the city, furnished by the insurance carrier or its authorized 
agent. 
(c) ?The cancellation, surrender or other termination of the liability insurance filed with the city in 
compliance with this article shall automatically terminate the license granted under this article, unless 
another policy complying with this article shall be in effect and on file with the city clerk. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab on the streets of the city, without having 
fully complied with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7.162) 


Chapter 18 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; zoning, ch. 86. 


Sec. 18-1. - Riverside Cemetery. 
    The city cemetery acquired from the Riverside Cemetery Association shall be known as the 
Riverside Cemetery. 
(Code 1983, § 3.51) 


Sec. 18-2. - Control of city cemeteries. 
    The city council shall operate, control and regulate all cemeteries owned by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3.52) 


Sec. 18-3. - City manager's duties. 
    The city manager shall manage and supervise the city's cemeteries. The city manager in carrying out 
his duties under this chapter is authorized to employ a sexton, or to designate an employee of the city to 
perform the duties of sexton either on a full-time or part-time basis, or to use any employee or employees 
from other departments of the city to perform work in the cemeteries. 
(Code 1983, § 3.53) 


Sec. 18-4. - Sexton's duties. 
    The duties of sexton shall be to demand and examine burial permits, to refuse burial until an 
interment order shall have been given by the city manager or clerk, to dig and fill all graves and to reopen 
graves upon proper authorization, to qualify and act in the capacity of a police officer in enforcing and 
abiding by the terms of this chapter and by arresting any persons while in the cemetery in the violation of 
this or any other chapter, to aid and assist the public in locating of lots or burial spaces and to take such 
steps as are necessary for the convenience and protection of funeral parties and to carry out the 
directives of the city manager relative to cemetery operations. 
(Code 1983, § 3.54) 


Sec. 18-5. - City clerk's duties. 
    The city clerk shall keep all cemetery records, sell lots or burial rights and issue certificates of 
ownership upon payment of the whole amounts, collect all sums in payment for lots or burial rights, 
interment fees and other services, and deposit such sums with the city treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 3.55) 


Sec. 18-5.5. - Repurchase of lots. 
    The city clerk may repurchase for the city any lots or burial rights, and make payment therefor at 
sums not exceeding the original cost, provided however, the council may authorize the clerk to 
repurchase at a price exceeding the original cost, but not to exceed the current selling price of said lots or 
burial rights. The repurchase price shall be paid from general operating funds of the cemetery and 
charged to a special account; which account shall be credited from the first monies received on the resale 
of said lots or burial rights. 
(Ord. No. 44a, 8-26-63) 


Sec. 18-6. - Investments. 
    The city treasurer shall deposit or invest all sums received as the council may direct. 
(Code 1983, § 3.56) 


Sec. 18-7. - Rules and regulations. 
(a) ?No burial shall be permitted until the interment of fees have been paid in full and until an interment 
order shall have been given by the city manager or clerk. 
(b) ?Charges for construction of foundations for monuments and markers shall be established by 
resolution of the city council. Foundations two feet by one foot or less shall be at least two feet deep. 
Foundations larger than two feet by one foot shall be at least two feet deep. Foundations may be 
poured by city staff only. 
(c) ?The burial of two or more remains in a single grave is permitted if it is an adult and infant or two 
infants. The cremains of up to four persons may be buried in the same space. 
(d) ?Under no condition will the city assume responsibility for error in opening graves. Orders from 
undertakers will be construed as orders from the owners. 
(e) ?No grave will be opened or body disinterred except by order of husband, wife, father, mother, son or 
daughter of the deceased and then only for good cause, and the city reserves the rights to refuse 
any such request. This provision does not apply when disinterment is ordered by a duly authorized 
public official. 
(f) ?Neither the purchase price nor the perpetual care agreement contemplates the repair or replacement 
of any monument or marker nor the repair of damages caused by the elements. 
(g) ?Unsightly, ill-proportioned monuments and stone works are prohibited and all appendages such as 
books or other objects of curiosity are prohibited. 
(h) ?No permanent plantings and displays shall be allowed around the grave monument. All displays 
placed before October 1, 2012 shall be maintained in a condition that is safe and in a manner that 
does not distract from the well-kept appearance of the cemetery. 
(i) ?Notice of funerals shall be given to the city manager or clerk at least 48 hours in advance of such 
funeral. 
(j) ?By special permission funerals may be held at the Blackmore Chapel. The interment fee shall include 
the use of the Chapel. The city shall not furnish tents for use in grave side services. $50.00 will be 
charged for assisting the vault company in setting up and removing a tent. 
(k) ?In all adult interments, the casket shall be enclosed in a permanent outside container. The following 
are considered as permanent outside containers. Concrete boxes, concrete, copper, or steel burial 
vaults. 
(l) ?The city reserves the right to govern the placement of monuments and to move monuments as 
necessary for the efficient operation and maintenance of the cemetery. In general the following 
standards shall apply: 
(1) ?No monument shall be placed closer than 48 inches to any other monument. 
(2) ?Monuments shall be placed at the head of the grave. When the city does not have personal 
knowledge of the burial orientation, the head of the grave shall be considered to be either the 
west or the south. 
(3) ?Monuments shall not be placed in such a manner as to block the view of any other monuments. 
(4) ?No more than two monuments may be placed on any one grave space, without the approval of 
the DPW superintendent. The second stone has to be flat. 
(m) ?All grave blankets, artificial flowers, and other winter grave decorations of a nonpermanent nature 
must be removed before April 1 of each year. Items not removed will be thrown away by the city. 
(n) ?The city reserves the right to trim, maintain and remove any landscape materials planted in the 
cemetery. 
(o) ?Littering is prohibited. No person shall deposit trash, rubbish, or other waste material on the ground, 
roadways, or elsewhere within the cemetery. 
(p) ?Motorcycles and snowmobiles are prohibited from operating within the cemetery grounds. 
(q) ?All grave decorations, flowers and other summer decorations of a nonpermanent nature must be 
removed before October 1 of each year. Items not removed will be thrown away by the city. 
(r) ?Grave spaces will not be reserved unless a minimum deposit of ten percent of the purchase price is 
paid as a down payment. The full balance must be paid within 90 days of the deposit, or the down 
payment will be refunded and the reservation nullified. 
(Code 1983, § 3.57; Ord. of 4-28-97; Ord. No. 2012-18, 10-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-01, 5-6-13) 


Sec. 18-8. - Perpetual care fund. 
    There is hereby created and established a cemetery perpetual care fund which shall be a separate 
fund held and invested as provided by state laws governing such trust funds. All sums from cemetery 
operations designated for perpetual care under this chapter, or in the rules and regulations adopted under 
this chapter, shall be deposited and held in the cemetery perpetual care fund, together with any gifts or 
other sums received by the city for this purpose. The income from such fund shall be used only for 
cemetery operations and for no other purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 3.58) 


Sec. 18-9. - Finance. 
    All cemetery revenues, except such sums as shall be designated for perpetual care, shall become 
part of the general funds of the city, and may be deposited in a special or city general account. There 
shall be included in the annual budget of the city a budget for cemetery operations. In the cemetery 
operations budget there shall be included the estimated income from the perpetual care fund, other 
cemetery income, and from general taxes, if necessary, and the estimated expenditures for operations, 
including a reasonable amount for administrative expense. A financial report shall be submitted with the 
budget summarizing past operations of the cemetery. 
(Code 1983, § 3.59) 


Sec. 18-10. - Rules of conduct. 
    The following rules of conduct shall be observed within any city cemetery: 
(1) ?All pedestrian traffic shall be confined to roadways and drives in and going about the cemetery, 
and no person shall walk upon burial spaces where interment has been made. 
(2) ?Vehicular traffic shall be confined to roadways or drives and shall not exceed the speed of 15 
miles per hour. The traffic regulations of the city shall be in effect and shall be enforced in any 
cemetery owned by the city. 
(3) ?No person shall carry or discharge firearms in the cemetery, except at ceremonials. 
(4) ?No person shall bring dogs into the cemetery, or permit dogs under their control or owned by 
them to enter the cemetery. 
(5) ?No persons shall create a disturbance of any kind at any time in any cemetery. All persons 
shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner showing proper respect for the dead and the 
bereaved. 
(6) ?Strangers are not allowed to approach the grave at a funeral. 
(7) ?No person shall cut, remove or carry away any flowers, trees, shrubs, plants or vines being in 
or growing upon any cemetery lots or grounds and for cemetery purposes, nor shall any person 
deface, injure or write upon any markers, monuments, headstones, fences or structures within 
any cemetery. 
(8) ?At any time when a monument, private vault or mausoleum becomes, in the opinion of the 
council, unsafe, or in any way injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots, a notice of 
such condition will be mailed to the last known or recorded address of the owner. If such 
condition is not remedied by the owners at their expense within 30 days, the council shall have 
the right and duty to cause the offensive or unsightly structure to be removed and inter the 
bodies in the earth on such lot, at cost to the owners or heirs. 
(9) ?Lots in any cemetery shall not be used for any other purpose than as a burial place for the 
burial of the human dead. 
(10) ?No person shall remove any object from any place in the cemetery or make any excavation 
without the consent of the proper authority. 
(11) ?No person not directly connected with the operation of the cemetery shall be permitted within 
any cemetery between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except by permission of the proper 
authority. 
(12) ?Flowers and emblems shall be removed from graves as soon as they become unsightly, and 
no responsibility for their return to lot owners will be assumed by the city. 
(13) ?All unsightly material or debris accumulating from any class of work must be removed at once. 
On the completion of the work all equipment and tools must be removed immediately, and the 
ground shall be left in as good condition as found by the contractor. 
(14) ?No stone work shall be brought into the cemetery on Friday after 5:00 p.m., and no work shall 
be commenced on that day that cannot be finished. The dirt and debris shall be entirely 
removed before the hour of closing. 
(15) ?No burial shall be permitted until the interment fees have been paid in full and until an 
interment order shall have been given by the city manager or clerk. 
(16) ?Charges for construction of foundations for monuments and markers shall be as follows: Five 
dollars per cubic foot, with a minimum for markers and monuments of $25.00. Foundations two 
feet by one foot or less shall be at least two feet deep. Foundations larger than two feet by one 
foot shall be at least three feet deep. Such fee and bond amount may be changed by resolution 
of the city council from time to time. 
(17) ?The burial of two or more remains in a single grave is permitted if it is an adult and infant or 
two infants. The cremains of up to four persons may be buried in the same space. 
In addition, to allow cremated remains to be buried on existing graves with the following 
stipulations: 
•?The cremated remains are those of an immediate family member of the person buried in the 
grave. 
•?The grave has already been used for the full burial, preventing cremated remains from being 
disturbed in order to utilize the grave for the full burial. 
•?The permission to bury cremated remains on the grave is subject to the approval of the lot 
owner or next of kin if the lot owner is deceased. 
All of these rules and regulations are subject to final approval by the department of public 
works. 
(18) ?Under no condition will the city assume responsibility for error in opening graves. Orders from 
undertakers will be construed as orders from the owners. 
(19) ?No grave will be opened or body disinterred except by order of husband, wife, father, mother, 
son or daughter of the deceased and then only for good cause. The city reserves the right to 
refuse any such request. This subsection does not apply when disinterment is ordered by a duly 
authorized public official. 
(20) ?Neither the purchase price nor the perpetual care agreement contemplates the repair or 
replacement of any monument or marker nor the repair of damages caused by the elements. 
(21) ?Unsightly, ill-proportioned monuments and stone works are prohibited, and all appendages 
such as books or other objects of curiosity are prohibited. 
(22) ?No permanent plantings and displays shall be allowed around the grave monument. All 
displays placed before October 1, 2012 shall be maintained in a condition that is safe and in a 
manner that does not distract from the well-kept appearance of the cemetery. 
(23) ?Notice of funerals shall be given to the city manager or clerk at least 48 hours in advance of 
such funeral. 
(24) ?By special permission funerals may be held at the Blackmore Chapel. The interment fee shall 
include the use of the chapel. The city shall not furnish tents for use in graveside services. 
(25) ?In all adult interments, the casket shall be enclosed in a permanent outside container. The 
following are considered as permanent outside containers: concrete boxes, concrete, copper or 
steel burial vaults. 
(26) ?Any new section of the Riverside Cemetery shall be designed in a manner that grave 
monuments shall be of flat grave marker type, bevel marker type (no more than eight inches in 
height), or slant grave marker type (no more than 22 inches in height with base) with no 
plantings situated around it, so as to easily permit the use of large mowing equipment in 
cemetery maintenance operations and no graveside services. 
(27) ?The city reserves the right to govern the placement of monuments and to move monuments 
as necessary for the efficient operation and maintenance of the cemetery. In general the 
following standards shall apply: 
a. ?No monument shall be placed closer than 48 inches to any other monument. 
b. ?Monuments shall be placed at the head of the grave. When the city does not have personal 
knowledge of the burial orientation, the head of the grave shall be considered to be either 
the west or the south. 
c. ?Monuments shall not be placed in such a manner as to block the view of any other 
monuments. 
d. ?No more than two monuments may be placed on any one grave space, without the 
approval of the DPW superintendent. 
(28) ?All grave blankets, artificial flowers and other winter grave decorations of a nonpermanent 
nature must be removed before April 1 of each year. Items not removed will be thrown away by 
the city. 
(29) ?The city reserves the right to trim, maintain and remove any landscape materials planted in 
the cemetery. 
(30) ?Littering is prohibited. No person shall deposit trash, rubbish or other waste material on the 
ground, roadways or elsewhere within the cemetery. 
(31) ?Motorcycles and snowmobiles are prohibited from operating within the cemetery grounds. 
(32) ?All grave decorations, flowers and other summer decorations of a nonpermanent nature must 
be removed before October 1 of each year. Items not removed will be thrown away by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3.61; Amend. of 5-11-09; Ord. No. 2012-18, 10-1-12) 


Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; offenses and 
miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Emergency preparedness act, MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.; 
governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq., MSA 3.4(1) et seq. 


Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means a person appointed to coordinate emergency planning and services within the 
city or as prescribed in this chapter. In the absence of an appointed person, the term "coordinator" shall 
mean any person appointed by the city manager, such as an assistant coordinator. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of 
life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including fire, flood, snow, ice or windstorm, 
wave action, oil spill, water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, utility 
failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air 
contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military or paramilitary action. Riots and 
other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this term unless they directly result from and are an 
aggravating element of the disaster. 
    District coordinator means the state police district emergency services coordinator or his authorized 
representative. 
    Emergency operations plan means the city emergency operations plan which has been prepared 
under section 22-8 to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the city. 
    Emergency services has a broad meaning to include preparations for and relief from the effects of 
natural and manmade disasters and includes civil defense. 
    Emergency services forces means all disaster relief forces; all agencies of the municipal 
government; private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees; and all other persons or 
groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this chapter or pursuant to a lawful order or 
directive authorized by this chapter. 
    Emergency services volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the coordinator 
and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
    State of disaster means a declaration by executive order or proclamation by the governor under the 
provisions of Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et 
seq.), as amended, which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local and 
interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to 
which the plans apply. 
    State of emergency means a declaration by the city manager or coordinator pursuant to this chapter 
which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the city emergency operations plan and 
authorizes the deployment and use of any municipal forces to which the plan applies. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, MCL 30.402, MSA 4.824(12). 


Sec. 22-2. - Intent and purpose of chapter. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an organization that will ensure the complete 
and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency and disaster. 


Sec. 22-3. - Effect on normal responsibilities and authority of elected officials and city departments; 
effect on volunteer agencies. 
    This chapter will not relieve any elected officials or city departments of the normal responsibilities or 
authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or 
other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 


Sec. 22-4. - Office of emergency services designated as coordinating agency. 
    The city office of emergency services will be the coordinating agency responsible for citywide 
emergency preparedness; it will provide the means through which the city council and the city manager 
may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this chapter and Act No. 
390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.), as amended. 


Sec. 22-5. - Organization for emergency services. 
(a) ?The city manager, with the approval of the city council, is hereby authorized and directed to create 
an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies 
within the city. The city manager, as administrative head of the city government, shall be the director 
of the emergency services forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, 
administration and operation, working through the coordinator. 
(b) ?The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1) ?An office of emergency services established within city government. The office of emergency 
services shall have an administrative head appointed who will be known as the coordinator, 
office of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary 
for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(2) ?The employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and 
commissions suitable for, or adaptable to emergency services activities may be designated as 
part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be by the city manager with 
the approval of the city council. 
(c) ?All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and other agencies of 
the city government designated by the city manager, with the approval of the city council, as 
emergency services forces shall cooperate with the emergency services coordinator in the 
formulation of the emergency operations plan, and they shall assist the coordinator in all matters 
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 


Sec. 22-6. - Powers and duties of city council, mayor and city manager. 
(a) ?The city council may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this chapter. 
Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the mayor invoke such power and authority, 
he shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the city council to perform its legislative and 
administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to that body relative to emergency 
activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the city 
council unless specifically provided in this chapter. 
(b) ?Under the following circumstances, the city manager or coordinator may declare a state of 
emergency exists in the city and may assemble and utilize the emergency services forces in 
accordance with the city emergency operations plan, and he may prescribe the manner and 
conditions of the use of such emergency services forces: 
(1) ?Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that a 
large-scale disaster or emergency situation in the city or state is imminent. 
(2) ?During any period of disaster in the city or state and thereafter as long as he shall deem it 
necessary. 
(c) ?Whenever the city manager or city council deems that any condition in the city is beyond the control 
of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major 
disaster, they may request the governor to declare a state of disaster exists therein by instructing the 
coordinator to contact the district coordinator in accordance with section 14 of Act No. 390 of the 
Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.414, MSA 4.824(24)), as amended. 
(d) ?The city manager, with the approval of the city council, is hereby empowered and has the authority: 
(1) ?To appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials, 
and supplies for disaster purposes; 
(2) ?To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance 
to the victims of a disaster; 
(3) ?To assign and make available for duty the employees, property, and equipment of the city 
related to firefighting; engineering; rescue; health, medical, and related services; police; 
transportation; construction; and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or 
without the physical limits of the city; 
(4) ?In the event of a foreign attack upon this state, to waive procedures and formalities otherwise 
required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the 
incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of 
volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without 
compensation of supplies, materials, and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of 
public funds. 
(e) ?The city manager, with the approval of the city council, shall establish procedures for the succession 
of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and 
discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(f) ?The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may make regulations permitting the 
coordinator to assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and provide disaster relief aid as 
prescribed in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. 
(g) ?When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the city manager may, until 
the city council convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the 
performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of 
temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and 
facilities and expenditure of existing funds, and the city council is also empowered to waive any such 
procedures and formalities. 


Sec. 22-7. - Appointment of emergency services coordinator and assistant coordinators. 
(a) ?The city manager, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint an emergency services 
coordinator who shall be a person with the personal attributes, experience, and training needed to 
coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments, and individuals within the city to protect the 
public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
(b) ?Assistant coordinators shall be designated to work with the coordinator on emergency planning 
matters. Assistant coordinators shall be selected and shall serve as follows: 
(1) ?There shall be one such assistant coordinator appointed from each city department as 
designated by the department head, with the approval of the city manager as part of the 
emergency services forces. 
(2) ?Assistant coordinators shall assume the duties of the coordinator whenever he is unavailable 
during disasters or emergency situations in the order of designation by the city manager, acting 
upon the recommendation of the coordinator. 
State Law reference— Local coordinator, MCL 30.409, MSA 4.824(19). 


Sec. 22-8. - Duties of emergency services coordinator. 
    The emergency services coordinator shall be responsible for the administration, planning, 
coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the city. He shall maintain liaison 
with county, state, and federal authorities, and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions 
so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. His duties shall include but not be limited to the 
following: 
(1) ?Development of the city emergency operations plan and any other appropriate disaster plans 
for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the 
city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting 
and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public 
health, safety and general welfare; 
(2) ?Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the 
personnel and facilities of the city for emergency purposes; 
(3) ?Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and 
required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster; 
(4) ?Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the city's 
emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the city with emergency regulations, 
procedures and operations; 
(5) ?Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or 
disaster relief programs; 
(6) ?Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such 
buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable 
buildings as public shelters; 
(7) ?Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, 
to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international 
wartime disasters; and 
(8) ?Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at the county level and 
adjacent municipalities. 


Sec. 22-9. - Volunteers. 
(a) ?Each department, commission, board, or other agency of city government may at any time appoint 
or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such city department, 
commission, board, or agency in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as 
emergency services volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the 
respective department, commission, board, or agency head for such volunteers. 
(b) ?The coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for 
which the city has no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in 
emergency activities. The coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for 
workers' compensation purposes. 


Sec. 22-10. - Rights of city employees. 
    City employees assigned to duty as a part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the 
provisions of this chapter shall retain all of the rights, privileges, and immunities of city employees, and 
shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 30.411(1)(b), MSA 4.824(21), (1)(b). 


Sec. 22-11. - No governmental or private liability. 
(a) ?This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public 
health, safety, and general welfare. As such, neither the city nor agents and representatives of the 
city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, nor trustee, nor any of 
the agents thereof acting in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with this 
chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of such activity. 
(b) ?Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without 
compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such 
real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or during an 
authorized practice disaster exercise shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person 
on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss 
of or damage to the property of such person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 30.411(2), (3), (6), MSA 4.824(21), (2), (3), 
(6). 


Sec. 22-12. - Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter 
shall be in effect, they shall supercede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar 
as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
State Law reference— Temporary ordinances or rules, MCL 30.412(2), MSA 4.824(22), (2). 


Sec. 22-13. - Establishment of police line or clear zone. 
(a) ?When any fire, accident, explosion, parade, calamity, public disturbance or other occasion causes 
or may cause persons to collect on the public streets, sidewalks or other areas of the city, the chief 
of police or officer acting for him may establish a police line or zone as may be necessary for the 
purpose of affording a clearing for: 
(1) ?The protection of persons and property; 
(2) ?Police officers, firefighters or public safety officers, and emergency medical personnel; and 
other personnel performing operations in accordance with their duties; 
(3) ?The exclusion of the public from the vicinity of a fire, accident, explosion, calamity or other 
emergency or public disturbances; 
(4) ?The passage of a parade; or 
(5) ?The movement of traffic. 
(b) ?Any person who shall knowingly cross any such line, knowingly enter into any such zone, or remain 
in any such zone after being requested to leave shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, 
that bona fide and properly identified representatives of the press and media, residents of the zone, 
and such other persons as the chief of police or officer acting for him may authorize to cross such 
lines or be within such zone may be permitted to cross such lines or enter into such zone, and may 
remain in such zone so long as they will not and do not interfere with emergency personnel 
performing their duties. 
(c) ?Every person present within such zone shall comply with any necessary order or instruction of any 
police officer and any person who refuses to comply with the necessary order of a police officer shall 
be guilty of a misdemeanor. 


Sec. 22-14. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any emergency services forces 
in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do 
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It 
shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of 
identification as a member of the emergency services forces of the city unless authority to do so has been 
granted to such person by proper officials. 


Chapter 26 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; zoning, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.; 
housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq., MSA 5.3057(1) et seq.; urban redevelopment 
corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq., MSA 5.3058(1) et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 
et seq., MSA 5.3501 et seq.; economic development corporations act, MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 
5.3520(1) et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 


Sec. 26-31. - Incorporation authorized. 
(a) ?There is hereby created and authorized the incorporation of the economic development corporation 
of the city, pursuant to and in accordance with Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 
(MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(b) ?The application dated June 14, 1976, and filed by Richard J. Yount, Larry F. Winling and Doug S. 
Brown is hereby approved. 
(c) ?The articles of incorporation for the economic development corporation of the city filed with such 
application are hereby approved and adopted. 
(d) ?A certified copy of this article has been filed with the county clerk and secretary of state in 
accordance with section 31, Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et 
seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(e) ?The applicants in the application dated June 14, 1976, are hereby authorized and directed to 
incorporate the economic development corporation of the city as a public corporation pursuant to 
such act. 
(Code 1983, § 1.250) 


Sec. 26-32. - Articles of incorporation. 
(a) ?The articles of incorporation follow, as adopted: 
(NONPROFIT) 
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION 
OF 
THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION  
OF THE CITY OF VASSAR 
    These articles of incorporation are signed by the incorporators for the purpose of forming a nonprofit 
corporation under the provisions of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et 
seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended, as follows: 
Article I 
    The name of the corporation is the economic development corporation of the City of Vassar. 
Article II 
    The purpose or purposes for which the corporation is organized are as follows: To act as an 
economic development corporation in accordance with Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 
(MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended, as such statute may from time to time be 
amended, including particularly to alleviate and prevent conditions of unemployment, to assist and retain 
local industries and commercial enterprises to strengthen and revitalize the economy of the State of 
Michigan and particularly the City of Vassar, to provide the means and methods for the encouragement 
and assistance of industrial and commercial enterprises in locating and expanding in the State of 
Michigan and particularly in the City of Vassar, to encourage the relocation and expansion of commercial 
enterprises to more conveniently provide needed services and facilities of the commercial enterprises to 
the City of Vassar and residents thereof. In furtherance of these purposes, the corporation shall have all 
of the powers which now are or hereafter may be conferred by law on corporations organized under Act 
No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974, subject to any amendments to said statute either 
increasing or diminishing the powers of economic development corporations formed thereunder. 
Article III 
    Said corporation is organized upon a nonstock basis. The amount of the assets which the 
corporation possesses is: 
Real property ..... None 
Personal property ..... None 
    Said corporation is to be financed under the following general plan: Contributions, gifts, donations, 
grants, and devises, either solicited or unsolicited, from public authorities, individuals, corporations, 
partnerships, or other organizations; by earnings from its activities, by borrowings and issuance of 
revenue bonds; and by other methods which from time to time be permitted corporations organized under 
said Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974. 
Article IV 
    The location of the first registered office is in care of The City of Vassar, Municipal Building, Vassar, 
Michigan 48768. 
    The post office address of the first registered office is in care of The City of Vassar, Municipal 
Building, Vassar, Michigan 48768. 
    The name of the first registered agent is E. Louise Aranyos. 
Article V 
    The names and addresses of the incorporators are as follows: 
Name 
???Residence or  
??Business Address 
Richard J. Yount 
670 Cork Pine Lane  
Vassar, Michigan 48768 
Douglas S. Brown 
126 North West Street  
Vassar, Michigan 48768 
Larry F. Winling 
641 Briarwood Drive  
Vassar, Michigan 48768 
 
Article VI 
    The first board of directors, and subsequent boards of directors, shall be appointed by the Mayor of 
the City of Vassar, State of Michigan, with the advice and consent of said Vassar City Council, as 
provided for by Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974, as the same may from time to time be 
amended. 
Article VII 
    The term of corporate existence is perpetual. 
Article VIII 
    No part of the earnings of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of any member, director, officer, 
or trustee of the corporation, or any private individual, person, firm or corporation (except that reasonable 
compensation may be paid for services rendered to or for the corporation affecting one or more of its 
purposes), and no member, trustee, officer or director of the corporation, or any private individual, person, 
firm or corporation shall be entitled to share in the distribution of any of the corporate assets upon 
dissolution of the corporation. No substantial part of the activities of the corporation shall be the carrying 
on or propaganda, or otherwise attempting to enforce legislation, and the corporation shall not participate 
in or intervene in (including the publication or distribution of statements) any political campaign of any 
candidate for public office. 
    Upon dissolution of the corporation or winding up of its affairs, all of the property and assets of the 
corporation remaining after the satisfaction of all obligations of the corporation shall be distributed to the 
City of Vassar, State of Michigan. 
Article IX 
    The bylaws of the corporation shall be as proposed by the Board of Directors of the Corporation and 
adopted by ordinance of the City of Vassar. 
Article X 
    These Articles of Incorporation and bylaws of the corporation may be amended by ordinance of the 
City of Vassar. 
Article XI 
    These Articles of Incorporation shall be published once in the Vassar Pioneer Times and shall 
become effective immediately upon publication. 
    In Witness Whereof, the undersigned, the incorporators of the above named corporation, have 
hereunto signed these articles of incorporation the 1st day of December, 1976. 
Richard J. Yount 
Douglas S. Brown 
Larry F. Winling 
(b) ?The articles of incorporation of the economic development corporation of the city delineated in 
subsection (a) of this section, having been approved by Ordinance No. 77 of the city, are published 
pursuant to section 31 of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974, as amended. The right 
exists to question the incorporation in court as provided in such section. The corporation shall 
become effective immediately upon publication in the Vassar Pioneer Times. The validity of the 
incorporation shall be conclusively presumed unless questioned in a court of competent jurisdiction 
within 60 days after the filing of the certified copies of the articles of incorporation and of this notice 
with the secretary of state and the county clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 1.250) 


Secs. 26-33—26-65. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 


Sec. 26-66. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given to them in Act 197 or as 
provided in this section unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 
5.3010(1) et seq.), as amended. 
    Authority means the city downtown development authority. 
    Board or board of trustees means the board of trustees of the authority, the governing body of the 
authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the city manager. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article, as now existing or 
hereafter amended. 
(Code 1983, § 1.262) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 26-67. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the city to halt 
property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of 
the city, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by establishing a 
downtown development authority pursuant to Act 197. 
(Code 1983, § 1.263) 


Sec. 26-68. - Continuation of authority. 
    There is hereby continued pursuant to Act 197 the downtown development authority for the city. The 
authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of 
the city downtown development authority. The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any 
court for this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its 
incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act 
197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Code 1983, § 1.264) 


Sec. 26-69. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district in which the downtown development authority shall exercise its powers, as 
provided by Act 197, shall consist of the following described territory in the city, subject to such changes 
as may be made pursuant to this article and Act 197: 
    An area in the City of Vassar, Michigan, within the boundaries described as follows: Lots 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 14 and Gore Lot beginning at the northeast corner Lot 11, thence to the southeast corner Lot 9, 
thence to the southwest corner Lot 14, thence to the northwest corner Lot 12, thence to point of 
beginning. Block 7; all of Blocks 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 except those lots north of the north line of Lincoln Street; 
Lots 1—13, Block 15; Lots 1—6 and Lots 7—12, Block 5; Lots 1—3, Block 13 of the original plat of the 
village (now city) and Lots 1, 2 and 3 of Block 1 Morse's Addition to the village (now city); Lots 7—10, 
Block 20; Block 21; Lots 2—5 and 18—21, Block 22; Block 22½; Lots 1 and 2, Block 23 of the original plat 
of the village (now city), and all public lands and rights-of-way enclosed therein. 
(Code 1983, § 1.265) 


Sec. 26-70. - Board of trustees. 
    The downtown development authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board of 
trustees consisting of the chief executive officer of the city and not less than eight nor more than 12 
members as determined by the city council pursuant to Act 197. The members shall be appointed by the 
chief executive officer, subject to approval by the city council, and shall hold office according to the 
following terms: Of the members first appointed, an equal number of the members, as near as is 
practicable, shall be appointed for one year, two years, three years and four years. A member shall hold 
office until the member's successor is appointed. Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of four 
years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the chief executive officer of the city for the 
unexpired term only. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for 
actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the board shall be elected by the board. 
Qualifications for members shall be as set forth in Act 197, as amended. 
(Code 1983, § 1.266) 


Sec. 26-71. - Powers of authority. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this article, the downtown development authority shall 
have all powers provided by law, subject to the limitations imposed by law and this article. The authority 
shall have the power to levy ad valorem taxes on the real and tangible personal property not exempt by 
law and as finally equalized in the downtown district at the rate of not more than two mills each year if the 
city council annually approves the levy by the authority. 
(Code 1983, § 1.267) 


Sec. 26-72. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a) ?The fiscal year of the downtown development authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end 
on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b) ?The board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the city manager prior to the first 
Monday in March in a manner like that required of each officer of the city in the Charter for the city. 
The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by 
the city council. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the 
operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so 
by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c) ?The authority shall submit financial reports to the city manager as requested. The authority shall be 
audited annually by an independent auditor approved by the city. Copies of the audit report shall be 
filed with the city clerk. The city council may assess a reasonable pro rata share of the funds for the 
cost of handling and auditing the funds against the funds of the authority, other than those 
committed, which cost shall be paid annually by the board pursuant to an appropriate item in its 
budget. 
(d) ?All financial transactions and reporting of the authority shall be provided in a manner and by such 
persons as are approved by the city manager. 
(e) ?If a director is employed as authorized by section 5 of Act 197, he shall post bond in the penal sum 
of $5,000.00 as required by such section of such statute. The premium on the bond shall be deemed 
an operating expense of the authority, payable from funds available to the authority for expenses of 
operation. 
(f) ?The downtown development authority may employ additional personnel in the best interest of the 
authority. All employees shall be hired in accordance with the city employee policies and procedures 
and follow hiring guidelines as established by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1.268; Ord. of 5-3-04) 


Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq. 


Sec. 30-1. - City election date. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 523 of 2012, the city hereby establishes the first Tuesday after the first Monday 
of November of each even-numbered year, as the date of the nonpartisan regular city election to be held 
every two years. 
(Code 1983, § 1.61; Amd. of 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2017-05 , 12-4-17) 


Sec. 30-2. - Nominations; primaries. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 276 of 2012, nominating petitions shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m. on the 
one hundred tenth day prior to the date of the regular city election. No primary election shall be held for 
any elective office for which nominating petitions are to be filed directly to the general election as provided 
for in chapter 4 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1983, § 1.62; Ord. of 10-1-07; Ord. No. 2017-05 , 12-4-17) 


Sec. 30-3. - Terms of councilmembers. 
    The term of office of councilmembers shall commence on the date from the Monday next following 
the date of the regular election at which they are elected, in conformity with section 3.3 of the Charter of 
the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1.63; Amd. of 2-7-05) 
Note— As provided by HB 4824: Sec. 644g office terms are extended if necessary to conform to 
the newly established election dates to begin November 2005. In accordance with election law 
changes city council terms will now be set at two-year and four-year terms beginning with the 
November 2004 election. 


Sec. 30-4. - Selection of mayor; mayor pro tem. 
    The provision of section 3.6 of the Charter of the city for selection of a mayor and mayor pro tem at 
its first regular meeting following each regular city election shall mean the regular city election held in 
every odd-numbered year. 
(Code 1983, § 1.64; Amd. of 2-7-05) 


Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; 
offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - COST RECOVERY 


Sec. 34-31. - Purpose of article. 
    The city finds that a significant potential exists for police, fire department and rescue services 
responses to incidents involving the release or threatened release of hazardous materials. Such incidents 
create a great likelihood of potential injury and/or property damage. The control and abatement of such 
incidents places a significant financial and operational burden upon the city police, firefighting and rescue 
services. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I, 6-13-94) 


Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted 
so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable 
application, and in conformity with the Michigan Environmental Response Act (MERA), Act No. 307 of the 
Public Acts of Michigan of 1982 (MCL 299.601 et seq., MSA 13.32(1) et seq.), as amended. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Emergency response means the providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, emergency 
medical and rescue services by the city or by a private industrial entity or corporation operating at the 
request or direction of the city, the county or the state, for an incident resulting in a hazardous materials 
release or threatened release. 
    Expenses of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city or 
by a private person, corporation or other assisting governmental agency, which is operating at the request 
of the city when making an emergency response to the hazardous materials incident, including the costs 
of providing police, firefighting, rescue services, emergency medical services, containment and 
abatement of all hazardous conditions at the scene of the incident. The costs further include all of the 
salaries and wages of the city personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and report preparation 
regarding such incident, all salaries and wages of personnel of assisting government agencies operating 
at the request or direction of the city and all costs connected with the administration of the incident 
relating to the production and appearance of witnesses at any court proceedings in relation thereto, 
including attorney fees. Costs shall also include, but not be limited to, such items as disposable materials 
and supplies used during the response to such incident, the rental or leasing of equipment used for the 
specific response, replacement of equipment which is contaminated beyond reuse or repair during the 
response to the incident, special technical services and laboratory cost, services and supplies purchased 
for any specific evacuation relating to the incident and any other cost reasonably associated with the 
emergency services cleanup. 
    Hazardous materials means explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, 
combustible liquid oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, poisonous solid, irritating material, 
etiological material, radioactive material, corrosive material, liquified petroleum gas, or any other 
hazardous material as defined in MCL 299.603, MSA 13.32(3). 
    Owner means any person having a vested or contingent interest in the property, premises, container 
or vehicle involved in the hazardous materials incident including, but not limited to, any duly authorized 
agent or attorney, purchaser, devisee or fiduciary of the person having the vested or contingent interest. 
    Premises means any lot or parcel of land, exclusive of buildings, and including a parking lot, tourist 
camp, trailer camp, airport, stockyard, junkyard, wharf, pier, public roadway and any other place or 
enclosure, however owned, used or occupied. 
    Vehicle means any mode which is used as an instrument of conveyance, including, but not limited to, 
motor vehicles, railroads, boats, aircraft, etc. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I(1), 6-13-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 34-33. - Duty to remove and clean up; failure to remove and clean up. 
(a) ?Duty to remove. It shall be the duty of the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for 
the operation, maintenance and/or condition of any building, premises, property or vehicle regarding 
which an incident arises which involves the release or threatened release of hazardous materials on 
or about the building, premises, property and/or vehicle to immediately contain and control such 
hazardous materials and undertake and complete a total cleanup of the area in such a manner as to 
ensure that all leakage, spillage or other dissemination of hazardous material is fully removed and 
the area is fully restored to its condition prior to the placement, leakage, spillage or other 
dissemination of such hazardous material. 
(b) ?Failure to remove and/or clean up. If the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for 
the operation, maintenance and/or condition of any building, premises, property or vehicle regarding 
which an incident arises which involves the release or threatened release of hazardous materials on 
or about such building, premises, property and/or vehicle, fails to remove in a timely manner, 
hazardous materials, after an emergency response involving hazardous materials or to comply 
completely with subsection (a) of this section, the city shall have the right to enter onto such property 
and remove and conduct a cleanup of all such hazardous materials either by governmental 
employees or by contractors and agents of the government. Prior to engaging in such cleanup, the 
city shall make diligent efforts to notify the owner of its duty to abate the emergency. All costs 
associated with such containment, control, removal and cleanup are in addition to the costs 
associated in the following sections and are to be reimbursed in like manner. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I(2), 6-13-94) 


Sec. 34-34. - Liability for expense of an emergency response. 
(a) ?Persons responsible. The owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the operation, 
maintenance and/or condition of any building, premises, property or vehicle regarding which an 
incident arises which involves the release or threatened release of hazardous materials on or about 
such building, premises, property and/or vehicle shall be required to reimburse the city for all 
expenses of an emergency response to such hazardous materials incident. 
(b) ?Nonliable party. The city or its duly appointed agents shall not be liable under this article for costs or 
damages as a result of response activity taken in response to a release or threat of release of 
hazardous substances. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I(3), 6-13-94) 


Sec. 34-35. - Charge against person. 
    The expense of an emergency response shall be charged against the person or corporation liable for 
the expense under this article. The charge constitutes a debt of that person or corporation and is 
collectable by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, expressed or 
implied. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I(4), 6-13-94) 


Sec. 34-36. - Cost recovery schedule. 
    The city shall, by resolution, as soon as possible after an emergency response, adopt a schedule of 
the costs included within the expense of the emergency response. This schedule shall be available at the 
office of the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I(5), 6-13-94) 


Sec. 34-37. - Billing. 
    The city may, within ten days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred for an 
emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person or 
corporation liable for the expenses as enumerated under this article. The bill shall require full payment 
within 30 days from the date of mailing or service of the bill upon the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I(6), 6-13-94) 


Sec. 34-38. - Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. 
    Any failure by the person or corporation described in this article as liable or responsible for expenses 
of an emergency response to pay the bill within 30 days of mailing or service of the bill shall constitute a 
default on the bill. In the case of default, the city shall have the right and power to add all emergency 
response costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against 
the property or premises. The city shall also have the right to bring action in a court of competent 
jurisdiction to collect such costs if the city deems such action to be necessary. In the event of bringing 
such an action, the city can seek to recover attorney fees and fines associated with the action. 
(Ord. No. 99, part I(7), 6-13-94) 


Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 14; emergency services, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; 
health and sanitation, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 54; 
solid waste, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 38-1. - Interfering devices. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, cause to be constructed or cause to be 
erected any electrically illuminated sign, electric motor or other electrically operated device within the 
city unless such sign, electric motor or other electrically operated device is so equipped or 
constructed as to eliminate all interference and disturbance to radio reception and television 
reception. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any electrically powered 
illuminated sign, electric motor or other electrically operated device within the city unless such sign, 
electric motor or other electrically operated device is so equipped or constructed as to eliminate all 
interference and disturbance to radio reception and television reception. 
(Code 1983, § 9.31) 


Sec. 38-2. - Climbing on structures declared nuisance. 
    The practice of climbing or entering on structural appurtenances or onto the roofs of structures or on 
fire escape apparatuses without having been requested or invited so to do by the owners or occupants of 
such structures or fire escape apparatuses is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereby declared to 
be punishable as a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 9.41) 


Sec. 38-3. - Tampering with fire escape apparatus. 
    The practice of tampering with fire escape apparatuses in the city without having been requested or 
invited so to do by the owners or occupants of the building to which the fire escape apparatuses are 
attached is hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 9.42) 


Sec. 38-4. - Exemption to sections 38-2 and 38-3. 
    Any person who shall enter onto any structural appurtenance or onto the roof of any structure or who 
shall tamper with any fire escape apparatus for the intended purpose of preventing property damage or 
personal injury shall be presumed to have acted upon the request or invitation of the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1983, § 9.43) 


Secs. 38-5—38-35. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - DISMANTLED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 


Sec. 38-36. - Purpose and intent of article. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the people of 
the city by prohibiting the outdoor storage of dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable, unlicensed or 
uninsured motor vehicles, or parts of motor vehicles, whether intended for use on the public streets or 
private property, in certain areas of the city, to provide penalties for violation of this article, and the 
removal of such items in violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9.71) 


Sec. 38-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dismantled motor vehicle means any motor vehicle from which some parts, which are customarily 
components of the motor vehicle, have been removed or are missing. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any self-propelled motor vehicle intended for use on public streets 
or private property which by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other causes is incapable of being 
propelled under its own power, or is currently unlicensed or uninsured if a license or insurance is required 
by law for the operation of such vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is intended to be self-propelled. 
(Code 1983, § 9.73) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 38-38. - Outdoor storage. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to store on, place on or permit to be stored or 
placed on or allowed to remain on any platted or unplatted parcel of land a dismantled, partially 
dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or any parts of a motor vehicle, which platted or unplatted parcel 
of land is located in a residential zone, under the terms and provisions of chapter 86 of this Code, as now 
or hereafter amended, or upon which parcel of land there is a structure used in whole or in part as a 
dwelling, unless such dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor 
vehicle shall be kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. Any bona fide 
owner, co-owner, tenant or cotenant may store, permit to be stored or allow to remain on the premises of 
which he is the owner, co-owner, tenant or cotenant, any such dismantled, partially dismantled or 
inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle if such motor vehicle is registered and licensed for a 
period of not to exceed 48 hours. 
(Code 1983, § 9.74) 


Sec. 38-39. - Extension of storage period; permit required. 
    In the event of hardship, any owner, co-owner, tenant or cotenant may secure a permit from the city 
clerk to extend such period of 48 hours for an additional period of not to exceed 30 days for any such 
dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle if such vehicle is 
registered and licensed. This article shall not be construed to permit parking or placing of such motor 
vehicles on any street right-of-way in the city or in any front yard as now or hereafter defined by chapter 
86. 
(Code 1983, § 9.75) 


Sec. 38-40. - Storage permit. 
    Any person wishing to store a motor vehicle beyond the 48-hour period, as provided for in section 
38-39, shall apply for a permit to the city clerk, and upon a showing of hardship, and provision for safe 
storage, shall be issued a permit as provided for in section 38-39 after payment of a permit fee. The 
amount of the permit fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 9.76) 


Sec. 38-41. - Conditional use permit. 
    In unusual circumstances an owner, co-owner, tenant or cotenant may seek a conditional use 
storage permit for a period of time specified in the permit. Applicants for conditional use permits shall 
make a written request to the city clerk and provide sufficient proof that the outdoor storage of an 
inoperable motor vehicle shall be accomplished in a manner that does not constitute a hazard to the 
public health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city. The police chief is directed along with the 
building inspector to make a report to the city manager stating that the issuance of a conditional use 
permit for the outdoor storage of an inoperable motor vehicle does not constitute a hazard to the health, 
safety or welfare of the residents of the city before such permit will be granted. 
(Code 1983, § 9.77) 


Sec. 38-42. - Maintenance of vehicle storage. 
    Persons granted a conditional use permit for outdoor storage of an inoperable motor vehicle shall 
maintain such vehicle storage in a condition so as not to constitute a hazard to the health, safety or 
welfare of the people of the city. Failure to do so shall be cause to revoke the conditional use permit. 
(Code 1983, § 9.78) 


Sec. 38-43. - Other provisions of law. 
    This article shall be construed as supplementary to other provisions of this Code now in effect or 
hereafter made effective relating to rubbish, litter, garbage, refuse, trash or junk, as well as to any 
statutes of the state relating thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 9.79) 


Sec. 38-44. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor 
vehicle on any platted or unplatted parcel of land in violation of the terms of this article is hereby declared 
to be a public nuisance, provided that 24 hours' notice shall have been given by the police to the owner or 
occupant of such premises to remove such vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 9.80) 


Sec. 38-45. - Removal of inoperable motor vehicles. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to remove or make safe storage of 
inoperable motor vehicles where the owner thereof shall have failed to comply with the terms of this 
article. The cost for removal or safe storage shall be billed by the city treasurer to the owner of the real 
property upon which the violation shall occur. Failure to pay for the removal or safe storage shall 
constitute a lien upon such property. 
(Code 1983, § 9.81) 


Secs. 38-46—38-75. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION CONTROL 


Sec. 38-76. - Rules adopted. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference the latest rules and regulations promulgated by the state 
department of natural resources relative to the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, Act No. 347 
of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 282.101 et seq.), as amended. Such rules shall be available 
for public inspection at the office of the city clerk, and the city also adopts by reference the county soil 
conservation district local soil erosion and sedimentation control standards and specifications, relative to 
such act. 
(Code 1983, § 8.51) 


Sec. 38-77. - Permit application. 
    Before groundbreaking of any construction project or earth change in the city involving one or more 
acres of land, or within 500 feet of any river or stream, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall 
be submitted to the city in accordance with such rules and standards. 
(Code 1983, § 8.52) 


Sec. 38-78. - Fee. 
    Each application shall be accompanied by a fee according to schedules adopted by resolution of the 
council. 
(Code 1983, § 8.53) 


Sec. 38-79. - Plan review; permit issuance. 
    The council shall by resolution designate a person trained and experienced in soil erosion and 
sedimentation control procedures to review and approve plans and issue permits. The approved permit 
shall be posted by the applicant at the project site. 
(Code 1983, § 8.54) 


Secs. 38-80—38-110. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 38-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the 
public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, 
navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property. Public nuisances 
shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 38-112. - Committing, creating or maintaining. 
    No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 9.1) 


Sec. 38-113. - Nuisances per se; enumeration. 
    The following acts, services, apparatus and structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1) ?The maintenance of any pond, pool of water or vessel holding stagnant water. 
(2) ?The throwing, placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place, 
square or sidewalk, or in any private place or premises where such throwing, placing, depositing 
or leaving is in the opinion of the health officer dangerous or detrimental to public health, or 
likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents and/or vermin, by any person, of any 
animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shell, tin cans, bottles, glass, or other 
rubbish, dirt, excrement, filth, rot, unclean or nauseous water, liquid or gaseous fluids, hay, 
straw, soot, garbage, swill, animal bones, hides or horns, rotten soap, grease or tallow, offal or 
any other offensive article or substance whatever. 
(3) ?The pollution of any stream, lake, storm sewer or body of water by, or the depositing into or 
upon any highway, street, lane, alley, public street or square, or into any adjacent lot or grounds 
of, or depositing or permitting to be deposited any refuse, foul or nauseous liquid or water, 
creamery or industrial waste, or forcing or discharging into any public or private sewer or drain 
any steam, vapor or gas. 
(4) ?The emission of noxious fumes or gas in such quantities as to render occupancy of property 
uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(5) ?Any vehicle used for any immoral or illegal purpose. 
(6) ?All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and newspapers. 
(7) ?Betting, bookmaking, prizefighting and all apparatus used in such occupations. 
(8) ?All illegal gambling devices, slot machines and punchboards. 
(9) ?All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling 
houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses. 
(10) ?The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are placed in the 
hands of an adult person. 
(11) ?All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or 
in any amount contrary to the provisions of this Code, or statute of the state. 
(12) ?Any use of the public streets and/or sidewalks which causes large crowds to gather, 
obstructing the free use of the streets and/or sidewalks. 
(13) ?All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or 
otherwise, and all excavations remaining unfilled or uncovered for a period of 90 days or longer, 
and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public. 
(14) ?All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place, or so situated, left or 
operated on private property as to attract the public. 
(15) ?The owning, driving or moving upon the public streets and alleys of trucks or other motor 
vehicles which are constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of its load or contents to blow, 
fall or be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which 
deposits from its wheels, tires, or other parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or 
private place, dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind; provided, however, 
that under circumstances determined by the city manager to be in the public interest, he may 
grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of this subsection, conditioned upon 
cleaning and correcting the violating condition at least once daily and execution of an 
agreement by such person to reimburse the city for any extraordinary maintenance expense 
incurred by the city in connection with such violation. 
(Code 1983, § 9.7) 


Secs. 38-114—38-145. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES 


Sec. 38-146. - Maintenance. 
    No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a menace to the health, morals or 
safety of the public. 
(Code 1983, § 9.2) 


Sec. 38-147. - Notice and hearing. 
    The council may, after notice to the owner and after holding a public hearing thereon, condemn such 
structure by giving notice to the owner of the land upon which such structure is located, specifying in what 
respects the structure is a public nuisance and requiring the owner to alter, repair, tear down or remove 
the structure within such reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days, as may be necessary to do or have 
done the work required by the notice. The notice may also provide a reasonable time within which such 
work shall be commenced. 
(Code 1983, § 9.3) 


Sec. 38-148. - Abatement. 
    If, at the expiration of any time limit in the notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements 
of the notice, the superintendent of public works shall carry out the requirements of the notice. The cost of 
such abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the 
provisions of section 7.17 of the city Charter and chapter 62 of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 9.4) 


Sec. 38-149. - Emergency abatement. 
    The superintendent of public works may abate any such public nuisance, if the public safety requires 
immediate action, without a preliminary order of the council. Thereafter, the cost of abating such nuisance 
shall be charged against the premises and the owner in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter 
and this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 9.5) 


Secs. 38-150—38-180. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - NOISE 


Sec. 38-181. - Enumeration of prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any 
excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise, which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the 
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the city. The following acts, among others, are 
declared to be loud, disturbing, injurious and unnecessary and unlawful noises in violation of this section, 
but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1) ?Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, 
motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal or to give 
warning of intent to get into motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are 
being applied and decelerating of the vehicle has begun; the creation by means of such signal 
device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sounds; and the sounding of any signal device for any 
unreasonable or unnecessary period of time. 
(2) ?Radios, phonographs and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph, 
television set, amplified or unamplified musical instruments, loudspeaker, tape recorder, or 
other electronic sound producing devices, in such manner or with such volume at any time or 
place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any 
dwelling, hotel, hospital, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. The 
operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to 
be plainly audible on a property or in a dwelling unit other than that in which it is located, shall 
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3) ?Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or making of any other 
loud noises on the public streets, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making 
of any such noise at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of 
persons in any dwelling, hotel, hospital or other type of residence, or in any office or of any 
persons in the vicinity. 
(4) ?Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud or boisterous manner. 
(5) ?Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent or loud, 
continued noise, and disturbs the comfort or repose of any person. 
(6) ?Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistles or sirens, except to give notice of the time to 
begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(7) ?Engine exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine or 
stationary internal combustion engine, except through a muffler or other device which effectively 
prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8) ?Construction noises. The erection (including excavation therefor), demolition, alteration or 
repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways on Sunday, and other days, 
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., unless a permit therefor be first obtained 
from the city manager. 
(9) ?Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading 
and unloading any vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10) ?Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument 
or device for the purpose of attracting attention for any purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 9.21) 


Sec. 38-182. - Exceptions to section 38-181. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of section 38-181 shall apply or be enforced against: 
(1) ?Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged upon 
necessary emergency business. 
(2) ?Highway and utility maintenance and construction. Necessary excavations in or repairs of 
bridges, streets or highways, or any public utility installation by or on behalf of the city or any 
public utility or any agency of the state, during the night or on Sunday, when the public safety, 
welfare and convenience necessitates the performance of the work at such times. 
(3) ?Public addresses. The reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loudspeakers for public 
addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(4) ?Sacred music. The use of sound amplifiers or other such devices by churches, or other 
organizations approved by the council. 
(5) ?Ice cream vendors. The use of sound amplifiers or such devices by vendors of ice cream, 
frozen ices and other frozen novelty products. 
(6) ?Trains. The use of train signaling or warning devices is permitted. 
(Code 1983, § 9.22) 


Secs. 38-183—38-200. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-02, adopted Sept. 13, 2004, amended the Code with the addition of a new 
chapter 39, sections 39-1—39-12. In order to maintain the alphabetical sequence of chapter titles, the 
provisions of said ordinance have been codified herein as article VI, sections 38-201—38-212, at the 
discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 38-201. - Powers. 
    The city council shall designate the city manager or his designee as director for purposed of this 
article. The director shall have full power and authority over all trees in or planted in parks, streets and 
public places of the city. The maintenance of such trees shall be subject to such policies as may be 
adopted. The city shall have the right to revise the policies from time to time as may be required for the 
proper care of such trees. Implementation of the revised policies shall not occur until it is filed with the 
department of public works, parks and recreation commission, and is available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 38-202. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits or neglects or refuses to comply with any of the sections of 
this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a civil infraction, punishable with a fine not to exceed 
$500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 38-203. - Interference with director; appeals. 
(a) ?Interference with director. No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the director or any of the 
director's assistants in the execution or enforcement of this article. However, nothing in this 
subsection shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit a public hearing or any remedy, legal or 
equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of 
any property within the city. 
(b) ?Right to appeal to tree board of appeals. 
(1) ?Any owner of property affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the 
enforcement of this article may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the 
board, provided that such person shall file, in the office of the city clerk, a written petition 
requesting such hearing and containing a statement of the grounds therefore within 21 days 
after the day the notice was served, and pay any appeal fee required by resolution of the 
council. 
(2) ?In order that the provisions set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section may be reasonably 
applied and substantial justice done when unnecessary hardship would result from carrying out 
the strict letter of this article, a tree board of appeals, referred to in this section as the board, is 
created. The duty of the board shall only be to consider appeals from the decision of the officials 
charged with the enforcement of this article sections 38-205 and 38-209—38-212 and to 
determine in particular cases whether any deviation from the strict enforcement of this article 
will violate the intent of this article and public health and safety jeopardized. 
(3) ?The board shall consist of three members who shall be appointed by and serve at the will and 
pleasure of the city manager with appointments confirmed by the city council. The members 
shall have such qualifications by education and experience as the city manager and council 
shall consider essential to enable them to act intelligently in matters concerning tree health. The 
term of office of members of the board shall be for three years with one term expiring per year. 
(4) ?Permitting any toxic chemical to seep, to drain or to be emptied on or about any tree. 
(5) ?Depositing, storing, placing or maintaining on any street or other public place any brick, sand, 
stone, concrete or other material which may impede free passage of water, air and fertilizer to 
the roots of any tree. 
(6) ?Failing to erect a suitable protective barrier around trees apt to be injured during any 
construction. 
(7) ?Knowingly permitting any electrical wires to be attached to any tree. 
(8) ?Digging a trench under or within 15 feet of any tree for the laying of pavement, pipe or conduit. 
(9) ?Driving, parking, hauling or storing any automobile, truck, trailer, boat, motorcycle, snowmobile, 
motor home or other motorized or wheeled vehicle within 25 feet of a tree in any street, park or 
public places except while within the clearly delineated travel or parking zones of any street or 
parking lot. This shall not be construed as to preclude parking on any gravel, concrete, 
bituminous or unimproved driveway or entryway or operating a motor vehicle on any such 
surfaced street within 25 feet of such tree. 
(10) ?Moving, spraying, bracing, trimming, doing surgery work, cutting any tree or part thereof. 
(11) ?Constructing or reconstructing a drive or parking area within 15 feet of any tree in a public 
place. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Secs. 38-204—38-206. - Reserved. 


Sec. 38-207. - Public improvements. 
(a) ?Section 38-206 shall not be construed to apply whenever the removal of such trees or any parts 
thereof shall be necessary for the construction of the sidewalks, streets, alleys, sewers or other 
public improvement which are authorized by any public governmental agency, after all reasonable 
attempts to preserve the tree are exhausted. 
(b) ?Whenever any person desires to remove a tree, in whole or part, because of the placing of a public 
improvement, the person responsible for construction of the public improvement shall obtain prior 
written permission of director. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 38-208. - Tree planting. 
(a) ?No tree or shrub shall be planted in any street, public place or park until the director shall have first 
approved the kind, size and variety of tree and designated the location therefore. No prohibited 
species shall be set out or any other tree unless it shall be free from infectious disease. 
(b) ?The director shall have the authority to plant trees in any street, park or public place, which the 
director deems adequate for this purpose. 
(c) ?The director shall determine the appropriate species of tree to be planted, considering parkway 
width, location of underground utilities, height of overhead utilities, spacing of existing trees and 
traffic visibility requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 38-209. - Loss of public trees; value. 
(a) ?Whenever the director shall determine that a tree in any street, park or public ground has been 
removed or impaired, damaged broken, severed or destroyed in a manner which will cause 
immediate or future removal of the tree which is deemed premature and untimely, the director shall 
assess against the responsible person the value of the tree as determined by a competent forestry 
professional using the Michigan Forestry and Parks Association Shade Tree Evaluation Guide. 
(b) ?The damages received by the city shall not be less than the cost of the removal of the damaged tree 
and replacement with a comparable tree as determined by the director. 
(c) ?It shall be the duty of the public safety department having knowledge of such damage or persons 
causing the damage to immediately report the damage to the director for investigation. 
(d) ?It shall be the duty of the director thereafter to notify the city manager who may initiate appropriate 
recovery procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 38-210. - Privately owned trees overhanging public grounds. 
(a) ?Any tree not growing in a street, park or public grounds but so located as to extend its branches 
over a street, sidewalk or other public grounds which is or becomes a menace or danger to the 
public safety or a traffic hazard shall be trimmed or removed by the owner of the property on which 
the tree stands, so as to remove the obstruction from the street, sidewalk or public grounds and so 
as to eliminate the traffic hazard and the menace and danger to the public, pursuant to written notice 
by the director. 
(b) ?When such notice is given, the owner will be given a reasonable amount of time, but not less than 
14 days, to take corrective action. If the work is not satisfactorily completed within that time, the 
director may make the necessary trimming or removals. The owner or other person to whom the 
notice was directed shall be notified by mail of the removal or abatement, and the cost incurred for 
such work, together with a statement that the cost of the work must be paid within 30 days or cost 
incurred will be charged against such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 38-211. - Public nuisance. 
(a) ?The director, after reasonable notice to the occupant, shall have authority to enter any private lands 
within the city to make field inspections of trees, including the removal of specimens for laboratory 
analysis, to determine the presence of infectious diseases, insect infestations or conditions that 
constitute a hazard to life and property or which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the 
city. 
(b) ?Any tree or part thereof growing on private property that in the opinion of the director endangers the 
life, health, safety or property of the public or is determined to harbor infectious diseases or insects 
that constitute a potential threat to other trees shall be declared a public nuisance. 
(c) ?Whenever any public nuisance exists, contrary to this article, the directo9r shall give notice to the 
owner or his agent and the occupant of the property describing the tree, its location and nature of the 
nuisance and ordering the owner, agent and occupant to take such measure as may be reasonably 
necessary to correct or abate such nuisance and specifying the measures required to be taken. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, cause or suffer the existence of a public nuisance from 
and after 14 days following the date of the notice provided for in this section. 
(e) ?When the notice given is not complied with, the director is authorized and empowered to order the 
removal or abatement of the public nuisance and shall have authority to call the necessary 
assistance therefore. Contracted work shall be submitted for bids and approved by the director. 
(f) ?Upon completion of the abatement or removal of the public nuisance, the director shall certify the 
cost of removal of the public nuisance. The owner or other person to whom the notice was directed 
shall be notified by mail of the removal or abatement and the cost incurred for such work, together 
with a statement that the cost of the work must be paid within 30 days or cost incurred will be 
charged against such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 38-212. - Electric wiring. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person having notice or knowledge that any wire, cable or other electrical 
material owned or controlled by any such person is attached to any tree standing in any street, park 
or public grounds to permit such wire, cable or electrical material to remain so attached for more than 
five days without proper approval from the director or his designee. 
(b) ?The director shall have power to order removed any wire, conduit or other existing thing that burns 
or chafes any part of any tree, whether trunk, root or branch, in any street, park or public place. 
(c) ?Nothing within this article shall be construed as conflicting with, impeding or preventing any public 
utility from installing and maintaining its equipment and providing service within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, 9-13-04) 


Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; civil emergencies, ch. 
22; emergency service, ch. 34; environment, ch. 38; subdivisions, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 42-1. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 
230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building inspector of the city is hereby designated as the 
enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as 
amended, State of Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of 
said Act through out the corporate limits of the community adopting this section. 
(Ord. No. 42, § 1, 3-5-12) 
Cross reference— Construction code, ch. 10, art. II. 


Sec. 42-2. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 
230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be 
enforced by the enforcing agency within the city. 
(Ord. No. 42, § 2, 3-5-12) 
Cross reference— Construction code, ch. 10, art. II. 


Sec. 42-3. - Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance study (FIS) entitled "Tuscola 
County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated April 3, 2012, and the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRMs) 
panel number(s) of 26157C;0339E, 26157C;0343E, 26157C;0476E, 26157C;0477E, and 26157C;0481E 
and dated April 3, 2012, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan 
Construction Code, and declared to be a part of section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to 
provide the content of the "flood hazards" section of table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 42, § 3, 3-5-12) 
Cross reference— Construction code, ch. 10, art. II. 


Secs. 42-4—42-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The flood chapter identifies the building board of appeals as the body that reviews 
requests for variances. The zoning board of appeals acts as the building board of appeals in the city. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 42-31. - Purpose and intent of article. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the 
people of the city and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding conditions by restricting or 
prohibiting certain uses dangerous to health, safety and welfare within designated floodprone areas; to 
require uses vulnerable to floods to be protected against flood damage at the time of construction; to 
control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, drains or devices; to control the filling, 
grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; to prevent or 
regulate the construction of flood barriers which may unnaturally divert floodwaters or increase flood 
hazards to other lands; to protect life and health; to minimize the expenditure of public funds for flood 
control projects or flood relief efforts; to minimize prolonged business interruptions; to minimize damage 
to public facilities and utilities including, but not limited to, gas mains, electric power lines, cable TV, 
telephone and sewer lines, water mains, streets, bridges and public buildings; to maintain a stable tax 
base by providing for sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize 
future flood blight areas; to ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is within a floodprone 
area; to define a floodplain management zone; and to provide for a system of permit fees for enforcement 
of this article. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. I, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-32. - Floodplain management zone. 
    The floodplain management zone shall be defined by reference to the 100-year base flood elevation 
designated by FEMA, so represented by the flood hazard boundary map H-01, as amended. Such map is 
hereby made a part of this article. The floodway map of the Federal Emergency Management Agency is 
floodway map 01-F. Such map is made a part of this article. The flood insurance study and flood 
insurance rate map dated July 2, 2004, for the city shall be the official map for determinations and 
regulation pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. III, 8-28-89; Ord. of 7-19-99; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-33. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this 
article or a request for a variance. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given 
year as defined by FEMA or its successors. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not 
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, 
remodeling or construction. 
    Flood or flooding means a general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of 
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of 
runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the city, dated July 2, 2004, on which 
FEMA or its successors has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium 
zones applicable to the community. 
    Floodplain management zone means those areas designated on the flood insurance rate map 
(FIRM) dated July 2, 2004, in zones labeled A, AE, AH, A0 and A99. Floodway means the channel of a 
river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth of a foot. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. New construction shall include 
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of 
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the building 
permit date. 
    Start of construction means the issuance of a building permit from the city or a soil erosion and 
sedimentation permit. Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the 
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or 
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above the ground, including a gas or 
liquid storage facility and a manufactured home. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of 
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or 
repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage 
occurred. For the purposes of this definition substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first 
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that 
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any 
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code 
specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alterations of a structure 
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article which permits 
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in 
unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. IV, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 42-34. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory 
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on 
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not 
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free 
from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer 
or employee thereof from any flood damages that result from reliance on this article, or any administrative 
decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. VII, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-35. - Fees. 
    The city council shall establish by resolution a fee schedule to provide for the expense of 
administering this article. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. X, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Secs. 42-36—42-55. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 


Sec. 42-56. - Appointment of administrator. 
    The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. V, § 1, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-57. - Floodplain management permit—required. 
    A floodplain management permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within 
the area defined as the floodplain management zone and for all developments utilizing five or more acres 
of land within the city. No such structure or land developments shall hereafter be located, extended, 
enlarged, converted, altered or otherwise changed without full compliance with the terms of this article or 
other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. V, § 2, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-58. - Same—Application contents. 
    Application for a floodplain management permit shall be made to the building official on forms 
furnished by him and may include, but is not limited to, the following specifications drawn to scale, 
indicating the nature, location, dimensions, elevations of the area, existing or proposed structures; 
drainage facilities location, existing and proposed; and a topographic survey in relation to base flood 
elevation with no greater than two-foot contours of the existing and proposed site, unless waived by the 
building official. Specifically, the following information shall be supplied by the applicant: 
(1) ?Elevation in relation to the base flood elevation of the existing and/or proposed lowest floor, 
including the basement, of all structures. 
(2) ?Elevation in relation to the base flood elevation to which any structure has been or will be 
floodproofed. 
(3) ?Certification from a registered professional engineer or architect of floodproofed structures in 
this article. 
(4) ?Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of 
any proposed drainage facilities. 
(5) ?Description and location of existing and proposed drainage facilities. 
(6) ?Topographic survey in relation to the base flood elevation with no greater than two-foot 
contours of the existing and proposed site; provided, however, that the building official in his 
discretion may waive this requirement for sites of less than one acre where he deems the 
information provided by a topographic survey will be of little or no benefit in reviewing the 
application. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. V, § 4, 8-28-89; Ord. of 7-19-99; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-59. - Duties of building inspector. 
    The building inspector shall: 
(1) ?Issue all floodplain management permits; 
(2) ?Review all applications for floodplain management permits to ensure that all provisions of this 
article have been satisfied; 
(3) ?Review all applications for floodplain management permits to ensure that all necessary permits 
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior 
approval is required including a floodplain permit and approval or letter of no authority from the 
state department of natural resources under the authority of the natural resources and 
environmental protection act, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994 (MCL 324.10l 
et seq., MSA 13A.101 et seq.), as amended; 
(4) ?Notify adjacent communities and appropriate state agencies prior to any alteration or relocation 
of a watercourse, and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency; 
(5) ?Ensure that the developer of structures of land within the floodplain management zone shall 
maintain such improvements or changes so that flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(6) ?Verify and record by survey in relation to the base flood elevation or other means acceptable to 
the building official, the lowest floor, including the basement, elevation of all improvements or 
changes requiring a floodplain management permit; 
(7) ?Obtain certification from the developer by a licensed professional engineer or architect that any 
proposed floodproofing shall be in accordance with chapter 44, sections 60.3 c.3 and 4 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations and adequate to protect the structure from flood hazard; 
(8) ?Determine the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards where 
there appears to he a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions; 
(9) ?Enforce and maintain records pertaining to this article. Verification of all as-built elevations for 
all new constructions and substantial improvements will be recorded and maintained prior to the 
issuance of the certificate of compliance; and 
(10) ?Levy the appropriate fees for administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. V, § 3, 8-28-89; Ord. of 7-19-99; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-60. - Variance procedures. 
    Whenever a proposed developer alleges that the building official has erred in his interpretation of this 
article or believes strict enforcement of the provisions of this article would constitute an unnecessary 
hardship without further benefiting the intent and purpose of this article, upon written request given to the 
building official the developer may seek relief in the form of a variance in the building official's 
determination from the building board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 580, art. V, § 5, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-61. - Building board of appeals procedures. 
    In reviewing applications for variances the building board of appeals shall consider the following: 
(1) ?The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others or damage to 
property; 
(2) ?The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3) ?The susceptibility of the contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the 
individual owner or user of the proposed facility; 
(4) ?The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5) ?The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6) ?The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the 
proposed use; 
(7) ?The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8) ?The relationship of the proposed use to any comprehensive plan, policy or floodplain 
management program; 
(9) ?The safety and access to the property in times of a flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10) ?The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters 
and the effect of wave action expected at the site; 
(11) ?The costs of providing governmental or other services before, during and after flood 
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, 
electrical power, water and transportation systems; and 
(12) ?The effort shown by the developer to provide other means of protecting the land and 
structures from flood hazard damage. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. V, § 6, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-62. - Granting variances. 
    Upon consideration of section 42-61 requirements, the building board of appeals may attach such 
conditions to the approval of a variance as it deems appropriate for the enhancement of the purposes of 
this article. Variances shall not, however, be issued within the designated floodway if any increase in 
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. Variances may be issued only after a 
determination that the variance to be issued is the minimum necessary to afford relief or that the building 
official erred in his interpretation of this article. Variances may be issued only after a showing of good and 
sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to 
the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, 
additional threats to public safety, public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the 
public or conflict with existing laws, statutes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. V, § 7, 8-28-89; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-63. - Notice to developer of variance. 
    According to chapter 44, section 60.6(a).5 of the Code of Federal Regulations, any applicant to 
whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that: 
(1) ?The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in 
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of 
insurance coverage; and 
(2) ?Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. V, § 8, 8-28-89; Ord. of 7-19-99; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-64. - Interpretation of article. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum 
requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal 
any powers granted under state statute or local ordinances. Whenever this article shall be in conflict or 
overlap another statute or ordinance, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2005-32, 11-29-05; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Secs. 42-65—42-85. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 


Sec. 42-86. - General standards. 
    In all areas requiring the issuance of a floodplain management permit, the following provisions shall 
be required: 
(1) ?All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, 
collapse or lateral movement of the structures. 
(2) ?All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and 
utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3) ?All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and 
practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4) ?All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(5) ?All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and the discharges from the systems into floodwaters 
and be equipped with backflow preventer valves. 
(6) ?All on-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or 
contamination from them during flooding. 
(7) ?All new or replacement electric distribution, generating, telephone or cable television 
equipment shall be designed and installed in such a manner that no flood damage may occur to 
those systems. 
(8) ?All new construction or subdivision sites of five acres or more shall provide for local flood 
control and water runoff, regardless of source, by installation of properly sized and designed on 
the site and connecting stormwater facilities including, but not limited to, curb and gutters along 
all streets, drives and parking areas and enclosed storm drains. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. VI, § 1, 8-28-89; Ord. of 7-19-99; Amd. of 4-5-04) 


Sec. 42-87. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas requiring the issuance of a floodplain management permit, under authority of Act No. 451 
of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994 (MCL 324.101 et seq., MSA 13A.10l et seq.), as amended, which 
prohibits habitation within the floodway, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1) ?Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential 
structure shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above one foot 
above the base flood elevation. 
(2) ?Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, 
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including the 
basement, elevated to or above one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with 
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be fioodproofed so that below one foot above the base 
flood level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of 
water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall 
certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. 
(3) ?Floodways. Since the floodway is extremely hazardous due to the velocity of floodwaters which 
carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, encroachments, including fill, new 
construction, and other developments, unless certified by a professional licensed engineer as 
providing for no increase in flood levels, shall be prohibited. Residential structures in the 
floodway shall be deemed nonconforming in accordance with ch. 86-523, city zoning ordinance. 
(4) ?Attached garages. Attached garages may be approved as a variance by the building board of 
appeals. Attached garages are to be treated the same as an enclosure below the lowest 
elevated floor of a building. The lowest floor of the garage does not have to be considered the 
lowest floor of the residence if it was used solely for parking, building access or incidental 
storage, and meets the following criteria: 
a. ?No machinery or equipment which services a building, such as furnaces, air conditioners, 
heat pumps, hot water heaters, washers, dryers, elevator lift equipment, electrical junction 
and circuit breaker boxes, and food freezers, is permitted below the base flood elevation. 
b. ?All interior wall, floor and ceiling materials located below the base flood elevation must be 
unfinished and resistant to flood damage. 
c. ?The walls of any enclosed area below the base flood elevation must be constructed in a 
manner to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure, and be 
equipped with permanent vents, valves, or other openings to permit the automatic entry 
and exit of flood waters. 
d. ?If laundry equipment or a workshop were placed in an attached garage, it would no longer 
be used for parking, building access or storage, and the floor of the garage would have to 
be considered the lowest floor of the structure. 
(5) ?Detached garages. Detached garages may be approved as a variance by the building board of 
appeals. If a detached garage constitutes a minimal investment and was used only for parking 
or limited storage, that garage could have its floor below the base flood elevation. At a 
minimum, detached garages which are not elevated so that their floor is at or above the base 
flood elevation would have to be designed and constructed to meet the following requirements: 
a. ?Use of the garage must be limited to parking or limited storage. 
b. ?The garage must be built using unfinished and flood damage resistant materials. 
c. ?The garage must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement 
of the structure. 
d. ?Be equipped with vents, valves, or other openings to automatically allow the entry and exit 
of floodwater. 
e. ?Any mechanical and utility equipment in the garage must be elevated to or above the base 
flood elevation or floodproofed. 
(Ord. No. 58O, art. VI, § 2, 8-28-89; Ord. No. 58R, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. of 7-19-99; Amd. of 4-5-
04) 


Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, 
ch. 50; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 46-31. - Findings. 
    The city council finds and declares that the interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the 
citizens of the city require the regulation, licensing and control of the assemblages of large numbers of 
people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility 
and other public services regularly provided in this city. 
(Code 1983, § 7.121) 


Sec. 46-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attendant means any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly by the payment of 
money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the payment of money for admission. 
    Licensee means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this article. 
    Outdoor assembly (assembly) means any event, attended by more than 1,000 attendants, all or any 
part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other 
exhibition including, but not limited to, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar 
gatherings, but does not mean: 
(1) ?An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency on publicly owned 
land or property; or 
(2) ?An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure. 
    Sponsor means any person who organizes, promotes, conducts, or causes to be conducted, an 
outdoor assembly. 
(Code 1983, § 7.122) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 46-33. - Violations of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his employee or agent to knowingly: 
(1) ?Advertise, promote or sell tickets to or conduct or operate an assembly without first obtaining a 
license as provided in division 2 of this article. 
(2) ?Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance. 
(3) ?Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display, exhibition, show, play, 
entertainment or amusement. 
(4) ?Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in, around or near the 
assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct. 
(5) ?Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess, intoxicating liquor while on the 
premises. 
(6) ?Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs or 
other controlled substances as defined in the state public health code, Act No. 368 of the Public 
Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1983, § 7.132) 


Secs. 46-34—46-55. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 


Sec. 46-56. - Required. 
    A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor assembly in the city 
unless he shall have first made application for, and obtained, as prescribed in this division, a license for 
each such assembly. 
(Code 1983, § 7.123) 


Sec. 46-57. - Application; fee, contents. 
    Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in writing on such forms and 
in such manner as prescribed by the city clerk, and shall be made at least 60 days prior to date of the 
proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00 and shall 
include at least the following: 
(1) ?Name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. Where the 
person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information 
shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the person is a 
corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed, and the names and addresses 
shall be provided of all shareholders having financial interest greater than $500.00. 
(2) ?A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed assembly. 
(3) ?The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed 
assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he 
shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the 
proposed assembly. 
(4) ?The dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. 
(5) ?An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the assembly each day it is 
conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of 
the sequential numbering or other method which will be used for accounting purposes. 
(Code 1983, § 7.124) 


Sec. 46-58. - Plans submitted with application. 
(a) ?Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams, 
where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1) ?Police and fire protection. 
(2) ?Food and water supply and facilities. 
(3) ?Health and sanitation facilities. 
(4) ?Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and equipment. 
(5) ?Vehicle access and parking facilities. 
(6) ?Camping and trailer facilities. 
(7) ?Illumination facilities. 
(8) ?Communications facilities. 
(9) ?Noise control and abatement. 
(10) ?Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal. 
(11) ?Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
(b) ?In addition, the application shall be accompanied by topographic maps drawn to scale of the overall 
site of the proposed assembly. 
(Code 1983, § 7.125) 


Sec. 46-59. - Investigation. 
    On receipt by the clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the chief law enforcement and 
health officers of the city, the state fire marshal and to such other appropriate public officials as the clerk 
deems necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the 
application and within 20 days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the 
city council. 
(Code 1983, § 7.126) 


Sec. 46-60. - Action on application. 
    Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the city council shall issue, set conditions prerequisite 
to the issuance of or deny a license. The city council may require that adequate security or insurance be 
provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a 
license, or where a license is denied, within five days of such action, notice must be mailed to the 
applicant by certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice. 
(Code 1983, § 7.127) 


Sec. 46-61. - Denial. 
    A license may be denied if: 
(1) ?The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this article or with any or all 
conditions imposed pursuant hereto, or with any other applicable provision of state or local law; 
or 
(2) ?The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the 
application or in any supporting document. 
(Code 1983, § 7.128) 


Sec. 46-62. - Contents. 
    A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, 
the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions 
imposed pursuant to this article. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the 
assembly, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Code 1983, § 7.129) 


Sec. 46-63. - Minimum requirements. 
    In processing an application the city council shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1) ?Security personnel. The licensee shall employ at his own expense such security personnel as 
are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum 
number of attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of 
property in and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the chief of 
police in cooperation with the director of state police is satisfied that such necessary and 
sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly. 
(2) ?Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in quantity and pressure to 
ensure proper operation of all water using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such 
water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then from a 
source constructed, located and approved in accordance with part 127, state public health code, 
Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et 
seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance 
with any other applicable state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a 
manner approved by the city health officer. 
(3) ?Restroom facilities. The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flushtype water closets in 
accordance with the county plumbing code, as follows: 
a. ?The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities constructed, installed and 
maintained in accordance with the county plumbing code. All lavatories shall be provided 
with hot and cold water, soap and paper towels. The number and type of facilities required 
shall be determined, on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities 
Male 
Female 
Toilets 
1:300 
1:200 
Urinals 
1:100 

Lavatories 
1:200 
1:200 
Drinking fountains 
1:500 
Taps or faucets 
1:500 
 
b. ?Where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, the licensee shall provide 
shower facilities, on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities 
Male 
Female 
Shower heads 
1:100 
1:100 
 
c. ?All facilities shall be installed, connected and maintained free from obstructions, leaks and 
defects and shall at all times be in operable condition as determined by the department of 
public works superintendent or city manager designee. 
(4) ?Food service. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only 
through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of part 129, state 
public health code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., 
MSA 14.15(1101) et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant 
thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. If the assembly is distant 
from food service establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services 
available on the premises as will adequately feed the attendants. 
(5) ?Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing 
medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the 
assembly. The kind, location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such 
facilities shall be as prescribed by the city health officer. 
(6) ?Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with 
all rules and regulations pertaining thereto established by the city health officer. If such rules 
and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in 
accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled, "Manual 
of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and 
haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with Act No. 243 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 
1951 (MCL 325.281 et seq., MSA 14.434(1) et seq.), as amended, and the rules and 
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local 
law, and, prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the city health officer with a 
true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which 
agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises 
so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(7) ?Solid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from, 
the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, flytight and rodentproof containers, 
provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of 
any license, the licensee shall provide the city health officer with a true copy of an executed 
agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will ensure 
proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create 
nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. The licensee shall implement effective 
control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the 
premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall not be used in any 
way so as to contaminate food, equipment or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. 
Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The 
premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin. 
(8) ?Public bathing beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or accessible public 
bathing beaches only in accordance with part 125, state public health code, Act No. 368 of the 
Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq.), as 
amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any 
other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(9) ?Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools 
only in accordance with sections 12521 through 12534 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 
Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.12541 et seq., MSA 14.15(12541) et seq.), as amended, and the 
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable 
provision of state or local law. 
(10) ?Access and traffic control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the 
premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off of the premises. Access to the 
premises shall be from a major highway or road as defined by the state department of 
transportation. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for 
access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the 
issuance of a license, the director of the department of state police and the director of the state 
department of transportation must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control. 
(11) ?Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor 
vehicles, but in no case shall he provide less than one automobile space for every four 
attendants. 
(12) ?Camping and trailer parking. A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises 
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and 
facilities in accordance with sections 12521 through 12534 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 
Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.12541 et seq., MSA 14.15(12541) et seq.), as amended, and the 
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable 
provision of state or local law. 
(13) ?Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to 
ensure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved 
by the city health officer. 
(14) ?Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance 
with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 and property damage insurance with a limit of not less 
than $50,000.00 from a company or companies approved by the state commissioner of 
insurance, which insurance shall ensure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to 
property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and 
which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of 
the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the 
insurance company shall notify the clerk in writing at least ten days before the expiration or 
cancellation of such insurance. 
(15) ?Bonding. Before the issuance of a license the licensee shall obtain, from a corporate bonding 
company authorized to do business in the state, a corporate surety bond in the amount of 
$50,000.00, in a form to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the licensee's 
faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this article and all applicable 
provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers, and 
employees and the city council against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out 
of or in any way connected with the assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of property 
adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, 
trash or other waste resultant from the assembly. 
(16) ?Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps as determined by 
the state fire marshal to ensure fire protection. 
(17) ?Sound producing equipment. Sound producing equipment including, but not limited to, public 
address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other recording devices shall 
not be operated on the premises of the assembly so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the 
peace and tranquility of the citizens of the city. 
(18) ?Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of sufficient height 
and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendants from 
gaining access and which will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and 
safe ingress and egress. 
(19) ?Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use on 
the basis of at least one unit for each 1,000 attendants. 
(20) ?Other reasonable conditions. Prior to the issuance of a license, the city council may impose 
any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of 
attendants or of citizens of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 7.130) 


Sec. 46-64. - Revocation. 
    The city council may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his employee or agent fails, neglects 
or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this division, or with 
any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated in this division by 
reference. 
(Code 1983, § 7.131) 


ARTICLE III. - RUMMAGE SALES 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 46-65. - Scope. 
    All rummage, garage, basement, barn, porch, carport, yard or other like sales conducted on property 
utilized or zoned for residential use shall be subject to the regulations, requirements and restrictions of 
this article. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06) 


Sec. 46-66. - Limitations. 
(a) ?No sale shall be conducted for longer than three consecutive days. 
(b) ?Not more than two such sales shall be conducted by the same person or at the same such location 
within a 90-day period of time. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06) 


Sec. 46-67. - Advertising sign. 
    One advertising sign shall be permitted for each sale under this article, which sign shall not exceed 
six square feet in area and shall be located only on private property with the permission of the property 
owner. No sign shall be erected on the right-of-way of any public street or affixed to any traffic control sign 
or utility pole. Signs must be taken down immediately following the end of the sale. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06) 


Sec. 46-68. - Location on property. 
    Each sale under this article shall be confined to a covered carport, garage or building, or shall be 
conducted a minimum of 20 feet from the front lot line of the premises of such sale, however, such sale 
shall not cause a public nuisance or create a traffic hazard based upon the location of said sale. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06) 


Sec. 46-69. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A written warning shall first be issued for any violation. Subsequent violations may be treated as a 
municipal civil infraction under chapter 2, article V of this Code, and may result in the issuance of a 
municipal civil infraction citation and a fine equal to $100.00 per violation. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06) 


Chapter 48 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-03, adopted Sept. 13, 2004, amended the Code with the addition of a new 
chapter 55, sections 55-1—55-4, 55-31—55-36. In order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of 
chapter titles, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as new chapter 48, sections 48-
1—48-4, 48-31—48-36, at the discretion of the editor. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 48-1 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be cited and referred to as the "Historic Preservation Code of the City of Vassar." 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the recognition, preservation and protection of historical and 
architectural sites, buildings, structures, objects, features and open spaces in order to: provide for the 
organization and establishment of historic districts significant to the cultural, social, economic, political 
and architectural heritage of the city and to provide for the designation of historically significant 'heritage' 
neighborhoods; encourage property owners and residents to participate in preservation activities; 
enhance, improve, and preserve neighborhoods; stabilize and improve property values; strengthen the 
local economy; foster civic beauty and pride; promote the use of historic districts and heritage 
neighborhoods for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city; and to create a historic 
district commission with specific powers and duties to accomplish these purposes pursuant to the 
authority and powers granted by applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as set 
forth below: 
    Adaptive use means the process of converting a building to a use other than that for which it was 
designed, e.g., changing a residential structure into an office or retail store. 
    Addition means construction which results in an increase in habitable floor area or height of a 
resource. 
    Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or 
shape. 
    Application means the completed official form for work as set forth by the historic district commission. 
    Building department means the administrative office of the city which has been designated by the 
city manager as having the responsibility to issue zoning permits and to assist the historic preservation 
officer as necessary. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval by the historic district commission or 
historic preservation officer of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely 
affect a resource. 
    Commercial historic district means that portion of a historic district in which nonresidential structures 
predominate and which promotes the adaptive use of residential buildings within the district while 
maintaining the overall historic character of the buildings, the streetscape and the historic district. This 
district does not, however, permit any commercial use not authorized under the city's zoning code. 
    Commission means the historic district commission created by city council pursuant to Public Act No. 
169 of 1970 (MCL § 399.201 et seq.). 
    Committee means the historic district study committee appointed by city council pursuant to Public 
Act No. 169 of 1970. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource which includes, 
but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means the failure to maintain, repair or secure a resource, resulting in the 
deterioration of the resource, in violation of this chapter. 
    Denial means the written rejection of an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
    Design assistance team means a committee consisting of architects and design professionals, which 
makes recommendations to the historic district commission. 
    Elevation means a scale drawing of the side, front or rear facades of a resource. 
    Emergency maintenance means temporary acts of repair, replacement, alteration or modification 
required by the issuance of an emergency order of the building department to protect persons and 
property when all or part of a resource is found to be dangerous to life, health, property or the safety of 
the public or its occupants. 
    Emergency order means the written order given by the building department to the owner, agent or 
operator of the resource that requires certain actions to be taken immediately to conform to the 
emergency maintenance definition above. 
    Heritage neighborhood means a geographically defined area, designated as such under the 
provisions of this chapter, for the education and promotion of preservation principles and practices. 
    Historic means a resource which is significant in the development of the city. There is no minimum 
age limit implied by the use of the term "historic." The term "historic" shall also apply to any resource that 
is significant to the overall appearance of a historic district and that plays a significant role in an historic 
district's streetscape. 
    Historic district means a geographically defined area, or thematically defined group of resources not 
necessarily having contiguous boundaries, which are related by historic, architectural, archeological, 
engineering, or cultural significance. 
    Historic district commission. See "commission." 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment and protection of resources 
significant in history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture as defined in this chapter. 
    Historic preservation officer means the city official designated by the city manager to administer and 
enforce this chapter and advise and assist the historic district commission in establishing policy and 
procedures, preparing and presenting materials for public education, responding to public inquiries, 
assisting neighborhoods with the formation of heritage neighborhoods or new historic districts, and 
otherwise assisting the historic district commission in performing the duties established by this chapter. 
    Landmark resource historic district means contiguous or noncontiguous individual structures with 
historic, architectural, archeological, engineering or cultural significance which have received such 
designation by city council. 
    Michigan historical center means the state historic preservation office, Michigan historical center, of 
the Michigan department of state (formerly the bureau of history). 
    Neighborhood association means a nonprofit organization constituted for the general welfare and 
benefit of a neighborhood or tenant association recognized as a neighborhood or tenant association by 
the city. 
    New construction means new resources that are to be constructed or placed within an existing or 
proposed historic district. Such new construction will be subject to the same design guidelines and review 
by the historic district commission in the same manner as work on other district resources. 
    Notice to proceed means written permission, issued by the historic district commission, to permit 
work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Ordinary maintenance means regular upkeep of the exterior of a district resource which does not 
change the streetscape or the historic nature or appearance of the structure, including minor repairs 
resulting from the usual and expected effects of weathering, to chimneys, stairs, porches, railings, roofing 
(which does not exceed 25 percent of the total roof area), soffits, fascias, windows, foundations, siding, 
driveways or walkways, through painting, patching, repairing or similar activities. Ordinary maintenance 
does not constitute work for purposes of this chapter. 
    Owner means any person having legal or equitable title, and/or a person having a financial interest 
or a leasehold interest for a term of more than one year in a resource. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, organization, or other legal entity. 
    Preservation guidelines means the preservation standards established and considered by the 
historic district commission in deciding whether a certificate of appropriateness is issued. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous 
boundaries that have delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing 
committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a 
historic district or added to an established historic district. This includes individual resources proposed for 
landmark resource designation. 
    Reconstruction means the process of reproducing by new construction the form and detail of a 
resource, or part thereof, as it once appeared. 
    Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair, 
reconstruction or alteration, which makes possible an efficient, contemporary use while preserving those 
portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, archeological, 
engineering or cultural values. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any 
process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of 
this chapter. 
    Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, 
sites, objects, features or open spaces located within a historic district, to include streetscape and street 
trees. 
(1) ?Site: A resource that is related to important historic events, a prehistoric or historic occupation 
or activity; the location of an institution or organization or an architectural resource that is ruined 
or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archeological regardless of value of 
any presently existing conditions such as an archaeological site or natural feature having 
cultural significance. 
(2) ?Building: A residential, commercial, industrial or institutional resource created to support or 
shelter any use or occupancy, including accessory buildings such as garages or sheds. 
(3) ?Structure: A resource of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of 
organization for purposes other than human shelter. Examples include signs, billboards, 
porches, decks, railings, fences, screen walls and other above-grade structures, driveways, 
sidewalks and other paved surfaces. 
(4) ?Object: A resource of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, architectural, archaeological or 
scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or 
environment, such as a statue, monument, fountain, lighting fixture, sign or sundial. 
(5) ?Open space: A resource that is undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area or formal or 
manmade landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
(6) ?Street tree: A resource which is a deciduous or coniferous tree at least ten feet in height 
located in a public right-of-way and designated as a resource pursuant to procedures adopted 
by the historic district commission and approved by the city council. 
(7) ?Streetscape: The visual appearance of a historic district. Features of a streetscape include 
resources within the public right-of-way such as street layout and design, street furniture, street 
lighting, and street trees. Streetscape also includes open spaces, features, objects and other 
resources on private property which are visible from the street, including the spacing of 
structures, continuity of setbacks and driveway placement. 
(8) ?Feature: A prominent or distinctive aspect, quality or characteristic of a historic district such as 
landscaped boulevards, brick paving, tree-lined streets and distinctive trees. 
    Restoration means the process of accurately recovering the form and appearance of a resource as it 
existed at a particular period of time by removing later work, replacing missing elements, and restoring 
the appearance and function of the original structure. 
    Staff means the provision of personnel and other resources to the commission for the purpose of 
administering this chapter. 
    Stop order means written order given by either the building department or historic preservation 
officer for work without an approved certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed. Order may be 
hand delivered to work site and/or mailed to the property owner and contractor. 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets and boulevards 
in the city, and includes lawn extensions, and sidewalks and the area reserved for sidewalks not yet 
constructed. 
    Street tree historic district means a district comprised of street trees designated by the historic district 
commission as having some historic or cultural significance in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-4. - Scope. 
(a) ?The provisions of this chapter shall apply to work and ordinary maintenance on all resources within 
designated historic districts in the city. This chapter is designed to effect proper restoration and 
rehabilitation of resources within designated historic districts in accord with the historic character and 
architectural design of the resource itself, the surrounding properties, the streetscape, and the district 
as a whole. 
(b) ?The provisions of this chapter are intended to acknowledge the electric nature of early 20th century 
architecture and are expressly intended to permit changes to buildings within historic districts which 
help them retain their historic character as established by this chapter and are applicable to the 
following resources located within a historic district: 
(1) ?The facade of structures and those sides of structures which are visible from any adjacent 
street, affect the streetscape, and to any resource which has a visual impact on the streetscape. 
This shall include such manmade changes as fences, decks, and parking arrangements. 
(2) ?The exterior of publicly owned structures. 
(3) ?New resources. 
(4) ?Landmark resources. 
(5) ?Commercial structures. 
(6) ?Streetlights. 
(7) ?Street trees. 
(8) ?Streetscape. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Secs. 48-5—48-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ORGANIZATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 


Sec. 48-31. - Historic district commission established; membership; meetings and rules of procedure. 
(a) ?There is hereby established a commission to be known as the city historic district commission. The 
commission shall consist of five members. Each shall reside within the city. Members shall be 
recommended for membership by the city manager and appointed by the city council for three-year 
terms. Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(b) ?At least two members shall be appointed from a list of residents submitted by one or more duly 
organized local historic preservation organizations. A majority of the members shall have a clearly 
demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. At least two of the commission 
members shall have a direct interest within at least one of the designated historic districts. 
(c) ?The commission shall elect a chairperson and adopt bylaws providing for its organization and 
conduct of business. The commission shall schedule regular meetings as necessary or as required 
by state law. The city manager or his/her designee shall serve as secretary of the commission. The 
concurring vote of three members of the commission shall be necessary to issue a notice to proceed 
or for the adoption or modification of preservation guidelines. Other actions of the commission, 
including approval of a certificate of appropriateness, shall require a simple majority of members 
present constituting a quorum. 
(d) ?The commission shall receive staff support from the city as assigned by the city manager, including 
administrative, clerical, research and other appropriate support. 
(e) ?All meetings of the commission shall be conducted in compliance with the Michigan Open Meetings 
Act, being Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL § 15.261 et seq.), and all writings of the commission 
shall be maintained and published in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, being Public 
Act No. 442 of 1976. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-32. - Powers and duties of historic district commission. 
    The commission established by this chapter shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1) ?To develop and recommend to city council a set of administrative procedures for the 
implementation of this chapter, including the adoption of rules of procedure, design review 
standards and preservation guidelines. 
(2) ?To make periodic recommendations to city council concerning proposed changes to this 
chapter in the form of text additions, deletions or revisions, the creation or deletion, expansion 
or contraction of historic district boundaries and the addition or deletion of designated landmark 
resources, commercial structures, streetlights or street trees. 
(3) ?To consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic groups, public agencies 
and citizens interested in historic preservation. 
(4) ?To disseminate information to the public and encourage and advise property owners in the 
protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of resources and other property of historic or 
architectural interest; to send periodic notice to property owners and residents of property in 
historic districts explaining the requirements of this and providing information relating to this 
chapter; and to provide technical assistance and information regarding historic preservation. 
(5) ?To consider methods other than those provided for in this chapter to encourage and achieve 
historic preservation, and to make appropriate recommendations regarding historic preservation 
to the city council and other bodies and agencies, both public and private. 
(6) ?To provide assistance to residents who wish to form heritage neighborhoods, accept petitions 
seeking heritage neighborhood status, recommend to city council the designation of heritage 
neighborhoods, communicate regularly with the heritage neighborhood committees, and provide 
assistance and guidance for the implementation of the heritage neighborhood program. 
(7) ?To review and approve or deny applications for certificates of appropriateness in accordance 
with preservation guidelines, and where appropriate, advise and refer applicants to appropriate 
persons, agencies and organizations for technical and financial assistance to meet the 
requirements of this chapter. In reviewing plans, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary 
of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, 
as set forth in 36 CFR 67. 
(8) ?To act as the city's duly appointed agent to accept property or gifts for preservation purposes, 
apply for and accept grants from the state and federal governments and other agencies, and 
administer such resources and acquisitions in accordance with city financial policies and the 
historical preservation purposes established by this chapter. 
(9) ?To recommend to city council that the city acquire a resource if all efforts by the historic district 
commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by city council that public 
ownership is most suitable and if considered being in the public interest. The city council may 
acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants, or proceeds from the 
issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the 
commission. The commission is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources using its 
own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that 
use by the city council. Upon recommendation of the commission, the city council may sell 
resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property 
transfer documents, if appropriate. 
(10) ?To delegate, if so desired, the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor 
classes of work to its staff, the building official or another delegated authority. The commission 
shall provide to the delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of 
appropriateness under this subsection. At least quarterly, the commission shall review the 
certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued for work by its staff, the inspector, or another 
authority to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(11) ?To work directly with any locally established historic preservation group or organization on 
cooperative efforts to promote historical preservation, designation of historically significant 
historical and architectural sites, buildings, structures, objects, features and open spaces within 
the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-33. - Design assistance team. 
(a) ?There is hereby established a design assistance team consisting of architects, engineers, 
architectural historians and/or design professionals. Members of the design assistance team shall be 
appointed and/or contracted by the city based upon recommendations from the historic district 
commission. Members of the design assistance team may not serve on the historic district 
commission at the same time. 
(b) ?The design assistance team shall, upon the request of the historic district commission, make 
recommendations to the historic district commission, and designated staff concerning an application 
for a certificate of appropriateness or any other responsibility of the commission. When making 
recommendations on a certificate of appropriateness, the design assistance team shall also review 
applications for conformance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-34. - Historically significant "heritage" neighborhood districts. 
    Designation of "heritage neighborhood districts" may be established to encourage residents to 
preserve and enhance the historic identity and liability of their neighborhood. Heritage neighborhoods 
may be designated by resolution of the city council, upon recommendation of the historic district 
commission, provided each of the following criteria is met: 
(1) ?An application for a heritage neighborhood district is filed with the historic preservation officer 
showing that the boundary of the proposed heritage neighborhood is defined by: 
a. ?An abrupt break in neighborhood identity, character or land use; 
b. ?A major street; 
c. ?A zoning boundary; 
d. ?A historic district boundary; or 
e. ?a previously established heritage neighborhood boundary. 
Provided that heritage neighborhoods may include all or portions of a designated historic 
district, or may consist of an area separate from a designated historic district, but no property 
may be included in more than one heritage neighborhood. The application shall be signed by at 
least five residents and/or property owners who shall serve as the initial heritage neighborhood 
committee. 
(2) ?After the application is filed, the proposed heritage neighborhood boundary must be approved 
in writing by the historic preservation officer prior to the commencement of the petitioning 
process. 
(3) ?After the boundary is approved by the historic preservation officer, a written petition signed by a 
resident or owner of 51 percent of the properties within the proposed heritage neighborhood 
boundary must be submitted to the historic district commission. The petition shall include a map 
showing the proposed boundary of the heritage neighborhood. 
(4) ?After the petition is submitted, a written history of the heritage neighborhood is filed with the 
historic district commission. Upon approval by the commission, copies of the completed history 
shall be transmitted to the Bullard-Sanford Library, the Library of Michigan, and the state historic 
preservation office, Michigan Historical Center, Michigan Department of State. 
(5) ?The historic district commission shall approve an application and recommend an appropriate 
resolution to city council for heritage neighborhood status after submission of a petition in 
compliance with this chapter provided that the commission finds that the designation will assist 
in promoting the historic nature and livability of the proposed heritage neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-35. - Heritage neighborhood committees. 
(a) ?Each designated heritage neighborhood shall have and be represented by a committee of at [least] 
five residents and/or property owners initially designated in the application and later elected by its 
residents and/or property owners in accordance with rules adopted by the historic district 
commission for the election of heritage neighborhood committees and approved by city council. 
(b) ?A person may be a member of a heritage neighborhood committee and at the same time serve on 
the historic district commission. 
(c) ?Heritage neighborhood committee members shall be notified of historic district commission 
deliberations affecting properties within their heritage neighborhood and may make 
recommendations to the historic district commission regarding property located within their heritage 
neighborhood. 
(d) ?Each heritage neighborhood committee may in consultation with the historic district commission and 
city staff, develop a plan for development or improvement of neighborhood streetscape amenities 
and services, such as signage, tree planting, lighting fixtures, street furniture and landscaping. 
Particular emphasis may be given to improvements which would preserve and enhance the 
neighborhood's historic identity and livability, and which the city might not otherwise provide. Plans 
must be approved by the historic district commission and city council. Plans may be updated every 
two years. 
(e) ?City council may annually include in the city budget a program or activity line for the implementation 
of heritage neighborhood plans. To qualify for funding, each heritage neighborhood must meet the 
following criteria: 
(1) ?A current approved plan less than five years old must be on file with the historic district 
commission. 
(2) ?A funding match as determined by the city must be secured from private contributions or other 
non-city sources. 
(f) ?When a heritage neighborhood is designated, the city may provide distinctive signage. The heritage 
neighborhood committee shall make specific recommendations to the city on sign placement and 
design. 
(g) ?Certificates of appropriateness shall not be required for any work in heritage neighborhoods, except 
for those properties which are also within a historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Sec. 48-36. - Historic districts. 
(a) ?Establishment, modification, and elimination of historic districts shall be in accordance with this 
chapter and Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL § 399.201 et seq.). 
(b) ?Pursuant to the provisions of section 3 of Public Act No. 169 of 1970, the following historic districts, 
landmark resource historic districts and streetlight historic districts and street tree historic districts are 
hereby established. Where districts are bounded by streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way, the 
entire right-of-way shall be included within the district. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, 9-13-04) 


Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 6; civil emergencies, ch. 22; emergency services, 
ch. 34; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 
58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Crimes, MSA title 28. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Accused means, unless a contrary intention appears, public and private corporations, limited liability 
companies, copartnerships and unincorporated or voluntary associations. 
    Act or doing an act includes "omission to act." 
    Controlled substance means a controlled substance as defined by article 7 of the Public Health 
Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq., MSA 14.15(7101) et 
seq.), as amended. 
    Property includes any matter or thing upon or in respect to which any offense may be committed. 
    Public place means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open 
to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public 
has access. 
    Written, writing and any term of like import include words printed, painted, engraved, lithographed, 
photographed or otherwise copied, traced or made visible to the eye. 
(Code 1983, § 9.91) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 50-2. - Medical marihuana. 
(a) ?Findings. The city adopts this section based on the following findings of fact: 
(1) ?Voters in the state approved a ballot initiative authorizing the use and cultivation of marihuana 
by and for persons with certain medical conditions. 
(2) ?The intent of the initiative was to enable certain specified persons who comply with the 
registration provisions of the law to obtain, possess, cultivate, use and distribute marihuana and 
to assist specifically registered individuals identified in the statute without fear of criminal 
prosecution under limited, specific circumstances. 
(3) ?Despite the specifics of the state legislation and the protections set forth therein, marihuana 
remains a controlled substance under state law and the obtaining, possession, cultivation, use 
and distribution of marihuana has a potential for abuse that should be closely monitored and to 
the extent permissible regulated by the local authorities. 
(4) ?If not closely monitored or regulated, the presence of marihuana even for the purposes 
permitted by the legislation can increase the potential for illegal conduct and/or activity or other 
adverse conditions and this threat affects the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the 
city. 
(5) ?It is the intent of the city that nothing in this article be construed to allow persons to engage in 
conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance, or to allow use, possession or 
control of marihuana for non-medical purposes or allow activity relating to cultivation, 
distribution or consumption of marihuana that is otherwise illegal. 
(b) ?Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to impose specific requirements on those individuals 
registering with the state as a "qualifying patient" or a "primary caregiver" and to regulate the conduct 
of activity pursuant thereto in the city so as to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general 
public. 
(c) ?Definitions. 
    MMMA means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. and the Michigan 
Medical Marihuana rules, Michigan Administrative Code R 333.1 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
    The terms "enclosed, locked facility," "marihuana," "medical use," "primary caregiver," "qualifying 
patient" and "usable marihuana" shall have the same meanings given to them in the MMMA. 
    Dispensary means any location, lot, building or premises used by more than one primary caregiver 
for medical use of marihuana, where marihuana is cultivated for distribution to a primary caregiver who 
does not have his or her primary residence at that location, lot, building or premises, or where there is 
medical use of marihuana for more than five qualifying patients. 
(d) ?Possession and use of medical marihuana. Marihuana can be possessed and used in the city only 
in accordance with and pursuant to the MMMA. 
(e) ?Medical marihuana facilities and licensure. If an applicant is granted a license by the state as a 
grower, processor, secure transporter, or for a medical marihuana provisioning center or safety 
compliance facility, it may only be operated consistent with the MMMA and MMFLA, and for all 
purposes contemplated therein, and subject to the following: 
(1) ?Permit required, eligibility, general provisions. 
a. ?No person shall operate a medical marihuana facility at a location for which a permit as 
provided for in this chapter has not been issued. 
b. ?Medical marihuana provisioning centers shall be allowed to operate only as regulated uses. 
c. ?Applications for renewal or amendment of existing permits shall be reviewed and granted 
or denied before applications for new permits are considered. 
d. ?The requirements set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any 
other licensing requirements imposed by local health codes, state law as amended, and 
any future derivations thereof. 
e. ?The council shall set the annual and renewal application and inspection fees for permits, 
not to exceed those set by state law. 
f. ?A permit and all renewal permits shall remain valid for one year after issuance. A completed 
renewal application must be received no later than 30 days prior to expiration. 
g. ?It is the sole and exclusive responsibility of the applicant at all times during the application 
period and permit holder during its operation to immediately provide the city with all 
changes in any information submitted on the application and any other changes that may 
tend to materially affect any state license or its permit. 
h. ?No permit issued under this chapter may be assigned or transferred to any person unless 
the transferee has submitted an application as required under this chapter. No permit 
issued under this chapter is transferable to any other location, except upon submission and 
approval by the city manager. 
i. ?The original permit issued under this chapter shall be prominently displayed at the permitted 
location where it can be easily viewed by the public, law enforcement, and administrative 
authorities. 
j. ?A permit holder may not engage in any other regulated use on the permitted premises, or in 
its name at any other location within the city without first obtaining a separate permit, if 
applicable and available, and paying any required fees. 
k. ?No application for a license renewal shall be approved unless: 
1. ?The fire department and the building safety office have inspected the proposed 
location for compliance with all laws for which they are charged with enforcement 
within the past calendar year. 
2. ?The zoning administrator has confirmed that the location complies with the Zoning 
Code and this chapter, at the time a license is granted. 
3. ?The city treasurer has confirmed that the applicant and each stakeholder of the 
applicant and the location of the medical marihuana establishment are not currently in 
default to the city. 
4. ?The police department has reviewed the application and determined that the applicant 
has satisfied the requirements of this chapter with respect to the security plan. 
5. ?The applicant possesses the necessary state licenses or approvals, including those 
issued pursuant to the MMFLA. 
6. ?The applicant has operated the medical marihuana establishment in accordance with 
the conditions and requirements of this chapter. 
7. ?The medical marihuana establishment has not been declared a public nuisance. 
8. ?The applicant is operating the medical marihuana establishment in accordance with 
federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(f) ?Marihuana primary caregivers. Assistance of a qualifying patient with the medical use of marihuana 
by a primary caregiver: 
(1) ?Is permitted only as a home occupation in RA-1, RA-2, RA-3 one-family and two-family 
residential districts; 
(2) ?Is prohibited in all other districts and for other than as a home occupation; and 
(3) ?Is subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?Compliance with all home occupation requirements set forth in section 86-127 of this Code. 
b. ?The use and cultivation of marihuana shall at all times comply with the MMMA. 
c. ?The primary caregiver shall operate the home occupation only at a single-family dwelling or 
two-family dwelling that is his or her primary residence. 
d. ?The home occupation location from which a primary caregiver provides assistance to a 
qualifying patient shall not be within a 1,000-foot radius from any parcel with a school, 
church or public library located on it. Measurement of the 1,000-foot radius shall be made 
from the lot line of the lot upon which the proposed home occupation will be situated to the 
lot line of the lot upon which the school or public library is situated and shall be the shortest 
distance between the respective lot lines. 
e. ?No more than one primary caregiver shall assist qualifying patients on any single lot. 
f. ?A maximum of one visit to a primary caregiver home occupation location per day, per 
qualifying patient, is permitted and shall be permissible only between the hours of 8:00 
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
g. ?All usable marihuana and marihuana plants under cultivation shall be contained within the 
primary structure of the home occupation lot, in an enclosed, locked facility inaccessible 
from the exterior of the structure and secured with devices which limit access to only the 
primary caregiver. 
h. ?The outdoor cultivation of marihuana plants is prohibited. 
i. ?If a room or area with windows is utilized as an enclosed, locked facility, the primary 
caregiver shall employ shielding methods which do not involve alteration to the exterior of 
the structure, and which prevent ambient light illumination of adjacent residential 
properties. 
j. ?A primary caregiver home occupation shall not be permitted in connection with or at a 
location at which any other home occupation is operated. 
k. ?No consumption of marihuana shall be permitted at a primary caregiver's home occupation 
location, except if the consumption is by a resident of the home occupation location who is 
also a qualifying patient. 
l. ?A primary caregiver who has been designated by a qualifying patient as that qualifying 
patient's primary caregiver is the only person permitted to assist that qualifying patient with 
that qualifying patient's medical use of marihuana, and may cultivate marihuana for that 
qualifying patient only if the primary caregiver is designated on the State of Michigan 
registry as being allowed to possess marihuana plants for that qualifying patient's medical 
use. 
m. ?The owner of the home occupation location shall obtain an occupancy permit and 
otherwise satisfy all requirements of section 86-127 prior to commencement of the home 
occupation activity by a primary caregiver and shall, if applicable, obtain a building permit 
for any alterations to the structure and comply with all related Code provisions. Under no 
circumstances shall the building inspector, zoning administrator or any other city official 
require the applicant to provide any information during the permitting process on whether 
or not the applicant is a primary caregiver or a qualifying patient, in recognition of the 
confidentiality requirements of the MMMA, provided however that this prohibition shall not 
have any effect on law enforcement activities by police authorities. 
n. ?A special use exception under section 86-128(5) shall not apply and is not permitted. 
o. ?A primary caregiver engaged in a home occupation complying with this section is hereby 
exempted from any otherwise effective requirement to obtain a license pursuant to section 
14-31. 
p. ?All home occupations complying with this section are subject to inspection at reasonable 
times for the purpose of personal property tax assessment, building occupation and 
occupancy permit reasons, for ascertaining conformity to any zoning requirements, for 
effective police and fire services or for purposes of ascertaining whether the home 
occupation must be accounted for in any fire department plan for dealing with toxic 
materials in conformity with Act No. 154 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 
408.1001 et seq.), as amended, with regard to hazardous chemicals. Inspection will be 
done by a properly identified appropriate official or his designee, i.e., fire chief, health 
officer or building official. Such inspection shall be conducted as may be deemed 
appropriate by the officer or employee named and shall indicate a determination of whether 
the requirements following the official's or employee's title have been complied with: 
1. ?Fire chief: The provisions of the fire code and all other applicable regulations and 
requirements of the city and the state relative to fire safety have been complied with. 
2. ?Health officer: All applicable health and sanitary requirements of the city, county and 
state have been complied with. 
3. ?Building official: The building requirements of this Code and of the state have been 
complied with and the zoning and other land use provisions of this Code will permit 
the home occupation at its proposed location. 
(g) ?Civil forfeiture. In addition to all other available penalties and remedies available under applicable 
laws, any marihuana sold or possessed with the intent to sell in violation of this section may be 
seized, forfeited and disposed of by the police agencies serving the city. 
(h) ?Penalty. Any violation of this article shall constitute a municipal civil infraction the penalty for which 
shall not exceed $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. Each day that a violation 
occurs shall be considered a separate offense. The city may in addition seek injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, §§ 1—8, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-4-18) 


Secs. 50-3—50-35. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION 


Sec. 50-36. - Interference with police authority and other city officers or employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any police officer, any member of the police 
department, or any person duly empowered with the police authority or any other city officer or employee 
while in the lawful discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his 
duty. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(25)) 


Sec. 50-37. - False alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise, without any 
good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or fire department or any public or private 
ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(34)) 


Secs. 50-38—50-70. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 


Sec. 50-71. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault, or an assault and battery, on any person. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(1)) 


Sec. 50-72. - Harassment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to insult, accost, molest, or otherwise harass, either by word of 
mouth, sign or motion, any person in any public place by engaging in a course of conduct or repeatedly 
committing acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(12)) 


Sec. 50-73. - Flirting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to flirt, willfully annoy, or make or extend offensive advances or 
invitations by word or act to any person to whom he is unknown, in any public place. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(12)) 


Sec. 50-74. - Jostling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park or 
public building. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(15)) 


Sec. 50-75. - Neglect of family. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person of sufficient ability to refuse or neglect to support his family in need 
of support. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(33)) 


Secs. 50-76—50-105. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 


Sec. 50-106. - Interference with or destruction of public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface 
any property not his own, public or private; or to mark or post handbills on or in any manner mar the walls 
of any public building, tree or pole within the city; or to take or meddle with any property not his own, 
public or private, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, 
without proper authority; or to disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any water meter without proper 
authority. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(11)) 


Sec. 50-107. - Spitting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk or on the floor or seat of any public carrier, 
or on any floor, wall, seat or equipment of any place of public assemblage. 
(Code 1983, § 46.42) 


Sec. 50-108. - Loitering upon public parking lots of businesses or industries. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person either individually or in pairs or in groups to go upon and loiter 
upon or remain upon any public parking lot during close of business hours for any purpose other than the 
parking and leaving an automobile, or during close of business hours to go upon and loiter and remain 
upon vacant portions, including driveways and the parking areas, of any privately owned business or 
industrial establishment, without the consent of the owners, and for any purpose not connected with 
attending to business in the establishment on such premises. 
(Code 1983, § 9.94) 


Sec. 50-109. - Trespassing on parking lots or vacant land. 
(a) ?It shall be a trespass and unlawful for any person, during close of business hours, to go upon and 
loiter and remain upon vacant portions, including driveways and parking areas, of any privately 
owned business, commercial or industrial establishments within the city, for any purpose not 
connected with attending to business in the establishment on such premises. 
(b) ?Vacant portions shall include doorways, entranceways and indented or bay areas of any storefront. 
(Code 1983, §§ 9.95, 9.96) 


Sec. 50-110. - Trespassing on or in buildings; notice to be posted. 
(a) ?It shall be a trespass and unlawful for any person, during close of business hours, to loiter and 
remain upon or against any business, commercial or industrial building within the city, including 
standing or sitting in doorways or doorsteps, sitting or leaning against windows or doors of buildings, 
or other projecting parts of buildings, or leaning against windows or doors of buildings, for any 
purpose not connected with attending to business within such building. 
(b) ?Any owner may post a notice in or on a business, commercial or industrial building visible from 
outside of the building stating the business hours of establishment and that such notice is posted 
pursuant to this article. Any acts prohibited by this article committed not within the posted business 
hours shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, §§ 9.97, 9.98) 


Secs. 50-111—50-140. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 


Sec. 50-141. - Public intoxication. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in a public place and either endangering directly 
the safety of another person or of property or acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in any public place with his ability to walk, talk or 
see significantly impaired by the use of any controlled substance; provided, however, that this 
subsection shall not be construed to apply to a person whose faculties have been impaired by 
medication prescribed by a physician and taken as directed. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(2)) 


Sec. 50-142. - Public profanity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to utter vile, profane or obscene language in any public place. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(8)) 


Sec. 50-143. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar 
conduct. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance or contention in any public 
place. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage or abet the 
collection of persons in crowds for illegal or mischievous purposes in any public place. 
(e) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any school, meeting or congregation lawfully 
assembled, whether religious, political or otherwise. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(13), (23), (35)) 


Sec. 50-144. - Loitering so as to obstruct public passage. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place after having been told to move on by a 
police officer, or to conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted 
passage of the public. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to play any ball game in any public street or sidewalk or otherwise 
obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups thereon, for any purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(14), (16), (17)) 


Sec. 50-145. - Responsibility for disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a 
resort of noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(24)) 


Sec. 50-146. - Prowling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl about any alley or private premises of any other person in 
the nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(27)) 


Secs. 50-147—50-180. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-08, adopted December 2, 2013, amended the Code by repealing 
former § 50-147 in its entirety. Former § 50-147 pertained to begging, and derived from the 
Code of 1983, § 9.92(7). 


ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 


Sec. 50-181. - Fireworks. 
(a) ?Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the City of Vassar Sec. 2012 Fireworks 
ordinance. 
(b) ?Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(1) ?APA standard 87-1 means 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for construction and approval for 
transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American 
Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland. 
(2) ?Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by 
combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and 
labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission 
under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 
3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
(3) ?Fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun or a flare, 
designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or 
detonation. 
(4) ?Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined 
under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.111 to 3.118, and 3.5. 
(5) ?Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
(6) ?National holiday means the following legal public holidays: 
a. ?New Years' Day, January 1. 
b. ?Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January. 
c. ?Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February. 
d. ?Memorial Day, the last Monday in May. 
e. ?Independence Day, July 4. 
f. ?Labor Day, the first Monday in September. 
g. ?Columbus Day, the second Monday in October. 
h. ?Veteran's Day, November 11. 
i. ?Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November. 
j. ?Christmas Day, December 25. 
(c) ?Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use 
consumer fireworks, except on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday no 
later than 1:00 a.m. and no earlier than 8:00 a.m. 
(d) ?Possession of consumer fireworks by minor. A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(e) ?Determination of violation; seizure. If a police officer determines that a violation of this section has 
occurred, the officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
(f) ?Penalty. 
(1) ?A violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00, plus the 
costs of prosecution. 
(2) ?Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this section, the city may 
dispose of or destroy any consumer fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution. 
(3) ?In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found responsible for a violation of this section 
shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying 
consumer fireworks that were confiscated for a violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(5); Ord. No. 2012-02, §§ 1, 3—7, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2012-86, §§ 1, 3—7, 9-4-
12; Ord. No. 2013-04, 9-3-13) 


Sec. 50-182. - Discharging certain weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, shotgun, rifle, revolver or any other 
firearm or airgun, bow and arrow, slingshot or any other missile-propelling implement within the limits of 
the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9.131) 


Sec. 50-183. - Hunting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt game with firearms or in any other manner within the limits 
of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9.132) 


Sec. 50-184. - Possession of weapons. 
(a) ?Prohibited weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a loaded rifle, 
shotgun or pellet gun, airgun or bow and arrow within the limits of the city, in any public place. 
(b) ?Exceptions. Section 50-182 and subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any peace officer in 
the performance of his duties as such peace officer. 
(Code 1983, § 9.133) 


Sec. 50-185. - Throwing objects from or at moving vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from or at any 
moving motor vehicle or at any person without that person's consent. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(31), (32)) 


Secs. 50-186—50-215. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 


Sec. 50-216. - Indecent or obscene conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(4)) 


Sec. 50-217. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any intentional open or indecent exposure of his person 
or of the person of another. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(10)) 


Sec. 50-218. - Prostitution. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution. 
(b) ?A person commits the offense of prostitution if he engages in, or agrees to engage in, sexual 
conduct with another in return for a fee. 
(c) ?Sexual conduct for purposes of this section shall be defined as any intentional touching by a person 
of another's breasts, buttocks or genital area for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(18)) 


Sec. 50-219. - Soliciting and accosting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place, or in or from 
any building or vehicle, by word, gesture or any other means, to commit prostitution or to do any other 
lewd or immoral act. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(20)) 


Sec. 50-220. - Loitering in place of unlawful occupation or business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or knowingly loiter, attend, frequent or be an occupant 
of any place where any unlawful occupation or business is being conducted, or to loiter in a house of ill 
fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(19)) 


Sec. 50-221. - Gambling. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, to directly or indirectly keep or occupy 
or assist in keeping or occupying any common gambling house or any building or place where 
gaming is permitted or suffered or to suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled 
by him any apparatus used for gaming or gambling or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling 
in any place within the city. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to, for hire, gain or reward, keep or maintain a gaming room, or a 
gaming table, or any game of skill or chance, or partly of skill and partly of chance, used for gaming, 
or to knowingly suffer a gaming room, or any such game to be kept, maintained or played on any 
premises occupied or controlled by him. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(22)) 


Sec. 50-222. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to look into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other 
residence in the city in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable 
expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(6)) 


Sec. 50-223. - Fortunetelling. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to pretend for money or gain to predict future events by cards, 
tokens, trances, the inspection of the hands or the conformation of the skull of any person, so-called 
mindreading, or by consulting the movements of the heavenly bodies. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to pretend for money or gain to tell fortunes or foretell future 
events by other means than those mentioned in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to pretend by or through means of palmistry, phrenology, 
clairvoyance, astrology or fortunetelling by cards or other devices for money or gain, to enable 
anyone to get or recover lost or stolen property, or to give success in business, enterprise, 
speculation or games of chance, or to make a person dispose of property, business or valuable 
things in favor of another. 
(Code 1983, § 9.92(9)) 


Secs. 50-224—50-255. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 50-256. - Minors under 12. 
    No minor under the age of 12 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, 
highway, alley, park, school or other public place normally open to the public including, but not limited to, 
shopping centers, places of amusement, private recreation areas or similar places, between the hours of 
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or some adult 
delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(Code 1983, § 9.151) 


Sec. 50-257. - Minors under 16. 
    No minor under the age of 16 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, 
highway, alley, park, school, or other public place normally open to the public including, but not limited to, 
shopping centers, places of amusement, private recreation areas or similar places, between the hours of 
10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or an adult 
delegated by the parent or guardian, to accompany the minor, or where the minor is upon an errand or 
other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
(Code 1983, § 9.152) 


Sec. 50-258. - Aiding or allowing violations. 
    Any parent, legal guardian or other person having the care or custody of any minor child who shall 
assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage the minor to violate the provisions of sections 50-256 or 50-
257, either by overt act, by failing to act or by lack of supervision and control over the minor, is guilty of a 
violation of this Code. The fact that a child under 12 years or under 16 years is apprehended while on the 
public street, highway, alley, park, school or other public place or other place normally open to the public 
during the hours defined in section 50-256 or 50-257 shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this 
section on the part of the parents, legal guardian or other person having the care and custody of the 
minor child. 
(Code 1983, § 9.153) 


Secs. 50-259—50-280. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - VIEWING OF ADULT MATERIALS 


Sec. 50-281. - Purpose of division. 
    This division represents an effort to control the displaying or exhibiting of adult orientated materials 
from locations where the materials may be viewed by minors. 
(Ord. No. 100, art. 6, 6-13-94) 


Sec. 50-282. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Establishment means any person as owner, agent, manager, employee or otherwise, who shall 
operate, conduct, maintain or otherwise be engaged in the carrying out of any trade, business, 
profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege for which any license is required under article II 
of chapter 14 of this Code. 
    Minor means persons under the age of 18 years. 
    Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1) ?Human genitalia and pubic region; 
(2) ?Buttock, anus; 
(3) ?Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(4) ?Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1) ?Human genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2) ?Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and 
(3) ?Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock, anus or female 
breast. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 6-13-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 50-283. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any establishment having as a part of its stock in trade for sale, barter or 
rental, books, magazines, other periodicals, films, posters, videotapes or other materials or means for the 
recording or reproduction of a visual display on a video screen or other display device which are 
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified 
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, to display or exhibit such materials from a location where 
the materials may be viewed by minors. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 6-13-94) 


Sec. 50-284. - Display or exhibition of prohibited materials declared nuisance and violation of Code. 
    The display or exhibition of materials as defined in section 50-283 is hereby declared to be a 
nuisance and is hereby declared to be punishable as a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 3, 6-13-94) 


Secs. 50-285—50-305. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 


Sec. 50-306. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to: 
(1) ?The consumption, use or possession of alcoholic beverages by a minor in the presence of his 
parent or legal guardian or a person placed in the position of a parent by such parent or legal 
guardian; his grandparent; or his aunt or uncle who is not a minor. 
(2) ?The consumption, use or possession of a drug by a minor pursuant to a lawful prescription of 
such drug. 
(3) ?Religious observances, educational activities and medical treatment. 
(4) ?The possession of alcoholic beverages or lawfully prescribed drugs by a minor during the 
course of an errand for a person described in subsection (1) of this section, or such possession 
as may be incidental to the lawful employment of such minor. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 1(9.211), 6-23-86) 


Sec. 50-307. - Consumption or use by permission. 
    A person who has the ownership, possession or control of any premises in the city and who 
knowingly permits the consumption or use of alcoholic beverages or drugs in any form by any minor on 
such premises is guilty of a misdemeanor. In an action for violation of this section, proof that the 
defendant demanded and was shown, before permitting such minor to consume such alcoholic 
beverages, a motor vehicle operator's license, or other bona fide documentary evidence demonstrating 
that such person is not a minor, shall be a defense to an action under this section. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 1(9.212), 6-23-86) 


Sec. 50-308. - Storage or display; misdemeanor. 
    A person who has the ownership, possession or control of any premises in the city and who stores or 
displays alcoholic beverages or drugs on such premises and who knowingly permits a minor to obtain 
possession of such alcoholic beverages or drugs for the purpose of consuming or using the same shall be 
guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 1(9.213), 6-23-86) 


Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 6; environment, ch. 38; offenses and 
miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 54-1. - Application of chapter. 
    This chapter shall apply to all public parks owned by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3.1; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-2. - Vandalism. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace 
or remove any building, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving, signs, notices, boundary 
markers, any facilities or park property or any structures or improvements in a public park. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or to remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, 
or to cut timber or other wood or make any excavations in any park. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful to damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, 
pick the flowers or any tree or plant, or dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas in a public park. 
(Code 1983, § 3.2; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-3. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful to bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, papers, 
boxes, cans, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash in any park or recreation area, except in 
receptacles provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 3.3; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-4. - Exceptions. 
    The restrictions of this chapter shall not apply to the city, or its agents or employees in the course of 
maintenance or construction of improvements in any park. 
(Code 1983, § 3.4; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-5. - Hours. 
    All parks shall be open from dawn to dusk (with the exception of Riverside Park Campground), or by 
permission of the city manager and/or city council for organized and supervised events. It shall be 
unlawful for any person to be present in any park during closed hours, except for law enforcement officers 
or employees of the city in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1983, § 3.5; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-6. - Vassar Memorial Park Race Track. 
(a) ?Vassar Memorial Park is the following described parcel of land in the city: Commencing at the 
northwest corner of the northeast one-quarter of section 7, running thence south 40 rods, thence 
east 80 rods, thence north 40 rods, thence west to the place of beginning and in T11N R8E, 
containing 20 acres of land. Also that piece of land described as follows: Commencing at the 
northeast corner of the above-described land, thence running east ten rods, thence south to within 
four rods of the line of highway, thence on a line at right angles to the highway, thence southerly on 
the line of the highway to a point directly south of the east line of the first described lands above, 
thence north to the place of beginning, containing about three acres of land. 
(b) ?No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the racetrack at Vassar Memorial Park without 
permission granted by city council. 
(c) ?This section shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles on the racetrack for the purpose of 
maintenance under the direction of the city manager or under the direction of other persons 
authorized by the city to maintain Vassar Memorial Park. 
(d) ?This section shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles on the racetrack in connection with 
authorized public activities. 
(Code 1983, § 3.6; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-7. - Hillside Park. 
    Hillside Park shall not be leased, sold or utilized in any way other than as a place for public activities 
of a nonprofit nature. This section is binding on all city officers that have any authority over the utilization 
of Hillside Park whatsoever. 
(Code 1983, § 3.7; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-8. - Rules of conduct. 
(a) ?Alcoholic beverages are not allowed in any parks in the city. Exceptions may be made for adult 
tournaments. If exceptions are made, alcohol cannot be consumed while in team uniform. 
Consequence of action: Participant will be asked to leave the ballpark and banned from any further 
participation in the tournament. If not involved in a tournament, in other words, during "regular 
season" play, a participant consuming alcohol or is determined to be "under the influence," the 
participant will be asked to leave and a two-game suspension will be imposed. Additional exceptions 
may be granted by city council on an individual request basis for organized events. 
(b) ?No smoking policy. 
(1) ?Definitions are as follows: 
a. ?Smoking or smoke means carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other 
lighted smoking device. 
b. ?Tobacco product means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed, sucked or placed 
in a person's mouth. 
(2) ?Unlawful acts will include the following: 
a. ?Smoking is not allowed in any parks or recreational areas including all playgrounds, 
recreational programs, and athletic events. For the purpose of delineating the areas where 
prohibition is in effect, signs shall be posted stating where smoking and the use of tobacco 
is prohibited. 
(3) ?A person who violated or fails to comply with the nonsmoking or use of tobacco products 
sections of this article shall be subject to any one or more of the following: 
a. ?Being asked to stop smoking or using the tobacco product; 
b. ?Being asked to leave the premises; 
c. ?Being responsible for a class 1 municipal infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in 
this section of this policy and any other relief that may be imposed by the court. Each act of 
violation and each day upon which such violations occurs shall constitute a separate 
violation. 
(c) ?Physical attacks, verbal or physical abuse or taunting will not be tolerated. If this occurs, the 
offending individual(s) (be the coaches, managers, players or spectators will be the suspended for a 
minimum of two games. If it is determined to be of a severe nature by the league personnel, the 
parks and recreation commission or the ballpark supervisor, a longer suspension may be imposed. If 
this suspension cannot be served because it is the end of the season, it will carry over to the next 
season the person is involved. 
(d) ?Verbal abuse of other participants, team members, coaches or officials must be restrained. If, in the 
opinion of league personnel, the parks and recreation commission or the ballpark supervisor, this 
abuse is taking place and not being restrained, a suspension may be imposed. Again, league 
personnel, officials, coaches, managers and the ballpark supervisor must watch this and enforce it 
with great care and sincerity. 
(Amd. of 2-26-98; Ord. of 11-3-03(2); Amd. of 8-1-05) 


Sec. 54-9. - Loitering. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place after park hours or after having been 
told to move on by a police officer or representative from the city, or to conduct himself in any public 
place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to play any ball game in any public street or sidewalk or to 
assemble or otherwise obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups thereon, for 
any purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Secs. 54-10—54-40. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 


Sec. 54-41. - Continued; membership. 
    The city parks and recreation commission is continued. The city parks and recreation commission 
shall consist of seven members who are electors of the city and one representative from Tuscola and 
Vassar Township for a total of nine members. There may also be two alternate members named from 
either the city or either township. Alternate members are encouraged to attend all meetings, but will only 
have voting rights in meetings which a regular voting member is not present. A majority of the board 
present may not be non-city residents for the purposes of voting. Each member must receive his 
appointment by the city council. The present members of the parks and recreation commission shall 
continue to serve for the respective terms to which they were appointed. Thereafter, two members shall 
be appointed each year, one to serve for a three-year term and one to serve for a two-year term. In the 
event of a vacancy on the parks and recreation commission, the council shall make an appointment to 
such vacancy within 30 days for the balance of the term in which the vacancy exists. Members of the 
parks and recreation commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1983, § 3.21; Ord. of 11-3-03(2); Ord. No. 2011-02, 4-11-11) 


Sec. 54-42. - Organization; meetings. 
    At its first meeting in July after regular appointments to the parks and recreation commission are 
made, the parks and recreation commission shall elect one of its members chairman and one of its 
members secretary. At such time as the city shall employ a parks and recreation director, such director 
shall be the advisor to the parks and recreation commission, but without the right to vote upon any 
decision of the parks and recreation commission. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a permanent 
record of all proceedings and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the parks and recreation 
commission and to provide a copy of all minutes to the city clerk. A majority of the members of the parks 
and recreation commission shall constitute a quorum. The parks and recreation commission may adopt its 
own rules of order, including rules for the removal of its members. 
(Code 1983, § 3.22; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-43. - Advisory function. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall be advisory to the city manager, and shall be charged 
and entrusted with making recommendations for the planning for, construction, management, supervision 
and control of all parks and recreation facilities which are or shall be owned and operated by the city, and 
of all recreation programs operated by the city or participated in by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3.23; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-44. - Program planning. 
    The parks and recreation commission, in planning recreation programs for the city, shall cooperate 
with and coordinate as far as possible its programs with other recreation programs within the city or 
adjoining areas, and shall make studies and recommendations for creating new recreation programs or 
consolidating or coordinating existing recreation programs. To this end the parks and recreation 
commission shall be the city's representative in meeting with representatives of other agencies or 
recreation programs. Each organization should be extended cordial invitations to attend the recreation 
meetings. 
(Code 1983, § 3.24; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-45. - Budget. 
    Prior to the submission by the city manager of his proposed budget to the council in each year, the 
parks and recreation commission shall submit to the city manager careful estimates in detail of the 
amount of money which, according to the judgment of the parks and recreation commission, will be 
needed for parks and recreation facilities and programs during the ensuing year. The city manager shall 
include in his proposed budget such estimates to the extent as in his judgment may seem justifiable, but 
the city manager shall forward to the council the parks and recreation commission's recommendations as 
originally proposed. 
(Code 1983, § 3.25; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-46. - Director. 
(a) ?The parks and recreation commission shall make recommendations to the city manager for the 
hiring of a parks and recreation director, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, and may take 
applications and hold interviews for the purpose of making recommendations for the hiring of a 
director, but the director shall be hired by the city manager and shall be an employee of the city 
responsible solely to the city manager. It is hoped that the parks and recreation commission would 
work with the superintendent of the city public schools so that this person hired as recreation director 
could also be the same person who is in charge of the community education and recreation program. 
(b) ?The specific duties and responsibilities of the director will be outlined in his job description. 
(Code 1983, § 3.26; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-47. - Reporting to council. 
    The parks and recreation commission should furnish copies of the minutes of its meetings to the 
council, together with reports and studies as it might make concerning current and long range plans for 
the development of parks and recreation programs within the city, and shall meet with the council on 
request for the purpose of discussing, informing, or planning with the council. In performing this function, 
the parks and recreation commission shall make studies and surveys as to existing park facilities and 
their uses, future parks and recreation facilities and their locations, development of long range recreation 
programs, and the financing of the maintenance and improvement of existing parks and recreation 
facilities and acquiring and developing new parks, recreation facilities and recreation programs. 
(Code 1983, § 3.27; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-48. - Meetings. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall meet at least once each month at such times and places 
as it may decide. Special meetings may be called at the discretion of the recreation chairperson. 
(Code 1983, § 3.28; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-49. - Recreation master plan. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall prepare, or have prepared, a parks and recreation 
master use plan. Such plan shall be developed by the commission through utilization of community 
surveys, public hearings, and other methods to receive public input into recreation programs, facilities, 
and planning. This master plan shall then be presented to the city council for adoption and submission to 
the state as necessary and required. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Secs. 54-50—54-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 3, 2003 repealed sections 54-49—54-51 in their entirety and added 
a new section 54-49. Former sections 54-49—54-51 pertained to the Vassar Memorial Park use 
committee, membership and meetings, respectively, and derived from Amd. of Aug. 4, 2003. 


ARTICLE III. - RIVERSIDE PARK 


Sec. 54-81. - Prohibited acts generally; rule 1. 
    A person shall not: 
(1) ?Enter, use or occupy lands or waters when the lands are posted prohibiting such entry, use or 
occupancy. 
(2) ?Destroy, damage or remove city property, trees, shrubs, wildflowers, planted grasses or other 
vegetation without first obtaining proper written permission. This does not apply to the picking 
and removal of mushrooms, berries and edible fruits or nuts. 
(3) ?Enter or remain in the city park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the 
person is a lawfully registered camper. 
(4) ?Peddle or solicit business of any nature; distribute handbills or other advertising matter; post 
signs on any lands, water, structures, or property; or use such areas as a base of commercial 
operations without first obtaining proper written permission. 
(5) ?Use a loudspeaker, public address system or sound-amplifying equipment of any kind without 
proper written permission. Permission shall not be granted if such equipment is capable of 
interfering with the use and enjoyment of the park by others. A person shall not operate any 
motor, motorboat, motor vehicle, radio, television, phonograph, tape recorder or any other 
device in such a manner as to create excessive noise that may disturb or annoy others. This 
subsection does not apply to city sponsored activities, parks and recreation activities or other 
civic events using the pavilion area. 
(6) ?Engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, wanton, profane, obscene or otherwise 
disorderly conduct tending to create a breach of the peace; disturb or annoy others; loiter, sit, or 
lie upon walks, passages, steps or roads thereby obstructing the free passage of others; 
remove or damage the property of another. 
(7) ?Build fires except in designated firepits or in stoves or grills that are approved by the park 
manager or his representative. All fires must be extinguished completely (not left smoldering) by 
12:00 a.m. 
(8) ?Dump, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, placing, throwing or leaving of 
litter in the park, or waters, except in containers provided; deposit refuse or waste material that 
has originated outside the park in receptacles or dumpsters provided for park uses; set fire to 
the contents of a refuse or trash container; or place or burn garbage in a fire ring or stove. 
(9) ?Store or leave a boat, trailer, camper or other property in the park without first obtaining proper 
written permission. 
(10) ?Possess a glass container within any land or water that is designated as a bathing beach or a 
land or water area that is regularly used for sunbathing, swimming or wading. 
(Ord. No. 98, Rule 1, 4-13-92; Amd. of 7-20-98; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-82. - Camping; prohibited acts; rule 2. 
    With respect to camping in the city park, the following provisions apply: 
(1) ?A person shall not camp without a camping permit issued by an authorized representative of 
the city. A person may camp in a designated campground or campsite only when the 
established fee is paid. 
(2) ?Not more than one camping unit may occupy each campsite. This would be a tow vehicle and a 
trailer or a private vehicle; however, a screen type shelter, in addition to an RV, may also be 
utilized on a campsite. Primitive tent camping may be permitted. 
(3) ?A person shall not remain on any one lot in excess of 14 days except for designated areas. 
(4) ?A noncamper shall not visit campers between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. City 
maintenance and enforcement vehicles are exempt from this subsection. It shall be the 
responsibility of the registered camper to report anyone refusing to leave their campsite after 
11:00 p.m. or anyone entering onto the campsite prior to 7:00 a.m. 
(5) ?A person shall not walk into or drive a vehicle into or through the campground area. This 
subsection does not apply to registered campers and their vehicles or to persons legitimately 
visiting a specific registered camper. 
(6) ?A registered camper party shall not leave a campsite continuously unoccupied during the first 
24 hours of the permit period without prior notification to the police department or city staff for 
purposes of flood evacuation and movement. 
(7) ?A person shall not use the campground for a permanent residence or as a base of operation of 
a business. 
(8) ?No more than eight persons shall camp on one campsite. Persons must be at least 18 years 
old to register or occupy a campsite, unless such persons are part of a chaperoned ground, i.e., 
scouts, cyclists, church and athletic teams. 
(9) ?Self-contained vehicle waste storage tanks, when parked on a site, must have the outlet 
plugged except when connected to a designated sewer outlet. All sewer and gray water must be 
emptied into sanitary sewer outlet or dumping station facilities. Violation of this rule will mean 
immediate eviction. 
(Ord. No. 98, Rule 2, 4-13-92; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-83. - Motor vehicles; rule 3. 
(a) ?Motor vehicles may not enter the park unless a city park motor vehicle permit has been obtained 
and affixed to the vehicle windshield. 
(b) ?No one shall operate or park a motor vehicle except on designated roads or designated parking 
areas; operate a motor vehicle on a park road or parking lot at a speed in excess of ten miles per 
hour, in an unsafe manner, at a speed greater than that posted, or disobey traffic, or parking signs. 
When a motor vehicle is found parked in the city park, the registration plate displayed on the motor 
vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the vehicle is the person who parked it 
there. 
(c) ?No one shall operate a motor-driven vehicle or any motorized device except on roads and parking 
lots constructed for the operation of licensed vehicles. 
(d) ?No one shall operate an unlicensed vehicle on a park road or parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 98, Rule 3, 4-13-92; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-84. - Animals; prohibited acts; rule 4. 
    A person shall not: 
(1) ?Possess a dog or other animal unless it is under immediate control on a leash not exceeding 
six feet in length. 
(2) ?Allow a dog or other animal within a water or land area designated as a bathing beach; bring a 
dog, except leader dogs for the blind, or other animals into an enclosed park building or leave a 
dog or other animal unattended at any time; permit a dog or other animal to run loose or create 
a disturbance; or to fail to properly control a dog or other animal. Any dog found not in the 
possession of, or under the immediate control of, its owner, or the owner's agent, or any dog 
creating a nuisance or disturbance, may be removed from the park and released to animal 
control. 
(Ord. No. 98, Rule 4, 4-13-92; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-85. - Firearms and hunting; prohibited acts; rule 5. 
    A person shall not: 
(1) ?Carry or have in possession a firearm or bow and arrow. This does not apply to registered 
campers who are legally transporting firearms or a bow and arrow. 
(2) ?Hunt, trap, kill, wound, capture or intentionally disturb any bird, animal or other wildlife. 
(3) ?Discharge any device that propels a projectile by gas, air, spring or rubber. 
(Ord. No. 98, Rule 5, 4-13-92; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Sec. 54-86. - Definitions; rule 6. 
    As used in this article: 
    Camping unit means a tow vehicle and a trailer or a private vehicle. 
    Proper written permission means a written permit issued by the park manager, his authorized 
representatives or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 98, Rule 6, 4-13-92; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 54-87. - Penalty for violation of article; rule 7. 
(a) ?Violation of any park rule may result in revocation of a camping permit or eviction from the park, or 
both. Violation of any park rule may also result in a criminal complaint being initiated. 
(b) ?Violation of any rule or failure to perform any act set forth in the rules set forth in this article is 
punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 and costs of prosecution, additional fines or fees as 
may be assessed by the district court, or by the imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 98, Rule 7, 4-13-92; Ord. of 11-3-03(2)) 


Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 14; environment, ch. 38; offenses and 
miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.241, 123.361 et 
seq., MSA 5.2661, 5.2726(1) et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 299.401 et seq., MSA 13.29(1) 
et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 299.501 et seq., MSA 13.30(1) et seq.; waste 
minimization act, MCL 299.731 et seq., MSA 13.30(131) et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 
299.751 et seq., MSA 14.528(321) et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 299.371 et seq., MSA 13.33(1) 
et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 


Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or a portion of a building, designated for occupancy by one family for 
residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    Family means one or two persons or parents with their direct lineal descendants and adopted 
children and including the domestic employees thereof; together with not more than two persons not so 
related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling unit comprising a single housekeeping unit. 
    Garbage means a putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, 
cooking and consumption of food. 
    Multifamily dwelling is a building or portion thereof consisting of four or more dwelling units. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including 
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Residential dwelling means a building or a portion of a building consisting of not more than three 
dwelling units. 
    Rubbish means all nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible 
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, 
crockery and similar materials. 
(Code 1983, § 2.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 58-32. - Collection by city. 
(a) ?All refuse accumulated by families in residential dwellings in the city shall be collected, conveyed 
and disposed of by the city or contract hauler under contract with the city. 
(b) ?All refuse accumulated by commercial establishments, including hotels, multifamily dwellings, 
restaurants and stores, which are located within blocks 9 and 11 of the assessor's plat of the city, 
shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or contract hauler under contract to the city. 
(c) ?Except as provided in this article, no other person shall collect or convey refuse over any of the 
streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city. 
(d) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any reference in this article to refuse collection by 
the city shall be deemed to refer only to those collections specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this 
section. 
(Ord. No. 14D, § 1, 6-23-86) 


Sec. 58-33. - Exception for actual producers other than residences. 
    This article shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which 
refuse has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse, provided 
such producers or owners comply with the provisions of this article and with any other governing law or 
ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 2.4) 


Sec. 58-34. - Exceptions for certain collectors. 
(a) ?This article shall not prohibit collectors of refuse from outside of the city from hauling such refuse 
over city streets, provided such collectors comply with the provisions of this article and with any other 
governing laws or ordinances. 
(b) ?This article shall not prohibit the collection or conveying of refuse by persons other than the city or 
contract haulers under contract with the city over the streets or alleys of the city, provided that: 
(1) ?Such refuse is accumulated by persons and establishments, commercial or industrial, not 
otherwise specified in section 58-32(a) and (b); and 
(2) ?The person collecting such refuse shall comply with the provisions of this article, including 
section 58-40, and with any other governing law or ordinances, and shall be subject to the 
regulatory authority vested in the city manager by this article, including that granted by section 
58-35(a). 
(Ord. No. 14D, § 2, 6-23-86) 


Sec. 58-35. - Collection supervision. 
(a) ?Supervision by city manager. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and 
disposed of by the city under the supervision of the city manager. The city manager shall have the 
authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers 
and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as he shall find 
necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such 
regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a regulation of or a fee charged by the city manager shall have 
the right of appeal to the council which shall confirm, modify or revoke any such regulations or fee; 
provided, however, that such right of appeal must be exercised within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1983, § 2.6) 


Sec. 58-36. - Precollection practices. 
(a) ?Preparation of refuse. Refuse shall be prepared as follows: 
(1) ?Garbage. All garbage before being placed in refuse containers for collection shall have drained 
from it all free liquids and shall be wrapped in paper. 
(2) ?Rubbish. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(3) ?Trimmings and clippings. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to a 
length of four feet and securely tied in bundles not more than two feet thick before being 
deposited for collection. 
(4) ?Leaves and yard clippings. It shall be unlawful to cast, place, sweep, rake, scatter or otherwise 
deposit leaves and yard clippings onto the sidewalk, curb and gutter, street or any other city 
right-of-way. Such leaves and yard clippings may be placed in proper locations for collection if 
placed in proper refuse containers. 
(b) ?Refuse containers. Refuse containers shall meet the following requirements and standards: 
(1) ?Duty to provide and maintain in sanitary condition. Refuse containers for commercial 
establishments specified in section 58-32(b) shall be provided by the city or by a contract hauler 
under contract with the city. All other refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, 
lessee or occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be maintained in good condition. 
Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this article or that may have ragged or 
sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the persons collecting the contents 
thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice. The city manager shall have the authority to 
refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith. 
(2) ?Materials. Containers shall be made of metal or plastic, equipped with suitable handles and 
tightfitting covers, and shall be watertight. Disposable waterproof bags may also be used. 
(3) ?Capacity. Containers for refuse accumulated by residential dwellings shall have a capacity of 
not more than 20 gallons and shall be of a kind suitable for collection purposes, and shall be of 
such weight that they can be handled by one man. All other refuse containers shall be of a type 
approved by the city manager. 
(4) ?Sanitation. Refuse containers shall be of a type approved by the city manager and shall be 
kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c) ?Storing of refuse. Refuse shall be stored according to the following provisions: 
(1) ?Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or 
upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the city, unless it is in 
proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the city manager. Nor 
shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
(2) ?Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is 
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(3) ?Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any 
refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, 
sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or onto any occupied premises within the 
city. 
(4) ?Use of dumpsters belonging to others. It shall be unlawful to place or in any way deposit any 
refuse, rubbish or garbage in a dumpster belonging to, in the possession of, or designated for 
the use of another person. 
(d) ?Points of collection. Refuse containers in residential areas (for use by residential dwellings) shall be 
placed for collection at the curbside in front of the property not earlier than 8:00 p.m. on the day 
preceding the day of collection, and for commercial establishments, including residential dwellings 
located in commercial buildings, at such locations as are designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 14D, § 3, 6-23-86) 


Sec. 58-37. - Collection practices. 
(a) ?Frequency of collection. Refuse shall be collected according to the following schedules: 
(1) ?Residential. Refuse accumulated by residential dwellings shall be collected at least once each 
week. 
(2) ?Commercial. The refuse of hotels, multifamily dwellings, restaurants and such other 
businesses, institutions and industries shall be collected at least once a week and if deemed 
necessary they may enter into an agreement for greater frequency of collection. Where 
necessary to protect the public health, the city manager shall have the authority to require that 
more frequent collection is made. 
(b) ?Limitation of quantity. Limits on the quantity of refuse deposited for collection are as follows: 
(1) ?Residential. A reasonable accumulation of refuse of each residential dwelling shall be collected 
during a collection period for the standard charge. 
(2) ?Commercial. A reasonable accumulation of refuse from hotels, multifamily dwellings, 
restaurants and other businesses, institutions and industries shall be collected during the 
collection period at a fair charge based upon the average weight or volume. The city manager 
shall have the authority to refuse to collect unreasonable amounts or to make an additional 
charge for such amounts. If the city enters into a contract with a contract hauler for the 
collection of refuse from such commercial establishment then the fair charge shall be deemed to 
be the fee provided for pursuant to such contract. 
(Code 1983, § 2.8) 


Sec. 58-38. - Special refuse problems. 
(a) ?Contagious disease refuse. The removal of wearing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other 
places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under the 
supervision and direction of the city. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular 
collections. 
(b) ?Inflammable or explosive refuse. Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in 
containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the city manager at the 
expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 2.9) 


Sec. 58-39. - Trash not to be collected. 
    The following items shall not be picked up as trash, either by the city or by a contract hauler: 
(1) ?Any trash not placed in appropriate containers. 
(2) ?Materials resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of buildings, such as 
stones, bricks, plaster, lumber, shingles, concrete, sand, gravel, excavated earth and surplus 
earth from grading, except one bushel basket full of any such items produced by the work of the 
resident upon the premises which will be picked up at one collection period. Ashes which 
contain hot cinders or smoldering embers will not be collected. Junked automobile parts 
including engines, transmissions, seats, doors and fenders will not be picked up and collected. 
Dead animals and animal waste will not be picked up. 
(3) ?Yard clippings (except yard clippings that are diseased or infested), medical waste, hazardous 
waste and any other materials, liquid or solid, which may not be disposed of at or accepted by a 
landfill under the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act No. 451 of 
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994 (MCL 324.101 et seq., MSA 13A.101 et seq.), as amended 
from time to time, except in compliance with such Act. 
(Code 1983, § 2.10) 


Sec. 58-40. - Collection by actual producers other than residential and contract haulers. 
(a) ?Requirements for vehicles. The actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which 
refuse is accumulated who desire personally to collect and dispose of such refuse, persons who 
desire to dispose of waste material not included in the definition of refuse and collectors of refuse 
from outside the city who desire to haul over the streets of the city shall use a watertight vehicle, 
provided with a tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and 
refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. 
(b) ?Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under this section shall be made outside the 
city limits. 
(c) ?Rules and regulations. The city manager shall have the authority to make such other regulations 
concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over city streets by 
either local or outside collectors as he shall find necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth 
in section 58-35 and provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 2.11) 


Sec. 58-41. - Refuse is property of city. 
    Ownership of refuse material set out for collection shall be vested in the city. Scavenging and junk 
picking of refuse materials placed for collection at the curbside is hereby expressly prohibited, and any 
person found guilty of such act shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in section 1-17. 
(Code 1983, § 2.12) 


Sec. 58-42. - Fees. 
(a) ?Amount of service charge. The service charge for the collection and disposal of refuse placed for 
collection shall be set each fiscal year by the council and cover the cost to the city for the operation 
of the system charged to the individual premises benefited. The charge to be set by the council shall 
be the same for each residential dwelling. The charge to be set by the council for all other 
commercial users and multifamily dwellings shall be in proportion to the average annual weight or 
volume of garbage and refuse produced by the commercial user or multifamily dwelling; provided, 
however, that if the city enters into a refuse removal contract with a contract hauler the commercial 
users and multifamily dwellings shall pay a fee not less than the fee provided for in such contract. 
The user shall be notified of the rate set and may appeal the rate to the city council within 30 days 
thereafter. 
(b) ?Consideration regarding fees. The fees for collection and disposal of refuse shall be set each fiscal 
year and shall cover the cost to the city for operation of the system. Such portion thereof as may be 
deemed sufficient may be set aside as a sinking fund for the development of the system. A 
commercial building which also may be classified as a residential dwelling because of one or more 
apartments (not exceeding three dwelling units) may petition the city manager for a refund of the 
"residential dwelling basic fee," provided satisfactory evidence is produced showing that the refuse is 
being collected and the user is paying an adequate fee to cover such collection. 
(c) ?Billing procedure. The rates established may be certified to the tax assessor and assessed against 
the premises served and collected and returned in the same manner as other city taxes are certified, 
assessed, collected and returned. 
(d) ?Delinquent accounts. The stoppage of service for nonpayment of refuse service charges shall be in 
addition to the right of the city to proceed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 2.13) 


Sec. 58-43. - On-site burning. 
(a) ?Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the open burning ordinance. 
(b) ?Permits for open burning. 
(1) ?Fires for outdoor cooking, fires purposely set for the actual instruction and training of firefighting 
personnel may be allowed at any time without a permit. 
(2) ?Burning permits are required to conduct all open burning, excluding cooking fires contained 
within a barbecue pit, fireplace, grill, or other receptacle specifically designed for cooking food 
over an open fire. Permits may be obtained during normal business hours at city hall or other 
public locations as designated by the fire chief. Permits shall be issued for a time period as 
determined by the fire chief or his designee and noted on the permit itself. 
(3) ?Applications for permits may be denied, or permits may be issued with conditions, canceled or 
revoked, based upon a determination by the fire chief or his/her designee that the requested 
open burning may endanger persons or property. Denial, revocation, restrictions or conditions 
may be placed at any time when situations merit such action. 
(4) ?Bonfires. No person or organization shall burn a bonfire without first obtaining a permit from the 
fire chief or his/her designee. Permits for bonfires must be obtained one week prior to the date 
the burning is to commence to allow for inspection of the burn location. Permits for bonfires will 
only be issued for a celebration of a particular holiday or civic event. Fuel to be burned shall be 
designated in any permit issued. Bonfires will be permitted into the dusk hours, however, such 
fires must be extinguished completely (not left smoldering) by 12:00 a.m. 
(5) ?Campfires. Campfires, those fires whose flames are not greater than thirty-six (36) inches high, 
are not creating a public nuisance, and are contained within a fire pit/ring or any other 
containment device specifically designed to prevent the escape of fire, will be allowed without 
first obtaining a permit. Campfires will be permitted into dusk hours, however, such fires must 
be extinguished completely (not left smoldering) by 12:00 a.m. 
(6) ?Residential outdoor burning pits. Outdoor burning pits shall be allowed after the application, 
inspection and issuance of a permit by the fire chief or his designee. These permits shall be 
issued on an annual basis. Pits shall be no more than 36 inches wide and at a minimum depth 
of not less than eight inches. Pits shall have a barrier or ring constructed of a material such as 
stone, brick, rock, earth or other suitable nonflammable material to provide protection from wind 
and to contain contents of pit for safety purposes. The fire chief or his designee may revoke 
annual permits in the event of misuse or noncompliance to these regulations. 
(c) ?Material restrictions. Open burning of household rubbish, tires, building materials, and paper 
products is strictly prohibited. 
(d) ?Location of open burning. 
(1) ?Open burning of any unrestricted material shall not be conducted within 25 feet of any structure 
or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause the fire to spread to within 25 feet 
of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition (e.g. working the earth around the fire to 
eliminate any combustible grasses from potentially being ignited; burning in a barrel, etc.) 
(2) ?Recreational fires and cooking fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure of 
combustible material unless contained within a barbecue pit, grill, or any other device 
specifically designed for the cooking of food over an open flame. Conditions which could cause 
a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. (e.g. placing 
stones around the fire to eliminate spread.) 
(e) ?Time and atmospheric conditions. All open-burning shall only be permitted during the daytime 
hours, with the exception of campfires and bonfires, unless specifically permitted by the fire chief or 
his/her designee, and when atmospheric conditions do not cause a fire hazard. The fire chief or 
his/her designee may put a ban on burning if deemed necessary. 
(f) ?Fire extinguishing equipment. A garden hose connected to a water supply or other approved fire-
extinguishing equipment (buckets containing water or sand; shovels; fire extinguishers with a 
minimum 2-A rating) shall be readily available for use at all open burning sites. 
(g) ?Attendance. All open burning shall be constantly attended by a person of at least 18 years of age, 
knowledgeable in the use of the fire extinguishing equipment required by this permit, and familiar 
with the limitations which restrict open burning. Said attendant shall supervise all open burning until 
the fire has been extinguished. 
(h) ?Discontinuance and enforcement. The fire chief, any certified police officer, or any persons as 
designated by the city manager are authorized to require that open burning be immediately 
discontinued if they determine it to constitute a hazardous condition. Enforcement of this section 
shall also be conducted by the people above. 
(i) ?Penalties. The sanction for violation of any part of this section shall be a civil infraction in the amount 
as prescribed below. 
(1) ?The civil fine for a violation of this section shall be no less than $50.00, plus costs and other 
sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2) ?Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or 
provision of this section. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second (or 
any subsequent" municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provisions 
committed by a person within any six-month period, unless some other period is specifically 
provided by this section and its amendments, and for which the person admits responsibility or 
is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this section for a 
particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as 
follows: 
a. ?The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus 
costs. 
b. ?The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense any subsequent repeat offense 
shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(3) ?Each day on which any violation of this section continues constitutes a separate offense and 
shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(4) ?In addition to any remedies available by law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or 
other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 2.14; Ord. No. 98-02, §§ 1—9, 8-3-98; Amd. of 8-1-05) 


Sec. 58-44. - Use of city-owned or city-contracted dumpsters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place any garbage, rubbish or refuse, in any of the city-
owned or city-contracted garbage dumpsters, unless authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 14F, § 1, 8-26-96) 


Sec. 58-45. - Article violations constitute civil infractions. 
    Any violation of this article shall constitute a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 14F, § 1, 8-26-96) 


Chapter 62 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 


Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost, when referring to the cost of any improvement, means the cost of surveys, plans, land, rights-
of-way, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing and construction and all other cost incident to 
the making of such improvement, special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Improvement means any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against 
one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially benefited thereby, in proportion to the benefit to be 
derived therefrom. 
(Code 1983, § 1.111) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 62-2. - Initiation of special assessment projects. 
(a) ?Proceedings for the making of public improvements within the city may be commenced by resolution 
of the council, on its own initiative or by an initiatory petition signed by property owners whose 
aggregate property in the special assessment district was assessed for more than 50 percent of the 
total assessed value of the privately owned real property located therein, in accordance with the last 
proceeding general assessment roll; provided, however, that in the case of special assessments for 
paving or similar improvements which are normally assessed on a frontage basis against abutting 
property, such petitions shall be signed by the owners of more than 50 percent of the frontage of 
property to be assessed. 
(b) ?Such petitions shall contain, in addition to the signatures of the owners, a brief description of the 
property owned by the respective signers thereof. 
(c) ?Such petitions shall be verified by the affidavit of one or more of the owners or by some persons 
with knowledge that the signers are such owners and that such signatures are genuine. 
(d) ?Petitions shall be addressed to the council and filed with the city clerk. Petitions shall in no event be 
mandatory upon the council. 
(e) ?All petitions shall be circulated and signed on blank forms furnished by the city. 
(f) ?All petitions shall be referred by the city clerk to the city manager. The city manager shall check the 
petitions to determine whether they conform to the foregoing requirements and shall report his 
findings to the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 1.112) 


Sec. 62-3. - Survey and report. 
    Before the council shall consider the making of any local or public improvement, the proposed 
improvement shall be referred by resolution to the city manager directing him to prepare a report which 
shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and estimates of cost; an estimate of the life of the 
improvement; a description of the assessment districts and such other pertinent information as will permit 
the council to decide the cost, extent, and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or 
proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefited; and 
what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The council shall not determine to proceed with the 
making of any local or special improvement until such report of the city manager has been filed, nor until 
after a public hearing has been held by the council for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of 
such public improvement. 
(Code 1983, § 1.113) 


Sec. 62-4. - Cost of condemned property to be added. 
    Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation, or otherwise, for the purpose of any special 
improvement, the cost thereof, and of the proceedings required to acquire such property, may be added 
to the cost of such special improvement. 
(Code 1983, § 1.114) 


Sec. 62-5. - Determination on the project. 
    After the city manager has presented the report required in section 62-3 for making any local or 
public improvement, as requested in the resolution of the council, and the council has reviewed such 
report, a resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the improvement; setting forth the nature 
thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special 
assessment upon the property especially benefited, determination of benefits received by affected 
properties and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large; designating the limits of the special 
assessment district to be affected; designating whether to be assessed according to frontage or other 
benefits; placing the complete information on file in the office of the clerk where the same may be found 
for examination; and directing the clerk to publish a notice of public hearing on the proposed 
improvement, at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such 
notice shall be made by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city at least one 
week prior to the holding of the hearing. Such notice shall also be given to each owner of or party 
interested in property to be assessed, whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records, 
by mailing by first class mail addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records, 
at least ten days before the date of such hearing. The last local tax assessment records means the last 
assessment roll for ad valorem purposes which has been reviewed by the local board of review, as 
supplemented by any subsequent changes in the names or the addresses of such owners or parties 
listed thereon. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special 
meeting of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1.115) 


Sec. 62-6. - Objections to improvements. 
    If, at or prior to such meeting of the council, more than 50 percent of the number of privately owned 
real properties to be assessed for any improvement, or in case of paving or similar improvements the 
owners of more than 50 percent of the frontage to be assessed for any such improvement shall object in 
writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings authorized by 
this chapter without a four-fifths vote of the members of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1.116) 


Sec. 62-7. - Hearing on necessity. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement all persons interested shall be given an 
opportunity to be heard, after which the council may modify the scope of the public improvement in such a 
manner as it shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole; provided, however, that if the 
amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held 
pursuant to notice prescribed in section 62-5. If the determinations of the council shall be to proceed with 
the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles, plans, specifications, 
assessment district and detailed estimates of cost, and directing the assessor to prepare a special 
assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination and report the same to the council for 
confirmation. Such resolution shall set forth the nature of the improvement, designate the limits of the 
special assessment district to be affected, prescribe what part or portion of the cost of such improvement 
shall be paid by special assessment upon the property benefited, and what part (if any) shall be paid by 
the city at large, specify the manner and method of paying for or financing the same in each case and 
determine whether the cost of the improvement shall be spread upon a special assessment roll before or 
after the improvement has been completed. 
(Code 1983, § 1.117) 


Sec. 62-8. - Special assessment roll. 
(a) ?Upon receiving such order and directions, the assessor shall make out an assessment roll, entering 
and describing therein all the lots, premises and parcels of land to be assessed, with the names of 
the persons if known, chargeable with the assessment thereof, and shall levy thereon and against 
such persons the amount to be assessed, in the manner directed by the council. In all cases where 
the ownership of any description is unknown, the assessor shall, in lieu of the name of the owner, 
insert "unknown," and, if by mistake or otherwise, any person shall be improperly designated as the 
owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises, or if the same shall be assessed without the name of the 
owner, or in the wrong name, such assessment shall not, for any such cause, be vitiated, but shall, in 
all respects, be valid upon and against such lot, parcel of land or premises as though assessed in 
the name of the proper owner, and when the assessment roll shall have been confirmed, be a lien on 
such lot, parcel of land or premises, and collected as in other case. 
(b) ?The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of the city manager as 
approved by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 1.118) 


Sec. 62-9. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
    No deviation from original plans or specifications as adopted, materially increasing the cost, shall be 
permitted by any officer or employee of the city without the authority of the council by resolution. A copy 
of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the clerk and attached to the 
original plans and specifications on file in his office. 
(Code 1983, § 1.119) 


Sec. 62-10. - Limitations on preliminary expenses. 
    No contract or expenditure except for the cost of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications 
and estimates of cost shall be made for the improvement until special assessments to defray the costs of 
the same shall have been levied. 
(Code 1983, § 1.120) 


Sec. 62-11. - Assessor to file assessment roll. 
    When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he shall certify and file the 
assessment roll with the clerk for presentation to the council for review and certification by it. 
(Code 1983, § 1.121) 


Sec. 62-12. - Review of special assessment roll; objections to be placed in writing. 
    Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the council, by resolution, shall accept such 
assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the clerk for public examination; shall fix the time 
and place the council will meet to review such special assessment roll; and direct the clerk to publish a 
notice of a public hearing for the purpose of giving an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. 
Such notice shall be made by one publication at least one week prior to the holding of the hearing. Such 
notice shall also be given to each owner of or party interested in property to be assessed, whose name 
appears upon the last local tax assessment records, by mailing by first class mail addressed to such 
owner or party at the address shown on the tax records at least ten days before the date of such hearing. 
The last local tax assessment record means the last assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes which 
has been reviewed by the local board of review as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the 
names or the addresses of such owners or parties listed thereon. The hearing required by this section 
may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. At this meeting all interested 
persons or parties shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the assessments against them. The 
assessor shall be present at every meeting of the council at which a special assessment roll is to be 
reviewed. 
(Code 1983, § 1.122) 


Sec. 62-13. - Changes and corrections in assessment roll. 
    The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment 
roll and, at such meeting, or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted, 
in writing. The council may correct the roll as to any special assessment description of any lot or parcel of 
land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution, annul such assessment roll and the same 
proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If after hearing all 
objections, and making a record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines it 
is satisfied with the special assessment roll, and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, 
it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in 
the office of the clerk and directing the clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy within ten days, 
therein commanding the assessor to spread the various sums and amounts appearing thereon on a 
special assessment roll or upon the tax rolls of the city for the full amounts or in annual installments as 
directed by the council. Such roll shall have a date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that 
date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applied, subject only to 
adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 62-20. 
(Code 1983, § 1.123) 


Sec. 62-14. - Special assessments; due date. 
    All special assessments, except such installments as the council shall make payable at a future time 
as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Code 1983, § 1.124) 


Sec. 62-15. - Annual installments; when due. 
    The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such 
annual installments shall not exceed 20 in number, the first installment being due each time after 
completion of the project for which the special assessment is made as the council shall determine. 
Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at the market rate, payable annually. 
(Res. No. 31A, 3-26-90) 


Sec. 62-16. - Collection from assessment roll. 
    When any special assessment shall be confirmed, and the council shall direct the assessment so 
made in the special assessment roll to be collected directly therefrom or from the general tax rolls, the city 
clerk shall attach his warrant to a certified copy of the special assessment roll, therein commanding the 
city treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in such roll the amount of money assessed to 
and set opposite his name therein, and in case any person named in the roll shall neglect or refuse to pay 
his assessment upon demand, then to levy and collect the assessment by distress and sale of the goods 
and chattels of such person and return the roll and warrant, together with his doings thereon, within 60 
days from the date of such warrant. 
(Code 1983, § 1.126) 


Sec. 62-17. - Collection by treasurer. 
    Upon receiving the assessment roll and warrant, the city treasurer shall proceed to collect the 
amounts assessed therein. If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment upon demand, the 
treasurer may seize and levy upon any personal property found within the city, or elsewhere within the 
county, belonging to such person, and sell the same at public auction, first giving six days' notice of the 
time and place of such sale, by posting such notice in three of the most public places in the city or 
township where such property may be found. The proceeds of such sale, or so much thereof as may be 
necessary for that purpose, shall be applied to the payment of the assessment, and a percentage of five 
percent upon the amount of the assessment for the costs and expenses of such seizure and sale, and the 
surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 1.127) 


Sec. 62-18. - Delinquent special assessments. 
    Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll, 
shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien 
created by general law for state and county taxes, and by the city Charter for city taxes, until paid. From 
such date after confirmation, as shall be fixed by the council, the same collection fee, penalties and 
interest shall be paid on delinquent special assessments and upon delinquent installments of such special 
assessments as are provided by the Charter to be paid on delinquent city taxes. In case any assessment 
or any part thereof shall remain unpaid on the first Monday of May following the date when the same shall 
become delinquent, the assessment shall be reported unpaid by the treasurer to the council, and such 
delinquent assessments, together with all accrued interest shall be transferred and reassessed on the 
next annual city tax roll in a column headed "special assessments" with a penalty of four percent upon 
such total amount added thereto, and when so transferred and reassessed upon such tax roll shall be 
collected in all respects as provided for the collection of city taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 1.128) 


Sec. 62-19. - Assessment for abating hazards and nuisances. 
    If it shall become necessary to abate a hazard or nuisance as described in section 7.9 of the Charter 
of the city, the council shall determine what amount or part of each such expense shall be charged, and 
the person, if known, against whom and the premises upon which, the same shall be levied as a special 
assessment; and as often as the council shall deem it expedient, it shall require all of the several amounts 
so reported and determined, and the several lots or premises and the persons chargeable therewith 
respectively to be notified by the clerk either by registered mail sent to their last known address as shown 
on the assessment roll of the city or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, 
the cost thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, which shall not be less than 30 days, in which payment 
shall be made. In all cases where payment is not made within the time limit, the nonpayment shall be 
reported by the clerk to the assessor who shall spread such amounts against the several persons or 
descriptions of real property chargeable therewith on the next roll for the collection of city taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 1.129) 


Sec. 62-20. - Additional assessment; refunds. 
    When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the improvement for 
which it was made, the council may make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount 
assessed shall not exceed the value of benefits received by any lot or parcel of land. Should the 
assessment prove larger than necessary to five percent or less, the council may place the excess in the 
city treasury; if more than five percent, then the excess shall be refunded pro rata according to 
assessments. In either case, the council may provide by resolution that the amount of any such excess 
may be allowed as a credit on the last installment where such installment still remains unpaid at the time 
the final cost of the improvement is determined. 
(Code 1983, § 1.130) 


Sec. 62-21. - Additional procedures. 
    In case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry into full effect the 
making of any special assessment, the council shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or 
procedures required. 
(Code 1983, § 1.131) 


Sec. 62-22. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a 
special fund to pay such costs or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment 
account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as 
otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 1.132) 


Sec. 62-23. - Contested assessments. 
    Except and unless notice is given to the council in writing of any intention to contest or enjoin the 
collection of any special assessment for the construction of any pavement, sewer or other public 
improvement, the construction of any sidewalk, or the removal or abatement of any public hazard or 
nuisance, within 30 days after the date of the meeting of the council, to hear objections to the making of 
such improvements, as required by this chapter, which notice shall state the grounds on which the 
proceedings are to be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the 
purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of such special assessment; and, regardless of whether 
or not any public improvement is completed in any special assessment district, no owner of real property 
located in such district shall be entitled to commence any suit or action for the purpose of contesting or 
enjoining the collection of any such special assessment after he has received a benefit from the 
substantial completion of that portion of such public improvement for which he is assessed. 
(Code 1983, § 1.133) 


Sec. 62-24. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason 
whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for 
any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be 
made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any 
part thereof has been completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All 
proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the manner as 
provided for in the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been 
collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the assessment, and the reassessment shall to that 
extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance 
shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Code 1983, § 1.134) 


Sec. 62-25. - Combination of projects. 
    The council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the 
costs; provided, however, that for each district there shall be established separate funds and accounts to 
cover the cost of the combination. 
(Code 1983, § 1.135) 


Sec. 62-26. - Street improvements. 
(a) ?In all street construction and street improvements financed in part by special assessment the city 
shall pay 100 percent of the cost and expense of the following items: 
(1) ?Any part of a street in excess of 30 feet in width. 
(2) ?All storm sewers and drainage structures. 
(3) ?All street intersections. 
(4) ?All tree removals and new trees. 
(5) ?All exempted frontage on corner lots. One-half of the frontage on the longest side of a corner 
lot shall be exempt frontage except that not less than 60 feet, nor more than 100 feet shall be 
exempt. 
(6) ?All regrading of sidewalks. 
(7) ?All regrading of manholes. 
(8) ?All utility changes not borne by public utility companies. 
(9) ?All costs of extra sand backfill. 
(b) ?In all street construction and street improvements financed in part by special assessment, the costs 
and expenses of the following items shall be prorated between city and property owners in direct 
proportion to other costs borne by them: 
(1) ?Engineering; 
(2) ?Legal expense; 
(3) ?Accounting; 
(4) ?Printing; and 
(5) ?Advertising. 
(c) ?In all street construction and street improvements financed in part by special assessment the cost 
and expense of items not set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be borne by 
property owners. 
(Code 1983, § 1.136) 


Chapter 66 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; special assessments, 
ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - STREETS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 66-31. - Notification of completion of work. 
    Every person causing an opening or excavation to be made in any street, alley, sidewalk or public 
place shall, upon completion of their work in such opening or excavation, notify the city superintendent of 
public works or his designee that the work is completed and the opening or excavation is ready for 
backfilling or repaving. 
(Code 1983, § 4.5) 


Sec. 66-32. - Backfill requirements. 
    All openings and excavations shall be refilled on or before the time fixed in the permit, in such 
manner and with such material as shall be determined suitable by the city superintendent of public works 
or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 4.6) 


Sec. 66-33. - Resurfacing. 
    The surface or pavement removed for each opening or excavation shall be restored to and 
maintained in as good a condition as the original surface or pavement. If the applicant fails to restore the 
surface or pavement to its original condition within the time limited in the permit, the city superintendent of 
public works or his designee shall cause such work to be done and the cost thereof charged to the permit 
applicant. 
(Code 1983, § 4.7) 


Sec. 66-34. - Inspections. 
    The city superintendent of public works or his designee shall inspect all openings and excavations 
made under this article to determine that such opening or excavation is made in compliance with the 
specifications contained in the permit and the terms of this article, and shall make an inspection prior to 
backfilling and prior to resurfacing or repaving, to determine that such backfilling and resurfacing or 
repaving comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 4.8) 


Sec. 66-35. - Emergency excavation. 
    In case of an emergency arising out of office hours when an immediate excavation is necessary in 
the interest of public safety, the work may be done without first obtaining a permit. The police department 
shall be notified as soon as practicable, and regular application for a permit shall be made before noon of 
the next following business day. 
(Code 1983, § 4.9) 


Sec. 66-36. - Guarding of excavation; barriers and flares. 
    Any person making an opening or excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or 
within five feet of the line of any street or public place, shall, between sunset and sunrise on every night 
that the same remains open or danger exists therefrom, keep such opening or excavation fenced or 
barricaded and properly lighted as required by the state manual of uniform traffic control devices so as to 
warn all persons of such opening or excavation and all obstructions. No unauthorized person shall 
remove or interfere in any way with any such lantern or other danger signal or any such barriers. 
(Code 1983, § 4.10) 


Sec. 66-37. - Blocking traffic. 
    No person making an opening or excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk shall obstruct more than 
one-half of the traveled portion of any street or alley without the permission of the superintendent of public 
works or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 4.11) 


Sec. 66-38. - Removal of excavated material. 
    Excavated materials shall be promptly removed and disposed of as excavated when there is not 
sufficient room to permit the storing of excavated material. When the storing of the excavated material is 
permitted at the site of the work, the excavated material shall be compactly piled, and any excess 
material shall be immediately removed and disposed of upon completion of backfilling. 
(Code 1983, § 4.12) 


Sec. 66-39. - Sidewalks. 
    When it is necessary to make an opening or cut in any part of a slab or square of sidewalk, the entire 
slab or square shall be removed and replaced to as good a condition as the original sidewalk. If any part 
of a slab or square of sidewalk is cracked or damaged in any way as the result of making any opening or 
excavation under this article, the entire slab or square shall be replaced. 
(Code 1983, § 4.13) 


Sec. 66-40. - Replacement of trees, shrubs and grass plots. 
    Where any shrubs, grass plots or other like or similar improvements existing upon the streets are 
disturbed or interfered with by reason of any construction work permitted under this article, the same shall 
be replaced in as good condition as prior to such construction work, all at the expense of the applicant. 
(Code 1983, § 4.15) 


Sec. 66-41. - Map or drawing of underground installation. 
    After the opening or excavation has been made, the applicant shall prepare a map or drawing, to be 
filed with the clerk and attached to the application, containing a brief description of the underground 
installation and showing its depth below the surface, its location with reference to the opening at the 
surface as seen from above, and its location with reference to a readily ascertainable surface landmark 
so as to enable the locating of the underground installation after the opening or excavation has been 
filled. 
(Code 1983, § 4.16) 


Sec. 66-42. - Curb cut construction. 
    All construction of curb cuts shall be done by the city or by contractors on behalf of the city and not 
by any private person or contractor. The expense of construction, repairing or reconstructing of curb cuts 
shall be assessed against the abutting owners. 
(Code 1983, § 4.17) 


Sec. 66-43. - Driveway apron. 
    Within one year after a driveway has been completed, the owner shall pave the driveway between 
the street right-of-way and the street with concrete or other comparable material meeting the 
specifications of the department of public works. If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any 
particular driveway apron within the time and within the manner required, the superintendent is hereby 
authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limit for construction by the owner, to 
cause such driveway apron to be constructed. The expense shall be charged to the premises and to the 
owner thereof and shall become a lien against the property and shall be collectible, if not paid, on the tax 
roll, as provided by this Code. 
(1) ?Driveway aprons constructed of concrete shall be of a thickness no less than six inches at the 
property line, commencing at the junction of the city street to a point as determined by the 
department of public services to ensure protection of underground utilities. The remaining 
driveway depth shall be no less than four inches in thickness. 
(2) ?Driveway aprons constructed of asphalt shall be of a thickness no less than four inches at the 
property line, commencing at the junction of the city street to a point as determined by the 
department of public services to ensure protection of underground utilities. The remaining 
driveway depth shall be no less than two inches in thickness. 
(3) ?Driveways shall be constructed at a grade as to create a uniform flow and blend at the junction 
of the street. 
(4) ?No driveway shall be constructed as to adversely affect the drainage of adjacent properties or 
cause excess drainage onto adjacent properties. 
(Code 1983, § 4.18; Ord. No. 2016-04, 9-6-16) 


Sec. 66-44. - Repair work specifications. 
    Backfill within the public right-of-way shall be 100 percent sand, fully compacted to city 
specifications. In no case shall excavated materials be used for backfill. Gravel base and pavement shall 
correspond to existing materials unless the subgrade has been disturbed, or, in the opinion of the 
superintendent of the department of public works, additional strength is required. 
(Code 1983, § 4.19) 


Secs. 66-45—66-65. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 


Sec. 66-66. - Required. 
    No person, other than a duly authorized city official or employee in the course of his employment, or 
unless acting under a construction contract with the city, shall cut, open, tear up or make any excavation 
within the limits of any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the city, for any purpose whatever, until a 
permit therefor shall have been obtained from the city clerk as provided in this division. 
(Code 1983, § 4.1) 


Sec. 66-67. - Application. 
    Permit applications shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk at least 24 hours before the time 
proposed to begin such work upon a blank form prepared and provided by the city. Such application shall 
state the name and address of the applicant; the name of the street, alley, sidewalk or public place in or 
under which it is desired to make the opening or excavation; the kind of surface or pavement thereon; the 
purpose, size and location, as near as can be determined, of the proposed opening or excavation; the 
dimensions of the surface or pavement to be removed; and the time within which the work described in 
such application, backfilling of the opening or excavation and resurfacing shall be completed; and shall be 
accompanied by a certificate of insurance or other evidence satisfactory to the city clerk that the city shall 
be held harmless from all claims and damages as provided in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 4.2) 


Sec. 66-68. - Fee. 
    Each application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $10.00 to 
cover the cost of administration and inspection. The clerk shall not issue a permit to any person who 
owes outstanding bills to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 4.3) 


Sec. 66-69. - Granting. 
    Upon approval of the application for a permit by the city manager, or such other person as the city 
manager may designate, and upon payment of the permit fee, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the 
applicant for the work, stating therein the time within which the work, backfilling of the opening or 
excavation, and resurfacing or replacement of pavement shall be completed. The applicant shall 
complete the work and effect the restoration of the streets, alleys and sidewalks as provided in this article 
within the time limited within the permit. The time for completion of the work and backfilling shall be kept 
to a minimum, and all resurfacing and repaving shall be completed within six months from the date of the 
permit. 
(Code 1983, § 4.4) 


Sec. 66-70. - Indemnification from liability. 
    Any person to whom a permit shall be granted shall do no injury in any street, alley, sidewalk or 
public place or to any shade tree, shrubs, lawns, concrete paving or sidewalk, or in any manner disturb 
any sewer, water main, pipe or conduit, and shall fully indemnify and save harmless the city from any and 
all claims and damages for which the city might be made or become liable to pay arising from work done 
under such permit, and especially shall indemnify the city and assume all liability and damages which 
may arise, come or occur to the city from any injury to persons or property from the doing of any work 
mentioned in this article, or the neglect of any person or corporation or its employees to comply with the 
provisions of this article, especially as to the putting up of lights or barriers at or around excavations; and 
the acceptance by any person of any permit under the provisions of this article shall be an agreement to 
pay to the city any sum of money for which the city may become liable from or by reason of such injury or 
failure by the applicant to comply with the terms of this article or of the permit issued under this article. 
Such person shall be given written notice of any and all formal claims, suits and demands filed with the 
city within 30 days after receipt of the same and shall be given an opportunity to defend the same. 
(Code 1983, § 4.14) 


Secs. 66-71—66-100. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 


Sec. 66-101. - Compliance with article. 
    All sidewalks, crosswalks and approaches hereafter constructed or repaired in the streets within the 
city shall be constructed or repaired according to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 4.41) 


Sec. 66-102. - Specifications; grade. 
    All sidewalks, crosswalks and approaches shall be constructed in accordance with city 
specifications. No new sidewalk may be constructed until excavation or filling to established grade is 
completed, and the location of the sidewalk determined by the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 4.42) 


Sec. 66-103. - Special assessment projects. 
    All projects for the construction or repair of sidewalks, crosswalks and approaches initiated under 
chapter 62 of this Code shall follow the provisions of such chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 4.43) 


Sec. 66-104. - Application by owner. 
    An individual property owner may apply to the city manager for the construction or repair of 
sidewalks abutting his property according to the following provisions; provided, however, that if the city 
manager shall determine that a particular new sidewalk is not in the public interest he shall advise the 
council of the application and his reason for rejecting it. The council's determination shall be final. 
(Code 1983, § 4.44) 


Sec. 66-105. - Construction by city. 
    If the individual property owner applying for the construction or repair of sidewalks abutting his 
property so requests, the city shall build or contract for the building or repair of the new sidewalk. In such 
case the applicant shall deposit the estimated cost of the sidewalk with the city treasurer. The amount of 
the deposit in excess of the applicant's share of the cost shall be refunded upon a determination of the 
actual cost. 
(Code 1983, § 4.45) 


Sec. 66-106. - Construction by owner. 
    If the individual property owner applying for the construction or repair of sidewalks abutting his 
property so desires, he may build or have built the sidewalk himself. Upon completion of the work the city 
shall pay its share of the cost to the applicant. 
(Code 1983, § 4.46) 


Sec. 66-107. - City's share of cost. 
    The city's share in the cost of building a new sidewalk and the repairing and replacing of an existing 
sidewalk, in accordance with such fixed dollar amount or percentage, shall be established from time to 
time by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 4.47) 


Sec. 66-108. - Owner; construction of unapproved sidewalk. 
    In all cases where the application of an individual property owner for the construction or repair of a 
sidewalk is rejected as not in the public interest, such sidewalk may be constructed or repaired by the 
individual property owner according to city specifications at the established grade, subject to inspection 
by the city manager, in which case all costs shall be borne by the individual property owner. 
(Code 1983, § 4.48) 


Sec. 66-109. - Order to construct. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the council, it shall be deemed necessary to repair or replace any 
existing sidewalk, the council shall so declare by resolution and shall order the repair or replacement of 
such sidewalk. The clerk shall cause to be served upon the owner of any lot in front of or adjacent to the 
sidewalk as required to be repaired or replaced, notice of the work required to be done by the council, 
and that such work must be done within 30 days of service of such notice. 
(Code 1983, § 4.49) 


Sec. 66-110. - Notice to owner. 
    Notice shall be served upon the owner either by personal service or by certified mail at his last 
known address. The notice shall contain the name of the owner and a description of the property, shall 
designate the work required to be done, and shall recite that the work is required to be done by resolution 
of the council, giving the date of such resolution. The notice shall further state that the owner is required 
to comply within 30 days, or that if the owner objects to such work being done he must, within 30 days, 
file with the clerk a written demand for public hearing on the proposed work, and that if such work is not 
done or demand for public hearing is not filed within 30 days, the city shall cause such work to be done 
and the cost thereof charged against the property as a special assessment. 
(Code 1983, § 4.50) 


Sec. 66-111. - Repair or replacement by city. 
    If the owner of any lot shall neglect or fail to repair or replace any sidewalk within 30 days from the 
date of service of such notice or file a written objection as provided in section 66-112, then it shall be the 
duty of the city manager to forthwith cause the sidewalk to be repaired or replaced, as the case may be, 
and after the sidewalk is completed to file with the council a statement in writing of the cost and expense 
of repairing or replacing the sidewalk, together with a description of the lot and the name of the owner. It 
shall be the duty of the council, after such statement is filed, to order the assessor to spread the owner's 
share of the cost of such work as a special assessment against such lot or premises on the next city tax 
roll. The assessment shall be collected according to law in the same manner as other city taxes; or the 
city may collect such amount from the owner of such premises in an action of assumpsit together with the 
cost of suit. 
(Code 1983, § 4.51) 


Sec. 66-112. - Appeal from construction order. 
    If the owner of any lot receiving notice objects to such work being done, he shall within 30 days from 
the date of service of such notice file his written objection with the clerk and demand therein a public 
hearing on the proposed work. Upon receipt of such written objection the council shall set a date for a 
public hearing on the proposed work and notify the owner of the hearing date. At the public hearing the 
owner or any interested person shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the council may 
abandon, modify or determine to proceed with the proposed work in such manner as they shall deem to 
be in the best interest of the city. All proceedings in connection with the proposed work shall thereafter 
conform to the provisions of chapter 62 of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 4.52) 


Sec. 66-113. - Repairs. 
    When it is necessary to make an opening in or cut any part of a slab or square of sidewalk, the entire 
slab or square shall be removed and replaced to as good a condition as the original sidewalk. If any part 
of a slab or square of sidewalk is removed, cracked or damaged in any way as the result of making any 
opening or excavation, the entire slab or square shall be replaced at the expense of the person removing, 
cracking or otherwise damaging the sidewalk. 
(Code 1983, § 4.53) 


Sec. 66-114. - Parking on sidewalks. 
    No person shall park any car, truck or other motor vehicle on or over a public sidewalk or other 
designated walkway; provided, however, that bicycles shall not be considered as motor vehicles for the 
purpose of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 4.60) 


Sec. 66-115. - Sidewalk signs. 
    No person shall place any sign on or above any public sidewalk or within the public right-of-way, 
except as provided under chapter 86 of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 4.61) 


Sec. 66-116. - Obstructing sidewalks. 
(a) ?No person shall place merchandise for sale or other objects on a public sidewalk, except that in 
those areas having no front yards, as permitted under chapter 86 of this Code, persons may be 
permitted to display merchandise for sale within 36 inches of the edge of the public right-of-way. 
However, in no case shall this placement of merchandise be permitted if it results in less than 48 
inches of unobstructed sidewalk. No person shall place any awning, canopy or porch above a public 
sidewalk at a height less than 84 inches. 
(b) ?Temporary permits to partially obstruct the sidewalks for a specified period of time, not to exceed 
seven days, may be granted as provided in article II of chapter 14 of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 4.62) 


Sec. 66-117. - Snow removal. 
(a) ?Owner responsibility on commercial property. The owner of any property classified as commercial 
on the current tax roll shall remove all snow and ice from any public sidewalk adjacent to such 
commercial property, prior to 10:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(b) ?Penalty for violation of section. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be 
guilty of a civil infraction. The civil fine will be set at $100 for the first violation, $150 for the first 
repeat offense and $250 for the second (or subsequent) repeat offense per chapter 2, article V of 
this Code. 
(c) ?Separate offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a 
violation occurs or continues. 
(d) ?Removal by city; costs and expenses to constitute lien. The DPW superintendent is hereby 
authorized to remove any snow or ice on sidewalks, where the owner of adjacent commercial 
property has failed to comply with this section after being provided notice by the city. The cost for 
removal, including all expenses and administrative costs, shall be billed by the city treasurer to the 
owner of the commercial property adjacent to the sidewalk. Failure to pay for the snow or ice 
removal shall constitute a lien upon the property and shall be collectable on the tax roll, as provided 
in this Code. 
(e) ?Creation of administrative rules. The city manager or their designee has the authority to create rules 
and regulations to administer this section. 
(Code 1983, § 4.63; Ord. No. 2014-06, 6-2-14) 


Chapter 70 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; floods, ch. 42; 
streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.; 
minimum standards, MCL 560.259, MSA 26.430(259). 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The 
definitions for terms defined in the Subdivision Control Act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et 
seq., as amended, shall control in the interpretation of this chapter unless indicated to the contrary in this 
section. 
    Block means property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting 
streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live 
stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    City planner or consulting planner means the staff planner or consulting planner of the city. 
    Clerk means the city clerk. 
    Commission means the planning commission of the city. 
    Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation or 
persons for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a "public" or "private" easement depending 
on the nature of the use. 
    Engineer or consulting engineer means the city engineer. 
    Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains 
and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, and other additions to the natural 
state of land which increase its value, utility or habitability. 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described or fixed in a recorded 
plat. 
    Major streets or thoroughfare plan means the part of the master plan which sets forth the location, 
alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive land use plan for the city, including graphic and written 
proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, 
zoning districts and all physical developments of the city, and includes any unit or part of such plan 
separately adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly adopted by the planning 
commission. 
    Multiple-family means as defined in chapter 86 of this Code. 
    Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is 
an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved 
pursuant to law or approved by official action; or, a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the 
office of the county register of deeds. A street includes the land between the street lines, whether 
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and 
lawns. 
(1) ?Major thoroughfare means an arterial street of great continuity which is intended to serve as a 
large volume trafficway for both the immediate city areas and region beyond, and may be 
designated in the city's major thoroughfare plan as a major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway 
or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. 
(2) ?Collector street means a street intended to serve as a major means of access from minor 
streets to major thoroughfares which has considerable continuity within the framework of the 
major thoroughfare plan. 
(3) ?Minor street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential 
properties. 
(4) ?Marginal access street means a minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare 
which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5) ?Boulevard street means a street developed to two two-lane, one-way pavements separated by 
a median. 
(6) ?Turnaround means a short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(7) ?Cul-de-sac street means a short minor street having one end permanently terminated by a 
vehicular turnaround. 
(8) ?Alley means a minor service street used primarily to provide secondary vehicular access to the 
rear or side of properties otherwise abutting upon a street. 
    Subdivision Act means the Subdivision Control Act, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 
1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended. 
    Zoning chapter means chapter 86 of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 5.221) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 70-2. - Fees. 
    Preliminary plat (stages 1 and 2) and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering fees, attorney 
fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other applicable development charges 
shall be paid by the proprietor as may be provided for by ordinance or resolution of the city council as a 
condition of final plat approval. 
(Code 1983, § 5.232) 


Sec. 70-3. - Variance for hardship. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may 
result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that 
it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this 
section, the city council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing 
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the 
probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be 
granted unless the city council finds that: 
(1) ?There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict 
application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of 
this land. 
(2) ?The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of 
the petitioner. 
(3) ?The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other 
property in the territory in which the property is situated. 
(Code 1983, § 5.233) 


Secs. 70-4—70-35. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PLATS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 70-36—70-55. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 


Sec. 70-56. - Stages of approval. 
    The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat requires tentative and final 
approval as follows. 
(Code 1983, § 5.222) 


Sec. 70-57. - Tentative approval; filing. 
    Ten copies of a valid and complete preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written 
application in triplicate and any other information required to be submitted under the Subdivision Act, shall 
be filed with the clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 5.222(1)) 


Sec. 70-58. - Identification and description. 
    The preliminary plat shall include: 
(1) ?Proposed name of the subdivision. 
(2) ?Location by section, town and range, or by other legal description. 
(3) ?Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor 
who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land. 
(4) ?Scale of plat, one inch equals 100 feet as a minimum acceptable scale. 
(5) ?Date. 
(6) ?Northpoint. 
(Code 1983, § 5.222(2)) 


Sec. 70-59. - Existing conditions. 
(a) ?The preliminary plat shall include: 
(1) ?An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the 
relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings such as section lines and/or major streets or 
collector streets. 
(2) ?Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the 
tract and overall property dimensions. 
(3) ?Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the 
tract being proposed for subdivision including those of areas across abutting roads. 
(4) ?Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, and public 
easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those 
located across abutting roads. 
(5) ?Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within 
or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision. 
(6) ?Topography drawn as contours with a maximum contour interval of one foot. Topography to be 
based on USGS datum. 
(b) ?The school board or school superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area 
concerned shall be informed and made aware of the proposed preliminary plat by the proprietor. A 
letter or document from the school board or school superintendent indicating awareness of the 
proprietor's intentions shall be submitted to the planning commission as part of the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1983, § 5.222(3)) 


Sec. 70-60. - Proposed conditions. 
    The preliminary plat shall include: 
(1) ?Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with 
adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public 
walkways. 
(2) ?Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building setback lines showing dimensions. 
(3) ?Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use 
of property owners in the subdivision. 
(4) ?An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as 
excepted on the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel as 
excepted, the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance 
with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable 
relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat. 
(5) ?An indication of system proposed for sewage by a method approved by the city engineer. 
(6) ?An indication of system proposed for water supply by a method approved by the city engineer. 
(7) ?An indication of storm drainage proposed by a method approved by the city engineer, and, if 
involving county drains, the proposed drainage shall be acceptable to the county drain 
commissioner. 
(Code 1983, § 5.222(4)) 


Sec. 70-61. - Review by planning commission. 
(a) ?The clerk shall receive and check for completeness of the preliminary plat as required under this 
division. If complete and basically in conformance with applicable municipal requirements, the clerk 
shall place the proposal on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting. 
(b) ?The clerk shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to the city manager and the city engineer for 
their technical review and recommendations. 
(c) ?The commission shall review all details of the proposed subdivision within the framework of chapter 
86 of this Code, within the various elements of the master plan, and within the standards of this 
chapter. 
(d) ?The commission shall approve conditionally, disapprove or approve the preliminary plat. 
(1) ?Should the approval be a conditional approval and therefore tentative, the preliminary plat shall 
not be forwarded to the city council until such conditions have been satisfied by the proprietor. 
(2) ?Should the commission disapprove the preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons in the 
minutes of the regular meeting. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor. 
(3) ?Should the commission find that all conditions have been satisfactorily met, it may give 
approval to the preliminary plat. The chairman shall make a notation to that effect on each copy 
of the preliminary plat and distribute copies of the preliminary plat as follows: 
a. ?Retain one copy which shall become a matter of permanent record in the commission files; 
b. ?Forward one copy to the school board or school superintendent of the school district having 
jurisdiction in the area concerned; and 
c. ?Return the remaining copies to the proprietor. 
(Code 1983, § 5.222(5)) 


Sec. 70-62. - Review by city council; final approval. 
(a) ?The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat with the clerk together with a certified list of all 
authorities required for approval in sections 112 to 119 of the Subdivision Act. The proprietor shall 
also provide approved copies of plats from each of the required authorities. 
(b) ?The city council shall take action on the preliminary plat within 20 days of the submission of all 
necessary approved plats. 
(c) ?If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to all conditions laid down for approval, the city council 
shall give final approval to the preliminary plat. 
(d) ?The clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons 
shall be given. 
(e) ?Final approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of final approval. The two-
year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in writing. 
(f) ?No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the preliminary plat has 
received final approval of the city council, engineering plans have been approved by the city 
engineer, and any deposits required under section 70-2 have been received by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5.222(6)) 


Secs. 70-63—70-85. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 


Sec. 70-86. - Preparation. 
(a) ?The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Act. 
(b) ?The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat, as approved, and it may constitute 
only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and 
develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this chapter. 
(c) ?The proprietor shall submit, as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date with the written 
opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for 
examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
(Code 1983, § 5.223(1)) 


Sec. 70-87. - Review. 
(a) ?Six mylar copies and three paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the clerk, 
and he shall deposit such sums of money as the city council requires. 
(b) ?The final plat shall be reviewed by the city engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary 
plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
(c) ?The city engineer shall notify the city council of his recommendation for either approval or rejection 
of the final plat. 
(d) ?The city council shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat within 20 days of 
its date of filing. 
(e) ?Upon the approval of the final plat by the city council, the subsequent approvals shall follow the 
procedure set forth in the Subdivision Act. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded: one to 
the clerk, one to the planning commission, and one to the department of public works. Five mylar 
copies shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county plat board. One mylar copy shall be filed with the 
city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 5.223(2)) 


Secs. 70-88—70-120. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS 


Sec. 70-121. - Purpose of article. 
    The subdivision layout standards set forth under this article are development guides for the 
assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must be reviewed and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 5.223) 


Sec. 70-122. - Streets. 
    Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general specifications and typical 
cross sections as set forth in this article, and other conditions set forth by the city council. 
(1) ?Location and arrangements. Standards for the location and arrangement of streets shall be as 
follows: 
a. ?The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and 
shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned major thoroughfares and 
collector streets, and such part shall be platted in the location and width indicated on such 
plan. 
b. ?The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector streets in the adjoining 
subdivisions or of the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not 
subdivided, or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the 
commission. 
c. ?The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall 
be discouraged. 
d. ?Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major 
thoroughfare, the commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, or 
such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties 
and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
(2) ?Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum 
requirements: 
Street Type 
Right-of-Way  
Widths  
(in feet) 
a. 
Major thoroughfare 
100 
b. 
Collector streets 
?80 
c. 
Industrial service streets 
?80 
d. 
Multiple-family residential streets where platted 
?66 
e. 
Minor (single-family residential) streets 
?66 
f. 
Marginal access streets 
?34 
g. 
Turnaround (loop) streets 
120 
h. 
Alley 
?20 
i. 
Cul-de-sac streets, turnarounds 


1. 
Industrial 
75 radius 

2. 
Residential and others 
60 radius 
 
Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be 500 feet. Maximum length 
for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may exceed 500 feet, subject to the approval of the 
commission. 
(3) ?Street grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than 0.5 
percent. The maximum street grade shall be six percent except that the commission may make 
an exception to this standard on the recommendation of the engineer. 
(4) ?Street geometrics. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal 
street curves and sight distances shall in no case be less restrictive than the standards of the 
county road commission. 
(5) ?Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to 90 
degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major thoroughfares and collector thoroughfares shall 
do so with a tangent section of centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line 
of the major or collector thoroughfare. 
(6) ?Grading and centerline gradients. Grading and centerline gradients shall be per plans and 
profiles approved by the city engineer. 
(7) ?Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(Code 1983, § 5.224) 


Sec. 70-123. - Blocks. 
    Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1) ?Sizes. Standards for size shall be as follows: 
a. ?Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,400 feet in length, except where, in the 
opinion of the commission, conditions may justify a greater distance. 
b. ?Widths of blocks shall be determined by the conditions of the layout and shall be suited to 
the intended layout. 
(2) ?Public walkways. Standards for public walkways shall be as follows: 
a. ?Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be required by the commission to obtain 
satisfactory pedestrian access to public or private facilities such as, but not limited to, 
schools and parks. 
b. ?Widths of public walkways shall be at least 12 feet and shall be in the nature of an 
easement for this purpose. 
(3) ?Easements. Standards for easements shall be as follows: 
a. ?Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear or side lot lines as 
necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. 
Such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet wide, six feet from each parcel. 
b. ?Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric company easements 
should be sought from all of the utility companies serving the area. It shall be the 
responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plat to all appropriate 
public utility agencies. 
c. ?Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines so as to 
provide for streetlight dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed 
subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that 
easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final 
plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots (indicating lot numbers) are subject to 
streetlight dropout rights granted to the (name of utility company)." 
(Code 1983, § 5.225) 


Sec. 70-124. - Lots. 
    Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1) ?Sizes and shapes. Standards for sizes and shapes shall be as follows: 
a. ?The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall 
be appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated. 
b. ?Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 86 of 
this Code for the district in which the subdivision is proposed. 
c. ?Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 86 of 
this Code. 
d. ?Corner lots in a residential subdivision shall be platted at least ten feet wider than the 
minimum width permitted by chapter 86 of this Code. 
e. ?Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three to 
one shall normally be considered a maximum. 
f. ?Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designated for 
such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking, setbacks, and 
other requirements in accordance with the zoning chapter. 
(2) ?Arrangement. Standards for lot arrangements shall be as follows: 
a. ?Every lot shall front or abut on a street. 
b. ?Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines. 
c. ?Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector streets, where marginal access 
streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or 
with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to 
permit generous distances between building and such trafficway. 
d. ?Lots shall have a front to front relationship across all streets, where possible. 
e. ?Where lots border upon bodies of water, the front yard may be designated as the 
waterfront side of such lot, provided the lot has sufficient depth to provide adequate 
setback on the street side to maintain a setback for all structures equal to the front setback 
on the street side as well as on the waterfront side. 
(Code 1983, § 5.226) 


Sec. 70-125. - Natural features. 
    The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must 
be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community 
assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage 
and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of 
adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Code 1983, § 5.227) 


Sec. 70-126. - Floodplains. 
    Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in part within the 
floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation 
by stormwater shall require specific compliance with the Subdivision Act and its review by the water 
resources commission of the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1983, § 5.228) 


Secs. 70-127—70-160. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 


Sec. 70-161. - General requirements. 
(a) ?The improvements set forth in this article are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. 
All those improvements for which standards are not specifically set forth shall have such standards 
set by ordinance or published rules of the city council. All improvements must meet the approval of 
the city council. 
(b) ?Prior to the undertaking of any improvements the proprietor shall deposit with the clerk a 
performance bond to ensure the faithful completion of all improvements within the time specified. 
The amount of the bond shall be set by the city council based on an estimate by the engineer. All 
improvements shall be constructed and approved by the city within a length of time agreed upon 
from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council. 
(c) ?Prior to the acceptance by the city of improvements, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set 
by the city council shall be posted by the proprietor. 
(d) ?Improvements to all residential subdivisions shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with 
the standards and requirements established in this article and/or any other such standards and 
requirements which may from time to time be established by ordinance or published rules of the city 
council. The city council may choose to share the cost of certain improvements to an industrial 
subdivision. 
(Code 1983, § 5.229) 


Sec. 70-162. - Street pavement width standards. 
    Street pavement width standards are as follows: 
Street Type 
Pavement Width  
(in feet)  
(measured from face of curb  
to face of curb, if present) 
(1) 
Major thoroughfare 
In conformance with the standards and specifications established by 
the city council. 
(2) 
Collector streets 
56 
(3) 
Industrial streets 
40 
(4) 
Multiple-family residential 
streets 


a. 
Dedicated streets 
56 

b. 
Undedicated streets 
51  
(asphaltic or concrete pavement with concrete curb and gutter on 
each side) 
(5) 
Minor residential streets 
28 
(6) 
Marginal access streets 
24 
(7) 
Turnaround (loop) streets 
Not less than 80 diameter at terminating loop 
(8) 
Alley 
20 
(9) 
Cul-de-sac streets, 
turnarounds 


a. 
Industrial 
65 radius 

b. 
Residential and other 
45 radius 
 
(Code 1983, § 5.229(1)) 


Sec. 70-163. - Utilities. 
(a) ?Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all lines for 
telephone, electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed 
underground entirely throughout a residentially subdivided area, except for major thoroughfare right-
of-way, and such conduits and cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such 
service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead 
lines may be permitted upon written recommendation of the engineer, planner, commission, and the 
approval of the city council at the time of preliminary plat approval where it is determined that 
overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, plat design and 
character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as 
not to conflict with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance 
with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. All drainage and 
underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by 
easements granted by the proprietor. 
(b) ?Sewage disposal. A sanitary sewer system, including all appurtenances, shall be required in all 
residential subdivisions which shall connect and outlet into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(c) ?Water supply. A water supply system, including appurtenances, shall be required in all residential 
subdivisions which shall be connected to the city water supply system. 
(d) ?Storm drainage system. An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers, 
catch basins, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be required in all residential 
subdivisions. An open drainage system may be permitted by the city council at the recommendation 
of the planning commission. Adequate provision shall be made for proper drainage of stormwater 
runoff from residential yards. Each yard shall be self-contained, except where topography or other 
natural features require otherwise. 
(1) ?Culverts shall be of a diameter equivalent to the temporary plastic culvert in place (where 
applicable). 
(2) ?Culverts shall be of galvanized steel construction unless otherwise approved by the department 
of public works. 
(3) ?Culverts shall be installed at a grade as to provide adequate drainage to the county drain or 
public storm system. 
(4) ?Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Failure to maintain may result in 
maintenance and/or replacement by the city department of public works and associated costs 
billed to the property owner. 
(5) ?No culvert shall be installed that will adversely affect the drainage of adjacent properties or 
cause excess drainage onto adjacent properties. The property owner shall be responsible for all 
corrective actions as a result of improper drainage, or the city may perform such corrective 
actions and associated costs will be billed to the property owner. 
(Code 1983, § 5.230; Ord. No. 2016-03, 9-6-16) 


Sec. 70-164. - Other improvements. 
(a) ?Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required in residential subdivisions only. 
(1) ?Major thoroughfares. A five-foot wide concrete sidewalk located on the street right-of-way, one 
foot from the property line on the sides of the roadway abutting the subdivision shall be 
provided. In those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of 
sidewalks, the city council may waive this requirement. 
(2) ?Collector streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located on the street right-of-way, one foot from 
the property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided. In those instances where no 
good purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the city council may waive this 
requirement. 
(3) ?Minor streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located on the street right-of-way, one foot from the 
property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided. In those instances where no good 
purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the city council may waive this 
requirement. 
(4) ?Marginal access streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located on the street right-of-way one 
foot from the property line on the private property side of the roadway shall be provided. In 
those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the city 
council may waive this requirement. 
(5) ?Public walkways. The surface of the walkways shall be developed in concrete. Planting pockets 
shall be provided in public walkways for tree and shrub planting. The planting plan and surface 
treatment shall meet the approval of the commission. Fences and/or other improvements may 
also be required if the commission and/or city council determines they are necessary to protect 
the adjacent property owners. 
(b) ?Trees. Existing trees near street rights-of-way shall be preserved by the proprietor. Street trees shall 
be provided at least one per lot in residential subdivisions, and shall be placed between the sidewalk 
and street at such location as required by the commission. The type of tree required shall be as 
specified by section 86-530(2)e. Species prohibited by section 86-530(3) shall not be planted. 
(c) ?Street signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections within or abutting the 
subdivision, and they shall be located as follows in order of preference of the proprietor: 
(1) ?Next to a stop sign; 
(2) ?At the northeast corner of an intersection; or 
(3) ?At the southeast corner of an intersection. 
(Code 1983, § 5.231) 


Chapter 72 - TAXATION 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 72-1—72-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPTION—VILLAGE PARK APARTMENTS 


Sec. 72-21. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the city tax exemption ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 1, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-22. - Preamble 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to 
provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such 
housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing 
Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.). The city is 
authorized by this act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all 
classes of housing exempt from taxation under this act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes 
that would be paid but for this act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to 
moderate income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, 
the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid 
public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the 
service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this article are essential to the 
determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in 
reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that Werth Development, L.L.C. has offered subject to receipt of a mortgage 
loan from the state housing development authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development 
identified as Village Park Apartments Limited Dividend Housing Association, a Michigan Limited 
Partnership on certain property located north of Hixon Street in the city limit to serve persons of low to 
moderate income, and that Werth Development, L.L.C. has offered to pay the city on account of this 
housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State 
of Michigan, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of 
a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, 
heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Contract rents are as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in 
regulations promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for 
persons of low to moderate income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, 
industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improves the quality of the 
development as it relates to housing for persons of low to moderate income. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and/or 
permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Utilities mean fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service, which are paid by the 
housing development. 
    Sponsor means person(s) or entities, which have applied, to the authority for a mortgage loan to 
finance a housing development. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 3, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-24. - Class of housing development. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and 
for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be family classification which is 
financed or assisted pursuant to the act. It is further determined that Village Park Apartments Limited 
Dividend Housing Association, a Michigan Limited Partnership is of this class. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 4, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-25. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as Village Park Apartments Limited Dividend Housing 
Association, a Michigan Limited Partnership and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be 
exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city acknowledging 
that the Werth Development L.L.C. and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the 
housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and the 
qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of 
taxes as established in this article, and in consideration of Werth Development L.L.C. offer, subject to 
receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to construct, own and operate the housing development, 
agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The 
annual service charge shall be equal to five percent of the difference between the annual shelter rents 
actually collected. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 5, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-26. - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. 
    Notwithstanding section 72-25, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of 
the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low to moderate 
income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that 
portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low to moderate income persons or families" as used herein shall be the same meaning 
as found in 15(a)(7) of the act. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 6, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-27. - Contractual effect of article. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(6) of the act, to the contrary, a contract between the 
city and Werth Development L.L.C. with the authority as third party beneficiary under the contract to 
provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by 
enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 7, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-28. - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall be payable in the same 
manner as general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment will be paid on 
or before July 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 8, 7-19-99) 


Sec. 72-29. - Duration. 
    This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains 
outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; provided, that construction of the 
housing development commences within one year from the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 9, 7-19-99) 


Secs. 72-30—72-50. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - TAX EXEMPTION—SANDY HILL APARTMENTS 


Sec. 72-51. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the city tax exemption ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04) 


Sec. 72-52. - Preamble. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to 
provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such 
housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing 
Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.). The city is 
authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all 
classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes 
that would be paid but for this act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to 
moderate income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, 
the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid 
public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the 
service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this article are essential to the 
determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in 
reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that DeShano Development Corporation has offered subject to receipt of a 
mortgage loan from the state housing development authority, to erect, own and operate a housing 
development identified as Sandy Hill Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership 
Association, a Michigan Limited Partnership on certain property located on Leona Street adjacent to Tall 
Oaks Apartments (240 Shirley Street) in the city limit to serve persons of low to moderate income, and 
that DeShano Development Corporation has offered to pay the city on account of this housing 
development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04) 


Sec. 72-53. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State 
of Michigan, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of 
a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, 
heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Contract rents are as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in 
regulations promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for 
persons of low to moderate income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, 
industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improves the quality of the 
development as it relates to housing for persons of low to moderate income. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and/or 
permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Sponsor means person(s) or entities, which have applied, to the authority for a mortgage loan to 
finance a housing development. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service, which are paid by the 
housing development. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04) 


Sec. 72-54. - Class of housing development. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and 
for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be family classification which is 
financed or assisted pursuant to the act. It is further determined that Sandy Hill Limited Dividend Housing 
Association Limited Partnership Association, a Michigan Limited Partnership is of this class. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04) 


Sec. 72-55. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as Sandy Hill Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited 
Partnership Association, a Michigan Limited Partnership and the property on which it shall be constructed 
shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city 
acknowledging that the DeShano Development Corporation and the authority have established the 
economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of 
this article and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a 
payment in lieu of taxes as established in this article, and in consideration of the DeShano Development 
Corporation offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to construct, own and operate 
the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in 
lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to ten percent of the annual rents 
actually collected. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04; Amd. of 8-1-05) 


Sec. 72-56. - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. 
    Notwithstanding section 72-25, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of 
the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low to moderate 
income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that 
portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low to moderate income persons or families" as used herein shall be the same meaning 
as found in 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04) 


Sec. 72-57. - Contractual effect of article. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(6) of the act, to the contrary, a contract between the 
city and DeShano Development Corporation, with the authority as third party beneficiary under the 
contract to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is 
effectuated by enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04) 


Sec. 72-58. - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall be payable in the same 
manner as general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment will be paid on 
or before July 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04) 


Sec. 72-59. - Duration. 
    This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains 
outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; provided, that construction of the 
housing development commences within one year from the effective date of this article. The intended 
expiration of this article shall be September 9, 2023 upon discharge of mortgage. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-8-04; Amd. of 8-1-05) 


Chapter 73 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 


Sec. 73-1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by 
telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, 
safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the 
Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts 
of 2002) ("act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the City qualifies for distributions under the 
Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 1) 


Sec. 73-2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other 
applicable law. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 2) 


Sec. 73-3. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 
of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. [1] 
    City means the City of Vassar. 
    City council means the city council of the city or its designee. This section does not authorize 
delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this chapter to a 
telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the 
Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority 
created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry 
Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other 
legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, 
easement or waterway. "Public right-of-way" does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper 
and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, 
receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. "Telecommunication 
facilities" or "facilities" do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or 
houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed 
commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 
1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service 
in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider or provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as 
defined in Section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. 
"Telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a 
federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the 
communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as 
commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way 
communication device. For the purpose of the act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the 
following: 
(a) ?A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(b) ?Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities 
located within a public right-of-way. 
(c) ?A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 3) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— A copy of the act can be obtained on the internet at 
http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 


Sec. 73-4. - Permit required. 
(a) ?Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or 
seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and 
obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b) ?Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved 
by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the act. A telecommunications provider shall file one 
copy of the application with the city clerk and one copy with the city manager. Upon receipt, the city 
clerk shall make the necessary copies of the application and distribute a copy to all necessary 
parties. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including 
without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities 
in accordance with section 6(5) of the act. [2] 
(c) ?Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps 
submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, 
which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, 
pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on 
the face of each map. 
(d) ?Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, the application shall be accompanied by a 
one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e) ?Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional 
information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall 
comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional 
information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the 
requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the 
MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the act. 
(f) ?Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the act, authorizations or permits previously 
issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 
484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to 
the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall 
satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(g) ?Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the 
effective date of the act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way 
in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city 
an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to section 
5(3) of the act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not 
required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under 
this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed 
by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the act. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 4; Ord. No. 2016-01, 7-5-16) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— A copy of the application form as approved by the commission can be obtained on the internet at 
http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 


Sec. 73-5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a) ?Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated 
to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act, the city manager shall approve or deny an 
application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an 
application for a permit under subsection 73-4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way 
within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the 
city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the 
application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not 
unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b) ?Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in 
the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance 
with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the act. [3] 
(c) ?Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the act, the city manager may impose conditions on the 
issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access 
and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d) ?Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act, and without limitation on subsection (c) 
above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a 
condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that 
the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications 
provider's access and use. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 5) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Copies of the permit forms currently approved by the MPSC can be obtained on the internet at 
http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 


Sec. 73-6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the 
public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required 
under chapter 86 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall 
be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 6) 


Sec. 73-7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or 
under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 7) 


Sec. 73-8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the 
substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps 
showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route 
maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in 
accordance with section 6(8) of the act. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 8) 


Sec. 73-9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or 
construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily 
obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage 
done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and 
shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 9) 


Sec. 73-10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 4(d) above, a 
telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay 
an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the act. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 10) 


Sec. 73-11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the act, the city hereby modifies, to the 
extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the 
effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not 
exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In 
compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the act, the city also hereby approves modification of 
the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, 
so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the act. The city shall provide 
each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the 
requirement of section 13(4) of the act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers 
in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such 
imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a 
provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 11) 


Sec. 73-12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the act, if section 8 of the act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, 
the modification of fees under section 11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 12) 


Sec. 73-13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used 
by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds 
received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street 
fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 13) 


Sec. 73-14. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on 
the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 14) 


Sec. 73-15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or 
seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective 
date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable 
operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access 
services. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 15) 


Sec. 73-16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this 
chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under 
a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider 
related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 16) 


Sec. 73-17. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the 
requirements of the act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve 
that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the act, including but not 
limited to the following: 
(a) ?Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 
to 15.246, as provided in subsection 73-4(c) of this chapter; 
(b) ?Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in 
accordance with subsection 73-4(f) of this chapter; 
(c) ?Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and 
excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with subsection 73-
4(g) of this chapter; 
(d) ?Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a 
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public 
right-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 73-5(a) of this chapter; 
(e) ?Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with 
subsection 73-5(a) of this chapter; 
(f) ?Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with subsection 73-5(a) of 
this chapter; 
(g) ?Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different 
permit terms, as provided in subsection 73-5(b) of this chapter; 
(h) ?Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications 
provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with subsection 73-5(c) of 
this chapter; 
(i) ?Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to 
ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the 
telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 73-5(d) of this 
chapter; 
(j) ?Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or 
engineering permits, in accordance with section 73-6 of this chapter; 
(k) ?Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy 
of this chapter, in accordance with section 73-11 of this chapter; 
(l) ?Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with section 73-14 of this chapter; 
and 
(m) ?Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in 
accordance with section 73-15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 17) 


Sec. 73-18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the act, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve 
a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's 
authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 18) 


Sec. 73-19. - Authorized city Officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue 
municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction 
violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for 
violations under this chapter as provided by the City Code. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 20) 


Sec. 73-20. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit is 
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to [provisions of the City Code]. Nothing in 
this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a 
person of this chapter or a permit. 
(Ord. of 4-7-03, § 21) 


Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 14; environment, ch. 38; offenses and 
miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, 
ch. 66; zoning, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL § 257.1 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 74-1. - Adoption of Michigan Vehicle Code. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1956 PA 62 MCL 257.1—257.923, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 11-4-02, § 1) 


Secs. 74-2—74-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE 


Sec. 74-31. - Code adopted. 
    The Michigan Uniform Traffic Code, 1956 PA 62 MCL 257.951—257.955, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 12-2-02, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 
74-31—74-34, and adding new §§ 74-31—74-34. Former §§ 74-31—74-34 pertained to similar 
subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1983, §§ 10.1—10.4. 


Sec. 74-32. - References in code. 
    References in the Michigan Uniform Traffic Code to "local authorities" shall mean the city. 
(Ord. of 12-2-02, § 1) 


Sec. 74-33. - Notice to be published. 
    The city shall publish the ordinance from which this section derives in the manner required by law 
and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code and the fact 
that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. of 12-2-02, § 1) 


Sec. 74-34. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, 
that the city may not enforce any provision of the Uniform Traffic Code for which the maximum period of 
imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. of 12-2-02, § 1) 


Sec. 74-35. - Regulation of skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters or similar nonmotorized 
wheeled devices. 
(a) ?Use prohibited. The use of any skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters or similar 
nonmotorized wheeled devices on the following major street right-of-way is prohibited. This section 
does not apply to bicycles. 
(1) ?M-15 or Huron Avenue inside the city limits. 
(2) ?M-15 or Goodrich Street inside the city limits. 
(3) ?Cass Avenue from Spring Street to Oak Street. 
(4) ?North and South Main Street from Spring Street to Oak Street. 
(5) ?Division Street inside city limits. 
(6) ?Oak Street from Division Street to Main Street. 
(b) ?Central business district use. The use of any skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters, or 
similar nonmotorized wheeled devices within the central business district of the city is prohibited on 
sidewalks, roadways or entrance to any business, except city-owned parking lots. The central 
business district is bounded by Oak Street to the north, Spring Street to the south, Cass Avenue to 
the east and Main Street to the west. However, this prohibition does not apply to Spring Street and 
Oak Street (from Main to Cass) for access to the city parking lots. A crosswalk connecting Veteran's 
Park and Rotary Park (along the Moore Drain) is hereby established to provide access through the 
central business district from the north parking lot to the south parking lot and vice versa. This 
crosswalk may be used by skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters, or similar nonmotorized 
wheeled devices. Businesses outside the central business district who do not want skateboards, 
roller skates, rollerblades, coasters or similar nonmotorized wheeled devices on their property must 
have a sign posted stating "No skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters or similar 
nonmotorized wheeled devices, City Code Chapter 74, Section 35 of the City of Vassar." 
(c) ?Skateboarding on city streets. Except for the prohibited city streets, skateboards, roller skates, 
rollerblades, coasters or similar nonmotorized wheeled devices will be allowed. Riding shall be done 
as far to the right side of the road as possible, and in the same direction as traffic. 
(d) ?City-owned property. Skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters or similar nonmotorized 
wheeled devices are permitted on city-owned parking lots. 
(e) ?Yield to pedestrians. Any person operating skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters or 
similar nonmotorized wheeled devices shall yield to the right-of-way to any pedestrian. 
(f) ?Signs or markings. All areas where skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, coasters or similar 
nonmotorized wheeled devices are prohibited must have one or more signs posted to provide actual 
or constructive notice and which contain the words "no skateboarding" or any other combination of 
words indicating skateboarding is prohibited. Such sign must contain the words "City Code Chapter 
74, Section 35." 
(g) ?Penalties. Penalties for violations of this section shall be a municipal civil infraction punishable by a 
fine of not more than $50.00, and/or the impounding of the skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, 
coasters or similar nonmotorized wheeled devices for not more than 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 97-104, §§ 1—7, 11-24-97) 


Secs. 74-36—74-65. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 74-66—74-85. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 


Sec. 74-86. - Established; supervision. 
    Pursuant to section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, as added by Act No. 154 of the Public Acts 
of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 600.8395), as amended, a parking violations bureau, for the purpose of 
handling alleged parking violations within the city, is hereby established. The parking violations bureau 
shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 10.61) 


Sec. 74-87. - Location; rules. 
    The city manager shall establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint 
qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the 
bureau. 
(Code 1983, § 10.62) 


Sec. 74-88. - Disposition of violations. 
    No violation not scheduled in section 74-92 shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. 
The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the 
violation at the bureau, and in any case the person in charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of 
such violation in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint 
before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 10.63) 


Sec. 74-89. - Procedure. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the specific request of the 
alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having 
committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or 
attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person 
shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau, and all persons shall 
be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so 
desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall 
not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him by law. 
(Code 1983, § 10.64) 


Sec. 74-90. - Violation notices. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the city shall be deemed an 
allegation of parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in 
which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the parking violations bureau. It 
shall also indicate the address of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of 
the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for the 
arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such a person fails to respond within 
the time limited. 
(Code 1983, § 10.65) 


Sec. 74-91. - Parking meter fund. 
    The revenue received from parking meters shall be credited to a parking meter fund and shall be 
used for one or more of the following purposes: to pay for the cost, installation and maintenance of 
parking meters, and incidental equipment; to purchase, maintain and improve parking facilities on and off 
the public streets; to support the city police department and to administer this division; and to pay part of 
the cost of the ornamental street lighting system in the city; provided, however, that not more than ten 
percent of the revenue received in the parking meter fund in any fiscal year shall be used for street 
lighting. 
(Code 1983, § 10.66) 


Sec. 74-92. - Schedule of offenses and penalties. 
(a) ?Offenses. The following is a schedule of parking offenses and penalties: 
Offense 
UTC  
section 
Parking too far from curb ..... 
8.1, 8.2 
Angle parking violations ..... 
8.3 
Obstructing traffic ..... 
8.5 
Prohibited parking (signs unnecessary) ..... 
8.10 

On sidewalk 


In front of drive 


Within intersection 


Within 15 feet of hydrant 


On crosswalk 


Within 20 feet of crosswalk or 15 feet of corner lot lines 


Within 30 feet of street side traffic sign or signal 


Within 50 feet of railroad crossing 


Within 20 feet of fire station entrance 


Within 75 feet of fire station entrance on opposite side of street (signs 
required) 


Beside street excavation when traffic obstructed 


Double parking 


On bridge or viaduct or within tunnel 


Within 200 feet of accident where police in attendance 


In front of theater 


Blocking emergency exit 


Blocking fire escape 

Parking in prohibited zone (signs required) ..... 
8.10(r) 
Parking in alley ..... 
8.13 
Parking for prohibited purpose ..... 
8.14 

Displaying vehicle for sale 


Working on or repairing vehicle 


Displaying, advertising 


Selling merchandise 


Storage over 48 hours 

Wrong side boulevard roadway ..... 
8.15 
Loading zone violation ..... 
8.16, 8.17 
Bus, parking other than bus stop ..... 
8.19 
Taxicab, parking other than cabstand ..... 
8.19 
Bus, taxicab stand violations ..... 
8.20 
Meter violations ..... 
8.21 1st day within one 
week 
Meters, not parked within space ..... 
8.22 
Failure to set brakes ..... 
5.58 
Parked on grade wheels not turned to curb ..... 
5.58 
Bicycle parking violations ..... 
6.17 
Overnight parking (2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.) ..... 
8.25 
 
(b) ?Penalties. The penalty for each offense enumerated in this section shall be $2.00 if paid within the 
first 24 hours of the first business day following the violation and $5.00 if paid at any time thereafter. 
(Code 1983, § 10.67) 


Secs. 74-93—74-115. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - CITY PARKING LOTS 


Sec. 74-116. - Applicability of division. 
    This division shall apply to all public parking lots owned by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2.151) 


Sec. 74-117. - Hours. 
    All public parking lots owned by the city shall be closed to commercial or recreation vehicle parking 
from the hours of 9:00 p.m.—6:00 a.m. "Commercial or recreational vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, 
all motorized and non-motorized tractors, trailers, semitrailers, vans, trucks, open bed or flatbed pickups, 
mobile equipment, machinery, motor homes, campers, or other vehicles which meet one or more of the 
following criteria: 
(1) ?Vehicle or load height exceeds eight feet; 
(2) ?Vehicle or load width exceeds eight feet, as measured from the widest portion of the vehicle or 
load, but not including mirrors; 
(3) ?Vehicle or load length exceeds 20 feet (in combination with any attached trailers); 
(4) ?Manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating exceeds 10,000 pounds; or 
(5) ?Any non-motorized vehicle regardless of its height, width, length, or weight when it has been 
detached from a motor vehicle that is capable of towing such vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 2.152; Ord. of 1-3-11) 


Sec. 74-118. - Posting of hours. 
    The opening and closing hours shall be posted in each parking lot to inform the public, and it shall be 
unlawful for any person to be present in any parking lot during closed hours, except for the purpose of 
parking and leaving a vehicle, or of going to and leaving in a vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 2.153) 


Sec. 74-119. - Exceptions to division provisions. 
    This division shall not apply to law enforcement officers or employees of the city in the performance 
of their duties. 
(Code 1983, § 2.154) 


Sec. 74-120. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not 
exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding 90 days, or by both fine and 
imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1983, § 2.155) 


Secs. 74-121—74-140. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - MOBILE HOME PARKING 


Sec. 74-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home or mobile home, permanent shall have the meanings ascribed to them in chapter 86 of 
this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 6.21) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 74-142. - Applicability of division. 
    This division shall not be applicable to mobile homes (permanent) nor to mobile homes parked in 
licensed mobile home parks. 
(Code 1983, § 6.22) 


Sec. 74-143. - Parking restrictions. 
    No person shall park or cause to be parked any mobile home overnight on any street, alley, highway 
or other public place in the city. No person shall park or cause to be parked any mobile home between 
the established setback line and curbline on any lot or parcel of land. No mobile home shall be used or 
occupied unless there is a clear unoccupied space of at least ten feet on all sides thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 6.23) 


Sec. 74-144. - Mobile home parking permits. 
    No person shall park, use, occupy or permit the parking, use or occupancy of any occupied mobile 
home on any site, lot or tract of land within the city for any period longer than one week. The city clerk is 
authorized to issue permits for the parking, use and occupancy of a mobile home on premises upon 
which there is located a dwelling for a period not longer than six weeks from the date of issuance. Not 
more than one permit shall be issued for any one mobile home or mobile home occupant in any one 12-
month period, and not more than one permit shall be issued for any one site, lot or tract of land in any one 
12-month period. The city council may by resolution grant an extension of time for any permit granted 
under this division as will not be contrary to the public interests, where, by reason of special conditions, a 
literal enforcement of the provisions of this division would result in unnecessary hardship. The fee for 
each such permit shall be $10.00. 
(Code 1983, § 6.24) 


Sec. 74-145. - Property owner's consent. 
    No permit shall be issued unless there is endorsed upon the application the consent in writing of the 
owner or occupant in control of the premises to such parking, use and occupancy, and the consent in 
writing of the owner or occupant in control of the premises to be used for the use by the occupants of the 
mobile home of the sanitary facilities of the dwelling on the premises. This requirement shall not apply in 
those cases where the premises on which the mobile home is to be parked is connected with the sanitary 
sewer system of the city and the mobile home for which the permit is applied for is equipped with 
adequate toilet and other sanitary facilities, and in such cases the permit issued shall be conditioned upon 
connection of the toilet and sanitary facilities to the water and sewer system of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 6.25) 


Sec. 74-146. - Occupancy conditions. 
    No mobile home shall be occupied in such a manner as to be contrary to the provisions of chapter 10 
of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 6.26) 


ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY 


Sec. 74-147. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, as amended, being MCL § 480.11 et seq. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle which is self-propelled or a vehicle which is propelled by electric 
power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Trailer means a vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for carrying property and for being 
drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Truck means a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of 
property. 
    Truck tractor means a motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not 
so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-148. - Safety standards for drivers, vehicles, facilities. 
(a) ?A person shall not drive or an individual, co-partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees, 
trustee, or receivers appointed by any court shall not require or permit a person to drive a truck or 
truck tractor more than ten hours in any 15 consecutive hours, and then only following eight 
consecutive hours off duty. For the purpose of this section, the 15 consecutive hours shall be 
computed from the time the person reports for duty. The eight consecutive hours off-duty time shall 
be computed from the time the person is released from duty. All time elapsed between the time of 
reporting for duty and the time of release from duty shall be considered as on-duty time. 
(b) ?A person shall not drive, and an individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or 
receivers appointed by any court shall not employ, engage, hire or contract for hire any person to 
operate, drive or maintain, any truck, truck tractor, or trailer unless the person meets the 
qualifications as set forth by the department of state police under the authority of the act. 
(c) ?An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any 
court shall not operate any truck, truck tractor, or trailer or permit any person to drive any truck or 
truck tractor which does not meet driver or operator safety standards, safety standards for equipment 
and devices on trucks, truck tractors, or trailers and the loading and unloading thereof as set forth in 
rules promulgated by the department of state police. 
(d) ?An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any 
court shall not operate or maintain any facility used in connection with the transportation of property 
by any truck, truck tractor, or trailer which facility does not meet safety standards for the operation 
and maintenance of such facility as set forth in rules promulgated by the department of state police. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-149. - Sleeper berths. 
(a) ?Sleeper berths installed after December 1, 1952, may be operated but every sleeper berth shall be 
located within the cab or be immediately adjacent thereto, or be located within the cargo space of a 
truck. The sleeper berth shall be securely fixed with relation to the cab and shall be provided with a 
direct and ready means of exit into the driver's compartment. The exit shall have sufficient area to 
contain an ellipse having a major axis of 24 inches and minor axis of 16 inches. 
(b) ?The sleeper berth shall be constructed and maintained to provide, at least, the following inside 
dimensions: 75 inches long measured on the centerline of the longitudinal axis, and at every point 
along the 75 inches of required length 21 inches wide and 21 inches deep measured from the top of 
the mattress. 
(c) ?Persons engaged in sleeper berth operation may cumulate the required eight consecutive hours off 
duty in two periods of at least two hours each, resting in the sleeper berth. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-150. - Enforcement of state rules in conjunction with article. 
    The rules and regulations promulgated by the department of state police under the authority of the 
act shall be enforced in conjunction with the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-151. - Daily log. 
(a) ?Every individual, copartnership, association, corporation, or their lessees, receivers, or trustees 
appointed by any court, engaged in the operation of a truck or truck tractor on the highways of this 
state, shall require the drivers or operators thereof to maintain, in duplicate, and carry on each 
vehicle a daily log showing the points between which the same is operated, the mileage operated, 
the date and the hour upon which the driver or operator went on duty which shall be entered when 
the operator begins, the date and the hour of the completion of his duty, the number of hours 
intervening between the time of going on duty and the time of completion of his duty, freight bill 
number, manifest number or names of consignor and consignee, and such other information as the 
public service commission may prescribe by rule. After making his initial entry upon commencement 
of duty, the driver or operator shall record his activities in the log and the record of activities shall not 
be more than four hours behind the driver's current duty status. 
(b) ?The user of any such motor vehicle, irrespective of whether the same is operated from a garage, 
terminal or base point situate within or one situate without this state, shall within 72 hours of such 
use file in the principal office or principal place of business of such user the original daily log sheet, 
which shall remain on file at the principal office or principal place of business for a period of one year 
from date of trip. The user shall furnish a duplicate of any daily log of any driver or operator to the 
public service commission of this state, at their offices at Lansing, Michigan, within five days of a 
written demand therefor. The daily log shall be open at all times to inspection by any representative 
of the public service commission. The daily log shall be displayed by the operator or driver of the 
vehicle upon which the same is maintained, at any time upon demand of any peace officer of the 
state or any division thereof. The public service commission, by rule or regulation, shall prescribe the 
form for the daily log required by this article. For the purpose of this section, "user" does not include 
the driver. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-152. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the owner, driver or operator of any motor vehicle 
which is being used as a wrecking, relief or emergency road service vehicle; nor shall it apply to a public 
utility service vehicle in cases of emergency, nor to the specially trained drivers of motor vehicles which 
are especially designed or equipped for use, and are used solely for performing services in emergency 
maintenance of wells; nor when the driver or operator is delayed by an Act of God, public enemies, or by 
authority of law; nor to the owner, driver or operator of any motor vehicle having farm license plates; nor 
to the owner, driver or operator of any motor vehicle which is operated within the corporate limits of any 
city or village of this state, and for a distance of not to exceed 50 miles beyond the boundary of such city 
or village in which such vehicle is domiciled; nor to the owner, driver or operator of any motor vehicle 
being operated within 50 miles from the residential address of the title owner, with the exception of the 
provisions of section 90-102; nor to vehicles owned or operated by emergency road service garages or by 
the state or the United States, or by any state or federal corporation agency or instrumentality. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-153. - Violations 
(a) ?Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, any driver or operator who violates this article or 
a rule promulgated under the act, or any owner or user of any truck, truck tractor or trailer, or any 
officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation or association or their lessees or receivers 
appointed by any court which is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver 
or operator to operate or drive any truck, truck tractor, or trailer in violation of this article or a rule 
promulgated under the act, is guilty of a misdemeanor for each violation. 
(b) ?A peace officer or an officer of the motor carrier division of the department of state police, upon 
reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this article or a rule 
promulgated pursuant to the act, may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle. If a 
violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear for that violation. 
(c) ?A driver or operator or an owner or user of any truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or any officer or agent 
of an individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by 
any court that is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to 
commit a serious safety defect is subject to a fine for each violation. 
(d) ?As used in subsection (c), a "serious safety defect" means a violation of the act or a rule 
promulgated pursuant to the act relative to brakes, tires, steering, coupling devices, headlights, 
taillights, brake lights, and turn signals that result in the vehicle being placed out of service. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-154. - Prosecution in locale where offense committed 
    When this article or a rule promulgated under the act has been violated, the offense may be 
prosecuted in any county, city or jurisdiction in or through which the motor vehicle, driver or operator 
implicated was situated or passed when the offense was committed. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-155. - Affixing license to cab. 
(a) ?A license issued pursuant to the Motor Carrier Fuel Tax Act, being Act No. 119 of the Public Acts of 
Michigan of 1980 (MCL § 207.211 et seq.), as amended, and particularly section 5 of such act, shall 
be affixed to the righthand side of the cab of every commercial vehicle required to hold a license 
pursuant to such act. 
(b) ?Every person or entity convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine and costs 
of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-156. - Driving vehicle of size or weight exceeding stated limitations. 
(a) ?Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a misdemeanor for a person to drive or move 
or for the owner to cause or permit to be driven or moved on a highway a vehicle or vehicles of a 
size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in this article or otherwise in violation of this article. 
(b) ?The provisions of this article governing size, weight, and load shall not apply to a fire apparatus, or 
to an implement of husbandry incidentally moved upon a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the 
terms of a special permit issued as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(c) ?The state transportation department, pursuant to Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 
(MCL § 24.201 et seq.), as amended may promulgate rules permitting and regulating the operation 
of a vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight which exceed the size or weight limitations in this article. 
The rules may restrict or proscribe the conditions of operation of vehicles of a size or weight which 
exceed the size or weight limitations in this article, if the restriction or proscription is necessary to 
protect the public safety or to prevent undue damage to a road foundation or surface, a structure or 
an installation. The rules may provide for a reasonable inspection fee for an inspection of vehicles to 
determine whether their sizes and weights are in conformance with the act, and may require other 
security necessary to compensate for damage caused by the vehicles described in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-157. - Width of vehicle or load. 
(a) ?Generally. The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches, 
except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b) ?Operation or movement of implement of husbandry; extension beyond centerline of highway. A 
person may operate or move an implement of husbandry of any width on a highway as required for 
normal farming operations without obtaining a special permit for an excessively wide vehicle or load 
under section 74-167. The operation or movement of the implement of husbandry shall be in a 
manner so as to minimize the interruption of traffic flow. A person shall not operate or move an 
implement of husbandry to the left of the center of the roadway from a half hour after sunset to a half 
hour before sunrise, under the conditions specified in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, or at any 
time visibility is substantially diminished due to weather conditions. A person operating or moving an 
implement of husbandry shall follow all traffic regulations. 
(c) ?Outside width. The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete pipe, agricultural 
products, or unprocessed logs, pulpwood, or wood bolts shall not exceed 108 inches. 
(d) ?Vehicle with pneumatic tires. Except as provided in subsection (b), if a vehicle which is equipped 
with pneumatic tires is operated on a highway, the maximum width from the outside of one wheel 
and tire to the outside of the opposite wheel and tire shall not exceed 102 inches, and the outside 
width of the body of the vehicle or the load on the vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches. 
(e) ?Width of bus. The total outside width of a bus shall not exceed 102 inches. 
(f) ?Permit. A vehicle shall not extend beyond the centerline of a state trunk line highway except when 
authorized by law. Except as provided in subsection (b), if the width of the vehicle makes it 
impossible to stay away from the centerline, a permit shall be obtained under section 74-167. 
(g) ?Designation of highway for operation of vehicle or vehicle combination. The director of the state 
transportation department, a county road commission, or the city may designate a highway under the 
agency's jurisdiction as a highway on which a person may operate a vehicle or vehicle combination 
which is not more than 102 inches in width, including load, the operation of which would otherwise be 
prohibited by this section. The agency making the designation may require that the owner or lessee 
of the vehicle or of each vehicle in the vehicle combination secure a permit before operating the 
vehicle or vehicle combination. This subsection does not restrict the issuance of a special permit 
under section 74-167 for the operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination. This subsection does not 
permit the operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination described in section 74-163 carrying a load 
described in that section if the operation would otherwise result in a violation of that section. 
(h) ?Violation as civil infraction; owner charged. A person who violates this section is responsible for a 
civil infraction. The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-158. - Width of load carried on passenger-type vehicle. 
(a) ?A passenger-type vehicle shall not be operated on a highway with a load carried on the vehicle 
extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six 
inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side of the vehicle. 
(b) ?A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-159. - Height and length restrictions. 
(a) ?Except as provided in subsection (b), a vehicle unloaded or with load shall not exceed a height of 13 
feet six inches. The owner of a vehicle which collides with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct 
shall be liable for all damage and injury resulting from a collision caused by the height of the vehicle, 
whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is posted or not. 
(b) ?A truck, truck tractor, semitrailer or trailer manufactured on or after July 27, 1978, shall not be used 
to transport flammable liquids, in bulk, having a flashpoint at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, if the 
truck, truck tractor, semitrailer, or trailer exceeds 11 feet 8½ inches in height. However, safety 
equipment and those appurtenances which are required by state law, when added to a vehicle, may 
cause the vehicle height to exceed 11 feet 8½ inches, but shall not cause the vehicle height to 
exceed 13 feet six inches. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c) ?A vehicle, except a truck tractor, trailer, or semitrailer, including load, or articulated buses operated 
by a local public transit system funded by Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1951 (MCL § 
247.651 et seq.), as amended, shall not exceed a total length of 40 feet. The total length of a 
semitrailer operating in a truck tractor and semitrailer combination shall not exceed 53 feet, including 
load. All semitrailers longer than 50 feet shall have a wheel base of 40.5 feet plus or minus 0.5 feet, 
measured from the kingpin coupling to the center of the rear axles or to the center of the tandem axle 
assembly if equipped with two axles. Articulated buses operated by a local public transmit system 
funded by Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1951 may operate with a maximum of 65 feet. 
A combination of truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer, or truck and semitrailer or trailer, or a 
combination of truck tractor and two semitrailers, including load, shall not exceed a total overall 
length of 59 feet except as provided for on routes designated and approved by the state 
transportation department and by local authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction on 
which a person may operate a combination of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer or a truck tractor 
and two semitrailers with no limit on the overall combination length, if the length of each semitrailer 
or trailer including load does not exceed 28½ feet. The state transportation department in the city 
with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may designate highways where the overall length of a 
truck and trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed 65 feet. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination 
with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not be allowed to operate with more than two axles 
on the semitrailer. All truck tractor and semitrailer combinations with a semitrailer length longer than 
50 feet shall travel exclusively on highways designated by the appropriate road authority. The city 
shall have the option of prohibiting stops within their jurisdictions unless the stop occurs along 
appropriately designated routes, or is necessary for emergency purposes or to reach shippers, 
receivers, warehouses, and terminals along designated routes. A trailer or semitrailer in actual and 
lawful use in this state on December 1, 1982, may be operated in this state for the life of the vehicle 
in a combination with other vehicles in actual and lawful use in this state on December 1, 1982, if the 
combination was of legal length under the law of this state immediately preceding January 24, 1984. 
In calculating the length of a trailer or semitrailer under this subsection, the length shall be based on 
the cargo-carrying portion of the vehicle only, including load. A truck tractor or other motor vehicle 
shall not haul more than one trailer and one semitrailer or more than two semitrailers in combination 
at any one time, except that a farm tractor may haul two wagons or trailers or garbage and refuse 
haulers may, during daylight hours, haul up to four trailers for garbage and refuse collection 
purposes, not exceeding in any combination a total length of 55 feet at a speed of not to exceed 15 
miles per hour. In determining the length of a vehicle or a vehicle combination under this subsection, 
the length shall not be considered to include safety and energy conservation devices including, but 
not limited to, impact-absorbing bumpers, rearview mirrors, turn signals lamps, marker lamps, steps 
and handholds for entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mudflaps, or splash and spray 
suppressant devices; load induced tire bulge; refrigeration or heating units; or air compressors. A 
device shall be excluded from a determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the 
carrying of cargo. 
(d) ?If a combination of two semitrailers is pulled by a truck or truck tractor, a fifth wheel connecting 
assembly which conforms with motor carrier safety rules promulgated by the department of state 
police pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Act No. 181 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 
1963 (MCL § 480.11 et seq.), as amended, shall be used on each semitrailer. 
(e) ?A train of vehicles or a vehicle operated alone shall not carry a load extending more than three feet 
beyond the front of the train of vehicles or vehicle. 
(f) ?A motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches beyond the 
rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the roadway shall not be operated on the 
highways of this state unless equipped with a fender or bumper on the extreme rear of the frame or 
body. The bumper shall extend downward from the rear of the frame or body to within 30 inches of 
the roadway and be of substantial construction. In addition to the requirements of subsection (g) of 
this section, no vehicle which is required by federal law to have an underride guard of not more than 
22 inches above the roadway shall be operated upon the highways of this state without such an 
underride guard. 
(g) ?A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet whose frame 
or body extends more than 36 inches beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches 
above the roadway shall not be operated on the highways of this state unless equipped with an 
underride guard on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The underride guard shall meet all of the 
following requirements: 
(1) ?Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground clearance of 22 inches, as 
measured with the vehicle empty and on level ground. 
(2) ?Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the trailer on both left and right sides. 
(h) ?A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not be 
operated on the highways of this state at the times specified in MCL § 257.684, unless equipped with 
all of the following lamps and reflectors, in addition to any other lamps and reflectors required under 
this act: 
(1) ?Two side marker lamps which display an amber light, one on each side of the semitrailer, 
located at one-half the distance from the front to the rear of the semitrailer. 
(2) ?Two reflectors which reflect an amber light, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at one-
half the distance from the front to the rear of the semitrailer. 
(3) ?Two clearance lamps, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at one-half the distance from 
the front to the rear and as near to the top of the semitrailer as practicable. 
(i) ?A lamp required under subsection (h) shall be lighted at the times specified in the motor vehicle code 
and shall be visible when lighted at a distance of 500 feet from the side of the semitrailer on which it 
is mounted. A reflector required under subsection (h) shall be visible at the times specified in the 
motor vehicle code from all distances from 50 to 500 feet from the semitrailer when directly in front of 
lawful upper beams of headlamps. 
(j) ?Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a person may operate a combination of truck 
tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or truck tractor and semitrailer or trailer designed and used exclusively 
to transport assembled motor vehicles or bodies, recreational vehicles, or boats, which does not 
exceed a total length of 65 feet. The load on the combination of vehicles may extend an additional 
three feet beyond the front and four feet beyond the rear of the combination of vehicles. Retractable 
extensions used to support and secure the load that do not extend beyond the allowable overhang 
for the front and rear shall not be included in determining the length of a loaded vehicle or 
combination of vehicles. 
(k) ?A combination of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles. 
(l) ?Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, a number of motor vehicles, wholly or partially 
assembled, may be transported over the highways of this state in combination, utilizing one tow bar 
or three saddle mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one of the 
vehicles in combination. The combination shall not exceed the maximum length of 65 feet for the 
transportation of assembled motor vehicles, and the vehicles in the combination shall be adequately 
and securely fastened together in compliance with regulations of the state and of any federal agency 
having jurisdiction over the transportation. If motor vehicles are towed by means of triple saddle 
mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes acting on all wheels which are in contact with the 
roadway. A combination exceeding 55 feet in length may be operated only on highways and routes 
approved and designated for that operation by the state transportation department and by the city 
with respect to highways under its jurisdiction. 
(m) ?The total gross weight of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer combination or a truck tractor and 
two semitrailers combination which exceeds 59 feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds 
per engine net horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent specified in the SAE handbook 
published by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., (1977). 
(n) ?Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person who violates this section is 
responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this 
section. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-160. - Towing mobile homes; size limitations; permits; requirements. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a person shall not operate a towing vehicle, 
having attached a mobile home having a body length in excess of 45 feet and having a combined 
length of over 60 feet, a realistic body width of over 100 inches at base rail, and a height of over 12½ 
feet on the highways of this state. However, the jurisdictional authority may issue permits to mobile 
home transport companies or to mobile home manufacturers or dealers, for the movement, in the 
ordinary course of their business, of mobile homes to width of 14 1/3 feet plus normal appurtenances 
not to exceed six inches; of mobile homes to a realistic body length of 80 feet and having a 
combined length of 95 feet; of combinations of prebuilt housing modules or mobile homes having a 
total length not to exceed 80 feet and having a combined length of 95 feet; of prebuilt housing 
modules or mobile homes to a width of 14 1/3 feet, plus an eave not to exceed two feet in width; or of 
prebuilt housing modules or mobile homes to a width of 16 feet moved in the upper peninsula of this 
state; over all highways, including interstate and defense highways. Special permits for the 
movement of prebuilt housing modules or mobile homes, whose width including an eave of two feet 
exceeds 14 feet and are transported on interstate highways, may be issued on a single trip basis 
only in accordance with section 74-167. A prebuilt housing module or mobile home whose width 
including an eave of two feet exceeds 14 feet shall be moved only on the lane furthest to the right of 
the operator of the vehicle moving the module or mobile home and shall be moved in a manner so 
that the eave portion of the module or mobile home shall overhang on the shoulder of the highway 
on which the module or mobile home is moved. The permit shall provide the days and the times of 
day, but not on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays or the noon before until the noon after a holiday, 
during which the movement shall take place. The permit shall be issued only upon condition that the 
permittee comply with permit requirements and limitations of law, to insure the operation of a mobile 
home under permit in a manner which will not impede traffic on the highways and with safety in the 
movement of a mobile home, and only at a safe speed and when the pavement is not slippery. A 
mobile home that is 14 or more feet in width shall not be moved when the wind velocity exceeds 25 
miles per hour. On units exceeding 80 feet in overall combination length, or 12 feet in overall width, 
the permit shall provide that the mobile home be equipped with two flashing amber lights on the rear 
of the mobile home and one flashing amber light on the top of the towing vehicle. Signs with the 
words "oversize load" shall be displayed on the front bumper of the towing vehicle and the back of 
the mobile home. The signs shall be of durable material, in good condition, with black lettering on 
interstate yellow background. Each letter shall be of block lettering not less than 12 inches high at 
the front and not less than 16 inches high at the rear of the unit. A vehicle escort shall be required on 
those roads where the state police consider escort vehicles necessary for highway safety. The 
distance between mobile home axle centers shall not be less than 34 inches. The axles and tires 
shall meet standards established by the state transportation department. This section shall not grant 
or give authority to the state transportation department that did not exist on May 1, 1982, in 
accordance with section 1 of Public Law 85-767, 23 U.S.C. 127. 
(b) ?As used in this section, "mobile home" means a prebuilt housing module or a home which is 
designed to be transported by a motor vehicle upon a public highway and designed, equipped and 
used for sleeping, eating and living quarters, or is intended to be used for these purposes. 
(c) ?A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the vehicle may 
be charged with a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-161. - Load requirements. 
    A person shall not drive or move a vehicle, except a commercial vehicle carrying logs or tubular 
products, on a highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from 
dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing off, except for hay or straw, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. The 
tailgate, faucets and taps on a vehicle shall be securely closed to prevent spillage during transportation 
whether the vehicle is loaded or empty, and the body of the vehicle shall not have any holes or cracks 
through which material can escape. Any highway maintenance vehicle engaged in either ice or snow 
removal shall be exempt from this section. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-162. - Towing vehicles. 
(a) ?A passenger vehicle shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or having attached to the 
passenger vehicle more than one vehicle or trailer. 
(b) ?The drawbar or other connection between two vehicles, one of which is towing or drawing the other 
on a highway, shall not exceed 15 feet in length from one vehicle to the other. If the connection 
consists of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a red flag or other 
signal or cloth not less than 12 inches both in length and width. 
(c) ?A vehicle or trailer drawn by a motor-propelled vehicle shall be so attached to the vehicle with forms 
of coupling devices which will prevent the vehicle or trailer from being deflected more than six inches 
from the path of the towing vehicle's wheels. The vehicle or trailer shall also be connected to the 
towing vehicle, by suitable safety chains or devices, one on each side of the coupling and at the 
extreme outer edge of the vehicle and each chain or device and connection used shall be of 
sufficient strength to haul the trailer when loaded. 
(d) ?A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-163. - Maximum axle load; distance between axles. 
(a) ?Normal loading maximum. The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds 
designated in the following provisions which prescribe the distance between axles: 
(1) ?When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the maximum axle load shall not 
exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires. 
(2) ?When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between two axles but more than three and one-
half feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 13,000 pounds for high pressure pneumatic 
or balloon tires. 
(3) ?When axles are spaced less than three and one-half feet apart, the maximum axle load shall 
not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle. 
(4) ?Subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section shall be known as the normal loading maximum. 
(b) ?Heavier loading; highway designation. When normal loading is in effect, the state transportation 
department and the city with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may designate certain 
highways, or sections of those highways, where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier 
loading, which designation may be revised as needed, on which the maximum tandem axle 
assembly loading shall not exceed 16,000 pounds for any axle of the assembly, if there is no other 
axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly. 
(c) ?Tandem axle assembly, permissible weight; exception. Except as provided in subsection (h), on a 
legal combination of vehicles, only one tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on the designated 
highways at the gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other axle within 
nine feet of any axle of the assembly, and if no other tandem axle assembly in the combination of 
vehicles exceeds a gross weight of 13,000 pounds per axle. When the maximum gross weight of a 
combination of vehicles with load does not exceed 73,280 pounds, two tandem axle assemblies shall 
be permitted on the designated highways at a gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if 
there is no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly. 
(d) ?Tire size; permissible wheel loads. The normal size of tires shall be the rated size as published by 
the manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel shall not exceed 700 
pounds per inch of width of tire. 
(e) ?Seasonal road restrictions. During the months of March, April and May in each year, the maximum 
axle load allowable on concrete pavements, or pavements with a concrete base, shall be reduced by 
25 percent from the maximum axle load as specified in this chapter, and the maximum axle loads 
allowable on all other types of roads during these months shall be reduced by 35 percent from the 
maximum axle loads as specified. The maximum wheel load shall not exceed 525 pounds per inch of 
tire width on concrete and concrete base or 450 pounds per inch of tire width on all other roads 
during the period the seasonal road restrictions are in effect. 
(f) ?Safety standards; restricted loading requirements. The state transportation department, or the city 
with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may suspend the restrictions imposed by this section 
when and where, in its discretion, conditions of the highways or the public health, safety, and welfare 
so warrant, and may impose the restricted loading requirements of this section on designated 
highways at any other time that the conditions of the highway may require. 
(g) ?Gross vehicle weight, gross axle weight; determination; exception. For the purpose of enforcement 
of this article, the gross vehicle weight of a single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and 
loads, shall be determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the total weight on all 
the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In addition, the gross axle weight shall be determined by 
weighing individual axles or by weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross weight of the group 
of axles by the number of axles in the group. Pursuant to subsection (h) of this section, the overall 
gross weight on a group of two or more axles shall be determined by weighing individual axles or 
several axles, and the total weight of all the axles in the group shall be the overall gross weight of the 
group. 
(h) ?Gross vehicle weight over certain amount; designation of highways; requirements; formula. The 
loading maximum in this subsection shall apply to interstate highways, and the state transportation 
department, or the city with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may designate a highway, or a 
section of a highway, for the operation of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of not more than 
80,000 pounds which are subject to the following load maximums: 
(1) ?Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle, including all enforcement tolerances. 
(2) ?A tandem axle weight of 34,000 pounds including all enforcement tolerances. 
(3) ?An overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles equaling. 
W = 500( LN + 12N + 36) 
????????N-1 
Where: 
W = Overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 
pounds; 
L = Distance in feet between the extreme of a group of two or more consecutive axles; and 
N = Number of axles in the group under consideration; except that two consecutive sets of 
tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each if the first and last axles of the 
consecutive sets of tandem axles are not less than 36 feet apart. 
The gross vehicle weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds including all enforcement tolerances. 
Except for five-axle truck tractor, semitrailer combinations having two consecutive sets of tandem 
axles, vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 80,000 pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross 
weight determined by application of the formula in this subsection shall be subject to the maximum 
axle loads of subsections (a), (b) and (c). As used in this subsection, "tandem axle weight" means 
the total weight transmitted to the road by two or more consecutive axles, the centers of which may 
be included between parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches, but not more 
than 96 inches, apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-164. - Transportation of flammable liquids in bulk; restrictions; statutory construction. 
(a) ?Hours permitted. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck tractor pulling a 
semitrailer and trailer combination or a truck tractor pulling two semitrailers shall not transport, 
except between the hours of midnight to 6:00 a.m. on routes and at times designated by the state fire 
safety board, a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit 
within a county having a population of 600,000 or more. In addition, a truck, a truck pulling a trailer, 
or a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport, except between the hours of midnight to 
6:00 a.m. on routes and at times designated by the state fire safety board, a flammable liquid, in 
bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, in a quantity of more than 9,000 
gallons within a county having a population of 600,000 or more. The exceptions provided by this 
subsection for transport on routes designated by the state fire safety board shall be construed to 
permit that transport only for the purpose of picking up or delivering a flammable liquid at a supply 
depot. 
(b) ?Fire safety standards. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck, truck pulling a 
trailer, truck tractor pulling a semitrailer, a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or 
a truck tractor pulling two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a 
flash point at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit within this state, unless the truck, truck and trailer 
combination, truck tractor and semitrailer combination, truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer 
combination, or truck tractor and two semitrailer combinations meet safety standards as determined 
by the state fire safety board. 
(c) ?Prohibition; effective date. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck pulling a 
trailer, a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two 
semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70 
degrees Fahrenheit within this state. This subsection shall not take effect until November 1, 1990. 
(d) ?Trucks with certain water capacity; restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section 
other than subsections (c) and (e), a truck with a water capacity of more than 9,500 gallons, a truck 
tractor pulling a semitrailer with a water capacity of more than 9,500 gallons, a truck pulling a trailer, 
a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two semitrailers 
shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70 degrees 
Fahrenheit in this state, unless the existing manhole or inspection ports of each truck, semitrailer, or 
trailer in the vehicle combination has been equipped with devices which are capable of withstanding 
the forces caused by an internal pressure of 50 pounds per square inch, applied and held at least 50 
milliseconds, and then released to two pounds per square inch, without having any residual venting 
of flammable liquid during the subsequent two pounds per square inch condition. 
(e) ?Trucks, semitrailers manufactured after certain date; prohibition; exception. Notwithstanding any 
other provision of this section, a truck or a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer, a semitrailer and trailer 
combination, or two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash 
point at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit in this state, if the truck or semitrailer, a semitrailer and 
trailer combination, or two semitrailers are manufactured after July 1, 1982, or was manufactured 
before July 1, 1982, but was not a vehicle registered in this state by the secretary of state at any time 
between January 1, 1985, and October 1, 1985, unless the truck or the semitrailer, a semitrailer and 
trailer combination, or two semitrailers have a water capacity of less than 13,800 gallons. 
(f) ?Maximum quantity; effective date. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or truck 
tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at 
or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit in a quantity of more than 13,400 gallons. This subsection shall not 
take effect until November 1, 1990. 
(g) ?Prohibition; exception; filing of notarized statement; time; bill of lading; daily log; contents. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or truck tractor pulling a trailer or 
semitrailer, a semitrailer or trailer combination, or two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable 
liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit in a quantity of more than 
13,400 gallons unless the owner of the truck or truck tractor pulling the trailer or semitrailer, 
combination semitrailer or trailer, or two semitrailers files with the department of state police within 
60 days after the effective date of this act a notarized statement that the truck or truck tractor pulling 
the trailer or semitrailer, semitrailer or trailer combination, or two semitrailers did transport a 
flammable liquid, in bulk, having a flash point at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, at any time 
between March 1, 1985 and October 1, 1985. Attached to the notarized statement shall be one of 
the following: 
(1) ?A copy of the bill of lading containing the date the flammable liquid was transported and the 
permanent identification number of the trailer or semitrailer in which the flammable liquid was 
transported. 
(2) ?A copy of the daily log prepared by the driver of the vehicle transporting the flammable liquid 
which contains the date the flammable liquid was transported and the permanent identification 
number of the trailer or semitrailer in which the flammable liquid was transported. 
(h) ?Penalty. The owner or driver of a vehicle which transports a flammable liquid in violation of 
subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), or (g) is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more 
than $3,000.00, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(i) ?Civil infraction. Except as provided in subsection (h), a person who violates this section is 
responsible for a civil infraction. 
(j) ?Enforcement. This section shall be enforced only by a police officer. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-165. - Information to be painted on trucks, tractors, trailers. 
(a) ?Required. All motor trucks or truck tractors, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, of 
more than 5,000 pounds registered weight and all towing or platform bed wrecker road service 
vehicles in operation upon the public highways of this state shall have the name, city, and state or 
the registered logo or emblem of the registered owner of the vehicle, and lessee of the vehicle if the 
vehicle is being operated under lease, painted or permanently attached on each side of the cab on a 
motor truck or truck tractor in letters of not less than three inches in height, not lower than the bottom 
edge of the door, except that motor trucks with closed van bodies may place the information on each 
side of the van body not lower than the bottom edge of the cab door. This information shall be in 
sharp color contrast to the background. 
(b) ?Removable identification devices. Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, 
the identification requirements of subsection (a) may be met through the use of removable devices 
which meet the requirements of subsection (a). These devices shall be of durable construction and 
securely attached to each side of the motor truck or truck tractor. The removable devices shall be 
attached so that the identification is in a horizontal position. 
(c) ?Nonapplicability to farm trucks. This section shall not apply to trucks eligible for and equipped with 
farm license plates. 
(d) ?Civil infraction. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-166. - Authority to require weighing of vehicle. 
(a) ?Generally. A police officer or a duly authorized agent of the state transportation department or a 
county road commission having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful 
may require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle by either portable or stationary 
scales approved and sealed by the department of agriculture as a legal weighing device, and may 
require that the vehicle be driven to the nearest weighing station of the state transportation 
department for the purpose of allowing an officer or agent of the state transportation department or 
county road commission to determine whether the conveyance is loaded in conformity with this 
article. 
(b) ?Shifting or removal of load; impounding vehicle for nonpayment of fines and costs; lien; appearance 
before judge or magistrate; powers of agents of highway department or county road commission. 
When the officer or agent, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is unlawful, 
the officer or agent may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing 
until that portion of the load is shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle load weight 
of the vehicle to the limit permitted under this chapter. All material unloaded as provided under this 
subsection shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or 
operator. A judge or magistrate imposing a civil fine and costs under this section which are not paid 
in full immediately or for which a bond is not immediately posted in double the amount of the civil fine 
and costs shall order the driver or owner to move the vehicle at the driver's own risk to a place of 
safekeeping within the jurisdiction of the judge or magistrate, inform the judge or magistrate in writing 
of the place of safekeeping, and keep the vehicle until the fine and costs are paid or sufficient bond 
is furnished or until the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the fine and costs will be paid. The officer 
or agent who has determined, after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is unlawful may 
require the driver to proceed to a judge or magistrate within the county. If the judge or magistrate is 
satisfied that the probable civil fine and costs will be paid by the owner or lessee, the judge or 
magistrate may allow the driver to proceed, after the load is made legal. If the judge or magistrate is 
not satisfied that the owner or lessee, after a notice and a right to be heard on the merits is given, will 
pay the amount of the probable civil fine and costs, the judge or magistrate may order the vehicle to 
be impounded until trial on the merits is completed under conditions set forth in this section for the 
impounding of vehicles after the civil fine and costs have been imposed. Removal of the vehicle, and 
forwarding, care, or preservation of the load shall be under the control of and at the risk of the owner 
or driver. Vehicles impounded shall be subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona fide lien of prior 
record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs and if the civil fine and costs are not paid within 90 
days after the seizure, the judge or magistrate shall certify the unpaid judgment to the city attorney, 
who shall proceed to enforce the lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in 
the case of chattel mortgage foreclosures. When the duly authorized agent of the state transportation 
department or county road commission is performing duties under this chapter, the agent shall have 
all the powers conferred upon peace officers by the general laws of this state. 
(c) ?Penalty for weight violation. An owner of a vehicle or a lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator, 
or other person, who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or moved on a highway, 
when the weight of that vehicle violates section 74-163 is responsible for a civil infraction and shall 
pay a civil fine in an amount equal to $0.03 per pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000 
pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less; $0.06 per pound of excess load when the excess 
is over 2,000 pounds but not over 3,000 pounds; $0.09 per pound for each pound of excess load 
when the excess is over 3,000 pounds but not over 4,000 pounds; $0.12 per pound for each pound 
of excess load when the excess is over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000 pounds; $0.15 per pound 
for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 5,000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds; 
and $0.20 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 10,000 pounds. 
However, the court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of the civil fine within the 
schedule provided in this subsection and may impose the civil fine provided in section 907(3) of the 
state vehicle code for a civil infraction where, at the time of the violation, either the motor vehicle, 
motor vehicle and semitrailer, or trailer did not exceed the total weight which would be lawful for each 
unit by a proper distribution of the load upon the various axles supporting each unit. 
(d) ?Failure to stop at or avoidance of weight scales; penalty. A driver or owner of a vehicle, truck or 
truck tractor, truck or truck tractor with other vehicles in combination, or special mobile equipment 
who knowingly fails to stop at or who knowingly bypasses any scales or weighing station is guilty of a 
misdemeanor. 
(e) ?Use of duly marked vehicle by agent. An agent or authorized representative of the state 
transportation department or a county road commission shall not stop a truck or vehicle in movement 
upon a road or highway within the state for any purpose, unless the agent or authorized 
representative is driving a duly marked vehicle, clearly showing and denoting the branch of 
government represented. 
(f) ?Failure to stop vehicle when requested to. A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop 
when requested or ordered to do so by a police officer, or a duly authorized agent of the state 
transportation department, or a representative or agent of a county road commission, authorized to 
require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle and load by means of a portable 
scale, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-167. - Special permit for unusual vehicles or loads. 
(a) ?Authorized. The state transportation department with respect to highways under its jurisdiction and 
the county road commissions and the city with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, upon 
application in writing and good cause being shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing 
the applicant to operate or remove a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle 
or load exceeding the maximum specified in this article or otherwise not in conformity with this article 
upon a highway under the jurisdiction of the authority granting the permit and for the maintenance of 
which the authority is responsible. 
(b) ?Application. The application for a special permit shall be on a form prescribed by the authority and 
shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved and the particular 
highways upon which permit to operate is requested. 
(c) ?Vehicles with movable tracks, traction engines, etc. The state transportation department with 
respect to highways under its jurisdiction and the county road commissions and the city with respect 
to highways under its jurisdiction may issue special permits authorizing the operation upon a 
highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the 
periphery of those movable tracks on farm tractors or other farm machinery, the operation of which 
upon a highway would otherwise be prohibited under this article. 
(d) ?Contents, issuance, term. A permit shall specify the trip or trips and date or dates for which it is to 
be valid and the authority granting the permit may restrict or prescribe conditions of operation of the 
vehicle or vehicles, if necessary, to protect the safety of the public or to insure against undue 
damage to the road foundations, surfaces, structures, or installations, and may require a reasonable 
inspection fee and other security as may be considered necessary to compensate for damages 
caused by the movement. A permit may be issued on an annual basis. 
(e) ?Poles. A person may transport telephone, telegraph, or electric poles of a greater length than 
otherwise authorized over the highways in the construction, maintenance, or repair of telephone, 
telegraph, or electric lines, if a permit is first secured from the state transportation department, the 
county road commission, or local authority having jurisdiction of the highways. 
(f) ?Pipes. A person may transport concrete pipe of a greater width than otherwise authorized over 
highways, if a permit for each project is first secured from the state transportation department, the 
county road commission, or local authority having jurisdiction of the highways. 
(g) ?Carrying, display of permit. A permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or 
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by a police officer or 
authorized agent of an authority granting the permit. A person shall not violate any of the terms or 
conditions of the special permit. 
(h) ?Violations. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-168. - Farm implement transportation; annual permits for dealers. 
    Upon application, the state transportation department may issue an annual permit authorizing a farm 
implement dealer to transport by truck, truck tractor, semitrailer, or trailer upon a state highway during 
daylight hours, farm machinery or implements of a greater width or height than authorized by this act, if 
the transportation is permitted under rules promulgated pursuant to section 716 of the state motor vehicle 
code. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-169. - Power of local authorities to prohibit or limit operation of trucks on highways. 
    The city and county road commission with respect to highways under their jurisdiction, except state 
trunk line highways, by ordinance or resolution, may do any of the following: 
(1) ?Prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles on designated highways or 
streets. 
(2) ?Impose limitations as to the weight of trucks or other commercial vehicles on designated 
highways or streets. 
(3) ?Provide that only certain highways or streets may be used by trucks or other commercial 
vehicles. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-170. - Peace officer, extraterritorial authority. 
    A peace officer of any county, city, village or township of this state may exercise authority and 
powers outside his own county, city, village or township when he is enforcing this act on a street or 
highway which is on the boundary of the county, city, village or township the same as if he were in his 
own county, city, village or township. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-171. - Enforcement by police officer; investigation; detention of driver; arrest. 
    Any police officer having reason to believe that the load, weight, or height of a vehicle or load is in 
violation of section 74-158, 74-160, 74-163 or 74-165 which violation is a misdemeanor, may require the 
driver of the vehicle to stop, and the officer may investigate, weigh or measure the vehicle or load. If after 
personally investigating, weighing, or measuring the vehicle or load, the officer determines that the load, 
weight, or height of a vehicle or load is in violation of the requirements of section 74-158, 74-160, 74-163 
or 74-165, the officer may temporarily detain the driver of the vehicle for purposes of making a record or 
vehicle check, may make an arrest for the violation, and may proceed as otherwise provided in this 
article. 
(Ord. of 11-3-03(3)) 


Sec. 74-172. - Adoption of State of Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act and federal regulations. 
    The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, as amended, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et 
seq.), and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Rules promulgated thereunder are hereby adopted by 
reference and as hereafter amended by the state legislature. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, 12-2-13) 


Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 14; 
floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public 
places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 78-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City water distribution system means all mains, connections, pipes, meters, hydrants and 
appurtenances connected with or served by the city water system. 
    Commercial user means an establishment as listed in the Standard Industrial Classification manual, 
1972 edition, and those establishments involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, 
based on a determination by the superintendent, discharges primarily domestic waste or wastes from 
sanitary conveniences. 
    Department means the water department of the city. 
    Residential user shall mean the kind of user of water and wastewater facilities whose premises or 
building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as 
detached, semi-detached, and row houses, "mobile" homes, apartments, foster care homes, or 
permanent multi-family dwellings. Transit lodging shall not be included as it is to be considered 
commercial. 
    Service connection means a connection serving a single water customer consisting of one 
connection, one curbstop and one meter. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the department or his authorized representative. 
    Water connection means that part of the city water distribution system connecting the water main 
with the premises served. 
    Water main means that part of the city water distribution system located within easement lines or 
streets designed to supply more than one water connection. 
    Water tap means the connection of the water service to the water main. 
(Code 1983, § 2.41; Ord. of 5-18-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 78-32. - Service connections. 
    Application for water connections shall be made to the superintendent on forms prescribed and 
furnished by him. The superintendent may refuse to authorize a larger service pipe than reasonably 
required by the premises served. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in accordance 
with the rules and regulations of the department and upon payment of a water tap fee, a service 
connection fee and a meter installation charge where meters are required. The fees shall be as 
established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2.42) 


Sec. 78-33. - Turning on water service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the department, shall turn on or off any water 
service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing his work (when it must be 
immediately turned off) or upon receiving written order from the department; provided, however, that upon 
written permit from the department, water may be turned on for construction purposes only, prior to the 
granting of a certificate of occupancy for the premises, and upon payment of the charges applicable 
thereto, which shall include the water tap and service connection fees, meter installation fee and deposit. 
(Code 1983, § 2.43) 


Sec. 78-34. - Injury to facilities. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall willfully or 
carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or 
equipment which is a part of the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1983, § 2.51) 


Sec. 78-35. - Cross connections. 
(a) ?The water supply cross connection rules of the state department of public health, being R?
325.11.401 to R?325.11.407 of the Michigan Administrative Code, are adopted by reference. 
(b) ?The city shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply 
where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of 
inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by 
the city and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(c) ?The representative of the city water department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time 
any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of 
inspecting the piping system thereof for cross connections. On the request of the owner, lessees or 
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information 
regarding the piping system on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, 
when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d) ?The superintendent of the water department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water 
service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section 
exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of 
contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be 
restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this 
section. 
(e) ?The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall 
be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city 
plumbing codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which 
is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: Water unsafe for 
drinking. 
(f) ?This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and city plumbing regulations, but is 
supplementary to them. 
(Code 1983, § 2.52) 


Sec. 78-36. - Fluoridation. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful to add fluoride to any public water supply system owned and operated by the 
city. 
(b) ?No fluoride shall be added to any water furnished by the city, which may be consumed by human 
beings, and the city hereby rejects the requirement of fluoridation in any manner or amount as may 
be prescribed by the state department of public health. 
(Code 1983, § 2.53) 


Sec. 78-37. - Water service regulations. 
(a) ?Authority of city manager to create. The city manager shall have the authority to make reasonable 
rules and regulations concerning the water system of the city as he shall find necessary and to 
change and modify such rules after publishing notice as required by law; provided, however, that 
such regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a rule or regulation of the city manager shall have the right of 
appeal to the city council, which shall confirm, modify or revoke any such rule or regulation; provided, 
however, that such right of appeal must be exercised within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1983, § 2.54) 


Sec. 78-38. - Maintenance of service connection. 
(a) ?The service connection from the main to the curb stop, and the stop box and fittings will be provided 
in place and maintained by the water department after payment of the fee charged for a water 
connection as provided in section 78-32. The service pipe from the curb stop to the building on 
private or public property shall be installed and properly maintained by the owner. The owner shall 
keep the curb box free from dirt, stones or other substances that will prevent access to the curb box. 
(b) ?Whenever the service connection from the curb box, located near the curb or property line, to the 
meter require repair or replacement to ensure proper delivery of water or to permit changing the 
meter, prevent waste of water or for any other cause, the customer shall be notified to make such 
replacement or repair within 48 hours and if such replacement or repairs are not made within such 
time, the water service may be discontinued. 
(c) ?Whenever a service connection is frozen, the pipe from the curb box to the meter or inside a 
residential structure shall be thawed out by the customer at their expense. 
(d) ?All repairs to damaged water lines connecting the water main to the curb box, meter or dwelling unit 
shall be charged to and collected from the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, 5-5-14) 


Secs. 78-39—78-60. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - METERS 


Sec. 78-61. - Use required; exception. 
    No person except a department employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, 
alter or interfere in any way with the water meter. The superintendent, with the approval of the city 
council, may authorize service on flat rate charges where it is not practical to install a meter. 
(1) ?Residential premises shall be unmetered and billed the flat residential rate. Any installation of 
an in-ground lawn sprinkler system requires a back-flow preventer. 
(2) ?Commercial premises shall be metered. Any installation of an in-ground lawn sprinkler system 
requires a back-flow preventer. All commercial accounts shall have a back flow preventer 
installed after the meter. 
(3) ?Home occupations in residential dwellings shall be unmetered and billed the flat rate. Home 
occupations shall install a vacuum break to prevent contamination of the water system. A home 
occupation property whose status is changing immediately as a result of the proposed 
ordinance change, do not have to pay the conversion fee. A home occupation property whose 
status changes voluntarily after July 1, 1998, will have to pay the conversion fee. Any 
installation of an in-ground lawn sprinkler system requires a back-flow preventer. 
(4) ?Family day care homes and group day care homes in residential dwellings shall be unmetered 
and billed the flat rate. Any installation of an in-ground lawn sprinkler system requires a back-
flow preventer. 
(5) ?Multiple dwellings with two or more units shall be metered and the bill sent to the owner of the 
building. Dwelling units that convert to single-family or multiple-family shall pay a conversion fee 
established in the annual budget resolution establishing fees and charges. A multiple dwelling 
property whose status is changing immediately as a result of the proposed ordinance change, 
do not have to pay the conversion fee. A multiple dwelling property whose status changes 
voluntarily after July 1, 1998, will have to pay the conversion fee. Any installation of an in-
ground lawn sprinkler system requires a back-flow preventer. 
(Code 1983, § 2.44; Ord. of 5-18-98; Ord. of 10-13-03) 


Sec. 78-62. - Accessibility; shutting off of water supply upon inaccessibility. 
(a) ?Meters shall be installed in a location that will be of easy access and approved by the water 
department. 
(b) ?The water supply may be shut off of any premises to which the water meter is inaccessible; 
provided, however, that notice of meter inaccessibility and pending water shut off shall be sent by 
first class mail to the owner of the premises at least 14 days prior to shutting off the water. 
(Code 1983, § 2.45; Ord. of 5-18-98) 


Sec. 78-63. - Reimbursement for damage. 
    Any damage, which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent or tenant, 
or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which 
may be wrought by frost, hot water or steam backing from a boiler shall be paid by the owner of the 
property to the city on presentation of a bill which shall be based on time and materials, plus 15 percent 
for overhead. 
(Code 1983, § 2.46) 


Sec. 78-64. - Failure. 
    If any meter shall fail to register properly, the department shall estimate the consumption on the 
basis of former consumption and bill accordingly. 
(Code 1983, § 2.47) 


Sec. 78-65. - Inaccurate meters. 
    A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge of $5.00 
will be made. If the meter is found to be defective, it shall be repaired, or an accurate meter installed, and 
no charge shall be made. 
(Code 1983, § 2.48) 


Sec. 78-66. - Accuracy required. 
    A meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested, it registers not to exceed five percent more or 
five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of five 
percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered fast to that extent. 
If a meter registers in excess of five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it 
shall be considered slow to that extent. 
(Code 1983, § 2.49) 


Sec. 78-67. - Bill adjustment. 
    If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been determined to register 
fast, the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent fast multiplied by the amount of the 
incorrect bills incurred by the consumer within the three months prior to the test. If a meter so tested is 
determined to register slow, the department may collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent 
slow multiplied by the amount of the incorrect bills incurred by the consumer for the prior three months. 
When the department on its own initiative makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without cost to 
the consumer, other than his paying the amount due the city for water used by him as provided in this 
division, if the meter is found to be slow. 
(Code 1983, § 2.50) 


Sec. 78-68. - Meter connections. 
    The city will furnish all necessary meters and expansion joints used in connection with such meters 
for installation by the customer's contractor. 
    In new service locations with buildings of multiple occupancy, where on service may serve two or 
more customers, a service valve must be furnished and installed by the building owner for each set of 
living quarters. 
    On services larger than one inch, a vertical or horizontal bypass is to be furnished and installed by 
the building owners. 
    All service and bypass valves shall be sealable in the closed position. Breaking a city meter or valve 
seal without prior notification to the city shall be grounds for the city to bill the customer twice the amount 
of the largest bill in the most recent twelve-month period. 
    The city shall be responsible for normal maintenance of meters. The customer shall be responsible 
for damage to the meter by freezing or abuse. The customer shall be responsible for keeping the meter 
heated and protected from mechanical damage. 
    Installation of meters in meter pits will not be permitted, unless a remote reading meter head can be 
installed at an easily accessible and secure location. 
(Ord. of 5-18-98) 


Sec. 78-69. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more 
than $500.00, together with costs of prosecution, by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 
days, or by both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 5-18-98) 


Secs. 78-70—78-89. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - WATER WELL ABANDONMENT 


Sec. 78-90. - Abandonment required. 
    Any user with an existing water well shall, upon making a water connection, abandon and plug the 
water well in accordance with the requirements of Part 127 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 
of 1978, as amended, and the Michigan Administrative Code R325.1601 et seq., as amended. Such a 
water well shall be abandoned and plugged no later than 30 days after the water connection is made. The 
user shall provide advance written notice of the well abandonment and plugging to the department and 
ensure that the department inspects the abandonment and plugging work. 
(Ord. of 10-7-02) 


Secs. 78-91—78-100. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted November 10, 2008, repealed and reenacted divisions 1—6 in 
their entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, divisions 1—6 pertained to similar subject matter and 
derived from Ord. No. 22K, §§ 2.81, 2.82(1)—(14), 2.83(1)—(5), 2.84—2.99, 3.00, 3.02, adopted August 
27, 1990. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 78-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, Public Law 92-500 (33) USC 1251 
et seq. 
    ASTM means the American Society for Testing Materials. 
    Authority means the City of Vassar. 
    BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under 
standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligram per liter. 
    Building lead means the extension from the building to the public sewer, including the wye branch. 
The following rules will be applied by the city to determine if the building lead is their responsibility: 
(1) ?Ten (10) feet from the edge of street in the case the public sewer is located within the street 
right-of-way. 
a. ?Properties located on the opposite side of the public sewer will be measured by using the 
street's edge that is located in front of their property. 
(2) ?Ten feet from the sewer manhole, in the case the public sewer is located within a recorded 
utility easement. 
a. ?Properties located on the opposite side of the public sewer will be measured by using the 
street's edge that is located in front of their property. 
 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestream from any portion of an industrial user's 
facility. 
    Categorical industrial user (CIU) means an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment 
standards. 
    City means the City of Vassar. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added and the amount of 
residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. 
    Classes of user means the kind of user connected to the sanitary sewers including but not limited to, 
residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, and governmental. 
(1) ?Residential user means a user of the wastewater facilities whose premises or building is used 
primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, 
semidetached, and row houses; mobile homes, apartments, foster care homes or permanent 
multifamily dwellings. Transit lodging shall not be including as it is to be considered commercial. 
(2) ?Industrial user means any nongovernmental or nonresidential users of the wastewater facilities 
that discharge industrial wastes to the wastewater facilities. Industrial users shall be identified in 
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972 edition, Office of Management and Budget, 
as amended and supplemented under the following divisions: 
Division A 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing 
Division B 
Mining 
Division D 
Manufacturing 
Division E 
Transportation, Communication, Gas and Sanitary Services 
Division I 
Services 
 
A user of the division listed above may be excluded if it is determined by the superintendent that 
it will introduce primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(3) ?Commercial user means an establishment as listed in the Standard Industrial Classification 
Manual, 1972 edition, involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on 
a determination by the superintendent, discharges primarily segregated domestic waste or 
wastes from sanitary services. 
(4) ?Institutional user means an establishment listed in the Standard Industrial Classification 
Manual, 1972 edition, involved in a social, charitable, religious or educational function which, 
based on a determination by the superintendent, discharges primarily domestic waste or wastes 
from sanitary conveniences. 
(5) ?Governmental user means any federal, state or, local governmental user of the wastewater 
facilities. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of 
organic matter with strong chemical oxidant under standard laboratory procedures and expressed as 
milligrams per liter. 
    Compatible pollutants means those pollutants that the wastewater treatment plant has been 
designed for specific removal of and shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, fecal 
coliform bacteria, total phosphorus, ammonia nitrogen, and any other that may be determined effectively 
treatable and added, as such, to the NPDES permit in the future. 
    Critical materials means organic and inorganic substances, elements or compounds listed in the 
register complied by the Michigan Water Resources Commission of the Department of Environmental 
Quality of the State of Michigan. 
    Daily average means that based upon a minimum of eight grab samples within a 24-hour period. 
    Director means the superintendent/coordinator of public works of the city, or his authorized agent, 
deputy or representative. 
    Discharge permit means that permit required by subsection 78-126(a). 
    Dissolved solids means those solids in wastewater other than suspended solids. 
    Domestic waste means wastes normally emanating from residential living units and resulting from 
the day-to-day activities usually considered to be carried on in a domicile. Wastes emanating from other 
units which are to be considered domestic wastes shall be of the same matter and strength and have the 
same flow characteristics. (See also the definition for Residential user .) 
    Dwelling means any structure designed for habitation including, but not limited to, houses, mobile 
homes, apartment houses, condominiums and townhouses. 
    Equalized means the on-site storage of sewage to allow for predetermined flow into the sewer line. 
    Excessive means in such magnitude that in the judgment of the superintendent, it will cause damage 
to any facility, will be harmful to the sewage treatment process, cannot be removed in the sewage 
treatment plant to the degree required to meet the Act, can otherwise endanger life, limb or public 
property, and or which can constitute a public nuisance. 
    Footing drains means the pipe or conduit placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and 
which intentionally admits groundwater. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, or serving of food; from the handling, 
storage or sale of produce; or from the canning or packaging of food. It is composed largely of putrescible 
organic matter and its natural or added moisture content. 
    Groundwater means the subsurface water occupying the saturation zone from which wells and 
springs are fed. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not defined as a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid, solid or gaseous wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, 
food processing, laboratories, trades or businesses, as distinct from domestic sewage. (See also the 
definition of Industrial user .) 
    Industry means a manufacturing establishment which produces a product from raw or purchased 
materials. 
    Infiltration means any water entering the sewerage system from the ground, through such means as, 
but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, 
and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Infiltration/inflow means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without 
distinguishing the source. 
    Inflow means any water entering the sewer system from such sources as, but not limited to, roof 
leaders; cellar, yard or area drains; and footing drains, sump pumps, cooling water discharges, drains 
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers, catch basins, 
stormwaters, and surface runoffs. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
    Interceptor sewer means a sewer that receives the dry weather flow from a number of collector 
sewers, sewer stubs or other sewers or outlets, and conducts such waters to a point of treatment or 
disposal. 
    Local unit means the City of Vassar. 
    May is permissive. (See the definition of Shall .) 
    MDEQ means Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    New source means construction at a source where no other point source is located, the process of 
production causing discharge is totally replaced due to construction or production, or wastewater 
generating processes of the facility are modified or substantially independent of the existing source at the 
same source. 
    Notification means mailing by first class United States mail addressed to the premises, as reflected 
on the tax role of the city. 
    NPDES permit means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the 
state department of environmental quality. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other efforts required 
to operate and maintain the sewer system, consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of wastewater to 
produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal 
regulations. 
    Owner(s) means owner of a parcel of real property as identified by a deed that has been recorded 
with the county register of deeds. 
    Person shall include, but not limited to any individual, firm, company, association, society group, trust 
or governmental authority. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of 
solution. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties 
in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such 
pollutants into the sewer system. The reduction or alterations can be obtained by physical, chemical or 
biological processes, process changes or by other means except as prohibited by Section 403.6(d) of the 
Act. 
    Private means jurisdiction by a nongovernmental entity. 
    Private sewer means a sewer system which is controlled, owned, operated and maintained by a 
private party and connects to the public sewer. The city is not responsible for any part of the private 
sewer system except for the immediate point of connection to the public sewer system. 
    Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all 
particles will be carried freely under flow conditions that normally prevail in the public sewers, with no 
particle greater than one-half of an inch in any dimension. 
    Public means jurisdiction by a governmental entity. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means any sewer treatment works and the sewers and 
conveyance appurtenances discharging thereto, which are owned and operated by the city. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, if any, and 
includes all publicly owned, operated, and maintained properties, structures, manholes, inlets, equipment, 
conduits, and processes for the purpose of collecting, treating, testing and dispensing of domestic 
wastewater, as existing now or hereinafter added to, expanded or improved, and within the public sewer 
and which is controlled, owned, operated and maintained by the city. 
    Replacement means the replacement, in whole or in part, of any equipment or facility in the sewer 
system to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other 
applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewage means a combination of water-carried domestic wastes from residences, business 
buildings, institutions, governmental and industrial establishments. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and 
subsurface water are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sediment means that matter which settles to the bottom of a liquid. 
    Separate means a wastewater transmission facility which is only intended to transport sanitary 
wastewater. 
    Septic tank disposal means the disposal of wastewater at the treatment plant by other means than 
through the sewer mains. 
    Sewage means a combination of water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, 
institutions, governmental, and industrial establishments, together with subsurface water and stormwater 
that may be present. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying the wastewaters. 
    Sewer use ordinance (SUO) means the rules in which the city uses to govern, operate and maintain 
the city's sewer system and refers to this article. 
    Shall is mandatory. (See the definition of May .) 
    Shall discharge means cause or allow to be discharged, either directly or indirectly. 
    Significant discharge means anybody who discharges more than 10,000 gallons a day or discharges 
any toxic or hazardous materials or any substance that may cause interference with the operation of the 
treatment works. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means all industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment 
standards under 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. and any other user that discharges an average of 
25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact 
cooling water and boiler blow down water); contributes a process waste stream that makes up five 
percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or is 
designated as such by the control authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) for adversely affecting the 
treatment plants operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 
CFR 403.8(f)(6)). 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given 
constituent or in any quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration, longer than 15 minutes, more 
than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation, or five times the 
allowable limit for those substances with allowable limits in this article. 
    Soil pipe means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the 
discharge soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the 
building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Standard classification means a classification based on the most current publication of the Standard 
Industrial Classification Manual (SIC). Standard Industrial Classification Code (SIC) numbers and 
descriptions as found in the 1972 or latest edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 
prepared by the Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. 
    Standard Method means the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and 
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works 
Association, and the Water Environmental Federation. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the treatment plant or his authorized deputy, agent or 
representative. 
    Surface water means all on the surface, as distinguished from subsurface water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface, or are in suspension in the water, 
wastewater or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering and are not referred to as 
nonfilterable residue in laboratory testing. 
    Total phosphorus means the total phosphorus content of a sample including all of the 
orthophosphates and condensed phosphates, both soluble and insoluble, and organic and inorganic 
species, and referred to in Standard Methods as total phosphorus. 
    Uncontaminated water means any water that has been taken in and used by a person and 
discharged without chemical change and meets the same physical requirements as exhibited before use. 
This does not include noncontact cooling water. 
    Unpolluted industrial process water means industrial process water or cooling water which is 
completely compatible with applicable stream standards, excepting thermal limitations. This includes 
noncontact cooling water. 
    User means any person that discharges wastes into the sewer system. 
    Wastes means substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that is added to the discharge water by 
the user. 
    Wastewater means any water that has been used and degraded or altered physically and/or 
chemically and discharged as an unwanted substance. 
(1) ?Combined wastewater means a combination of stormwater and other wastewater such as 
domestic or industrial wastewater. 
(2) ?Sanitary wastewater means a combination of domestic and industrial wastewaters, together 
with allowable infiltration. 
    Wye branch means that part of the building lead that connects the building lead to the public sewer. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 78-102. - Sewer system regulations. 
(a) ?Regulations. The city manager shall have the authority to make reasonable rules and regulations 
concerning the sewer system of the city as he or she shall find necessary, and to change and modify 
such rules after notice as required by law; provided, however, that such regulations are not contrary 
to the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a rule or regulation of the city manager shall have the right to 
appeal to the city council, which shall confirm, modify or revoke such rule or regulation; provided, 
however, that such right of appeal must be exercised within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-103. - Disposal of excrement, garbage or other objectionable wastes on public or private 
property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited, in an unsanitary 
manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any 
human or animal excrements, garbage or other objectionable wastes. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-104. - Article provisions not to operate as abatement of action, charges or proceedings. 
    This article shall not operate as an abatement of any action, charges, or proceedings now pending or 
which may hereafter arise under or by virtue of any ordinance or part thereof required. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-105. - Septic tank disposal. 
(a) ?Wastes from septic, vehicular or marine holding tanks may be disposed of only at the treatment 
plant. No wastes in violation of this article will be allowed. Wastes of unusual strengths or 
characteristics not covered in this article, if determined that such wastes could be harmful to the 
sewer system, will not be allowed, variations from wastes prohibited may be allowed, if it is 
determined by the superintendent that such variation will not be harmful to the sewer system. 
(b) ?All operators of septic tank trucks and other waste disposal units that are allowed to use the dump 
site shall be approved by the local unit and the superintendent. Such approval may be revoked at 
any time for rules of ordinance violations. 
(c) ?The city and/or the city council may provide for a user charge system by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Secs. 78-106—78-125. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 


Sec. 78-126. - Discharge permit and reports. 
(a) ?Permit required. Discharge permits shall be required of users as follows: 
(1) ?Users requiring. Persons engaged in any activities listed in Section 306(b)(1)(a) of the Act, and 
as revised by the administrator of the Act, shall obtain from the superintendent, prior to 
connecting to or discharging to the sewer system, a discharge permit. All major industrial users, 
as identified by quantity of flow or type of discharge, shall also obtain a permit. The following 
listed users must also obtain permits: 
Pulp and paper mills 
Paperboard, builder's paper, and board mills 
Meat product and rendering processing 
Dairy product processing 
Grain mills 
Canned and preserved fruits and vegetable produce 
Canned and preserves seafood processing 
Sugar processing 
Textile mills 
Cement manufacturing 
Feedlots 
Electroplating 
Organic chemicals manufacturing 
Inorganic chemicals manufacturing 
Plastic and synthetic materials manufacturing 
Potato processing 
Soap and detergent manufacturing 
Fertilizer manufacturing 
Petroleum refining 
Iron and steel manufacturing 
Nonferrous metals 
Phosphate manufacturing 
Steam electric plants 
Ferroalloy manufacturing 
Leather tanning and finishing 
Glass and asbestos manufacturing 
Rubber processing 
Timber products processing 
Or anyone who meets the definition of a significant industrial user. 
(2) ?Sixty-day grace period. Such persons presently engaged in the actions discharging to the 
sewer system shall, within 60 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this 
section is derived, complete and file an application for a permit with the superintendent. 
Discharge permits and discharge reports must be signed by a responsible corporate officer 
such as president, vice-president or secretary of the corporation or any other person who 
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation. 
(3) ?Superintendent's responsibility and authority. The superintendent shall require any person who 
is engaged in such activities and who is discharging or proposing to discharge wastes into the 
sewer system to obtain a discharge permit. The superintendent may change the conditions of 
the permit as circumstances, laws or regulations enacted by state or federal governments may 
require change. Limitations on discharge of wastes into the sewer system shall be in 
accordance and agreement with the current effluent guidelines developed by the Environmental 
Protection Agency and as modified by the state and the city. 
(b) ?Discharge permit application. Discharge permit application forms are available at the office of the 
superintendent, and persons required to obtain a permit shall produce and complete the application 
at their own expense and file the application with the superintendent and the local unit, and the 
superintendent will evaluate the data furnished. If insufficient data has been furnished, the 
superintendent will notify the applicant and action will not be taken until the desired information is 
received. After acceptance of the data, the superintendent may issue a permit with any restrictions, 
conditions, limitations or special requirements noted thereon, which may contain, but is not limited to, 
the following: 
(1) ?Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2) ?Installation of inspection, sampling and flow interruption facilities including access to such 
facilities; 
(3) ?Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and 
method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(4) ?Submission of discharge reports; 
(5) ?Special service charge or fees; 
(6) ?Pretreatment requirements; 
(7) ?Submission of samples, with chemical analyses, of all substances that may appear in the 
sewage discharge; and 
(8) ?A continuously updated inventory of all substances that may appear in the sewage discharge, 
with normal usage and amount on hand shown thereon. 
(c) ?Change in information; bypass. Any significant change in information supplied on the application 
form or in strengths or volumes of waters and wastewaters shall be reported immediately to the 
superintendent for determination of need to change conditions of the permit and related fees. The 
treatment plant superintendent shall be notified in the event of any anticipated or unanticipated 
bypasses. Such bypasses shall be prohibited unless unavoidable or justifiable. 
(d) ?Transfer of permit. A discharge permit shall not be transferred to a new person or location or be 
valid for a different manufacturing process. A new application shall be made in accordance with 
subsection (b) of this section. 
(e) ?Baseline monitoring report. New and existing sources that are classified as categorical industries by 
EPA standards are required to file baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) at least 90 days prior to 
discharge. New sources are required to include information on pretreatment methods they intend to 
use and to provide data on production, flow and amounts of regulated pollutants. 
(f) ?Permit renewal. All permits that are issued shall be subject to review of the discharge terms and 
conditions periodically, and shall be reviewed and renewed at least once every five years. 
(g) ?Enforcement. The conditions of the discharge permit shall be enforced by the superintendent in 
accordance with the provisions of this section. Any permit holder who fails to conform to the 
conditions and provisions of the permit will be subject to enforcement provisions of section 78-130. 
New sources are required to install and start up technology prior to discharge, to comply with 
categorical standards, and to achieve compliance within the shortest time feasible, not to exceed 90 
days after commencement of discharge. 
(h) ?Discharge reports. Each person issued a discharge permit shall submit a signed discharge report to 
the superintendent in June and December of each year. The superintendent may require a permit 
holder to submit more frequent reports if, in his judgment, believe the wastes being discharged are in 
violation of this article. This report shall include, but not be limited to, chemical constituents of the 
user's wastewater discharge, the nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emissions, 
production quantities, hours of operation and other information that relates to the generation, 
handling and discharge of wastes. The report may also include the chemical constituents and 
quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on the site. If sufficient data has been furnished, other 
information shall be provided upon request of the superintendent. The cost of any sampling that is 
required is the responsibility of the industrial user of the sewer system. 
(i) ?New source compliance deadline (40 CFR 403.6(b)). New sources are required to install and start up 
technology prior to discharge, to comply with categorical standards and to achieve compliance within 
the shortest time feasible, not to exceed 90 days after the commencement of discharge. 
(j) ?Violations. All persons engaged in activities set forth in subsection (a) of this section and who are 
discharging wastes to the sewer system shall notify the superintendent immediately upon discharge 
of wastes in violation of this article or the user's permit. A copy of this section and the treatment 
plant's telephone number shall be posted on the user's premises. 
(k) ?Violation reports. This notification shall be followed by a detailed written report, describing the 
causes of the accident and measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Dates shall be set 
for completion of such measures, and the completion shall be reported to the superintendent. 
Notification will not relieve users of liabilities for any expense, loss or damage to the system, or for 
any fines imposed on the city on account thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-127. - Restricted information; notification of industrial users. 
(a) ?Restricted information. All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, 
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections, shall be available to the 
public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests in writing that it is not to be released 
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act. However, federal regulations require that effluent data 
furnished by industrial user be available without restriction, as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, including: 
(1) ?Information necessary to determine the identity, amount, frequency, concentration, temperature 
or other characteristics of any pollutant discharges. 
(2) ?A description of the manner or rate of operation of any source to the extent necessary to 
determine what was discharged as regards to any applicable standard or limitation. 
(3) ?A general description of the location and nature of the source to the extent necessary to 
distinguish it from others. 
(4) ?Information on research, products, processes and methods can be protected to the extent that 
it is not effluent data. 
(b) ?Notification of industrial users. The city shall notify users of all applicable pretreatment standards 
and any other applicable requirements under Sections 204(b) and 405 of the Clean Water Act and 
Subtitles (c) and (d) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. This shall give the 
superintendent authority to conduct such notification. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-128. - Enforcement and termination of service. 
(a) ?Cease discharge. The city or superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist if it is 
determined that a discharge of wastes has been taking place, or threatens to take place in violation 
of prohibitions or limitations of this article, or provisions of the discharge permit, and direct those 
persons not complying, to comply immediately or comply in accordance with a time schedule 
provided by the superintendent, or to take appropriate or remedial preventative action in the event of 
threatened violation. 
(b) ?Corrective schedule. If it is determined that a discharge of wastes has been occurring or threatens 
to occur, in violation of this article or the provisions of the discharge permit, the city or the 
superintendent may require the user to submit for approval by the city or the superintendent, with 
such modifications considered necessary, a detailed time schedule of corrective and/or preventative 
action. 
(c) ?Permit revocation. The city manager or city council may revoke any discharge permit or terminate, 
or cause to be terminated, wastewater service to any person or industry, if a violation of this article is 
found to endanger the environment or threatens to interfere with the operation of the sewer system 
and shall be effective immediately upon written notification by the city or the superintendent. 
(d) ?Show cause hearing. Where the violation of this article is not corrected by timely compliance, the 
city council may order the user to show cause before the city council, or its duly authorized 
representative, why the proposed service termination should not be taken. A written notice shall be 
served on the discharger by personal service, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, 
specifying the time, place and date of a hearing to be held by the council or its designee regarding 
the violation; the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken; the proposed enforcement 
action; and directing the discharger to show cause before the council why the enforcement action 
should not be taken. The notice of hearing shall be served no less than ten days before the hearing. 
The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by the council which shall then enter appropriate 
orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger. Appeal of such orders may be 
taken by the discharger in accordance with applicable local or state law. 
(e) ?Reconstruction. Any user permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any decision or 
determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the city or superintendent interpreting or 
implementing the provisions of this article, or in any permit issued under this article, may file with the 
city manager a written request for reconsideration within ten days of such decision, action or 
determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. The 
city manager, after consultation with the superintendent, shall make a ruling on the appeal within ten 
days. 
(f) ?Compliance orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate 
any provisions of this article, discharge permit or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. 
The city or superintendent may issue a compliance order to the user to come into compliance within 
the specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time specified. The user's 
sewer service may be discontinued, unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related 
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. 
    Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance including, but 
not limited to, additional self-monitoring and management practice to minimize the amount of pollutants 
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for 
a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the discharger of any 
liability for violations, including any continuing violations. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a 
bar against or be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-129. - Agreements. 
    No provision of this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement 
between the user and the city whereby sewage or waste of unusual strength, volume or character may be 
accepted by the sewer system for treatment, subject to payment by such user of additional charges as 
may be reasonable, providing they do not extend to federal categorical pretreatment standards or any 
federal or state regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-130. - Penalties. 
(a) ?Assessments. When a discharge, by any user, of wastes or other material causes an obstruction, 
damage, unusual operational problems or other impairment to the sewer system, the superintendent 
may assess a charge against the user's waste service charge. 
(b) ?Discontinuation of service. Whenever a discharger of wastes or other material is in violation of the 
provisions of this article, or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, 
pollution or nuisance, the city council may order all discharge into the sewer system stopped by 
written notice served on any such persons engaged in such activities or causing discharge into the 
sewer system, and any such person shall forthwith stop such discharge until authorized by the 
superintendent to proceed otherwise. The user shall have the opportunity to respond to this 
notification within ten days. 
(c) ?Injunctive relief. Any wastes which are discharged into the sewer system in violation of this article 
will allow the city to seek injunctive relief in the appropriate court. 
(d) ?Falsification of records. Any person who violates the provisions of this article or any person who 
knowingly makes any false statements, representations, records, reports, plans or other documents 
filed with the city, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method, required under 
the article, shall be in violation and be subject to a fine not greater than $1,000.00, confinement in 
the county jail for not longer than 90 days, or any combination in the discretion of the sentencing 
judge. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(e) ?Indemnification of the city. Any user that discharges wastes in violation of the provisions of this 
article and causes the city to be penalized or fined by state or federal governments for such 
violations shall be charged the cost of the fines imposed against the local unit and such costs shall 
be added to the user's service charge. 
(f) ?Enforcement action. A list of all significant dischargers which were subject of enforcement actions of 
this article during the previous 12 months, shall be published by the city in the newspaper with the 
largest circulation in the municipality in which the unit is located, summarizing the enforcement 
actions taken against the dischargers during the same 12 months, whose violations remained 
uncorrected 45 days or more after notifications of noncompliance over that 12-month period, or 
which in involve failure to accurately report noncompliance. Remedies for violations of pretreatment 
standards or requirements are contained in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi). This provision requires the 
POTWs to have the authority to seek or assess civil or criminal penalties of at least $1,000.00 a day, 
plus legal fees, for each violation by IUs of pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(g) ?Municipal civil infraction and fines. A person who violates any provision of this article shall be 
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than 
$1,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions for the first violation. In 
addition to the civil fine provided in this division, the city shall also cover its costs, including all direct 
and indirect expenses to which the city has been put in connection with this violation. 
    A violator of this division shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and judicial 
orders as are authorized under state law. 
(h) ?Repeat offenses. Repeat offenses under this division shall be subject to increased fines as provided 
in this section, below. As used in this section, "repeat offenses," means a second (or any 
subsequent) violation of the same requirement or provision of this division for which the person 
admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense 
under this division shall be as follow: 
(1) ?The fine for any offense, which is a first, repeat offense, shall be $2,500.00, plus costs. 
(2) ?The fine for any offense, which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, 
shall be $5,000.00 each, plus costs. 
(i) ?Separate violation. Each day that a violation under this article continues to exist shall be considered 
a separate violation subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. 
(j) ?Threat to health, safety and welfare of the community. If the superintendent determines that situation 
causes or will cause an immediate, imminent and/or impending threat to health, safety and welfare of 
the community, or if the condition which causes the violation of this article is not corrected within 90 
days of the first notice of violation, the city may proceed to abate, remediate or otherwise eliminate 
the offending condition and may assess all cost incurred by the city, including attorney's fees and 
other costs, against the real property. The city shall have a lien for costs, which it incurs against the 
real property on which the offending condition existed. This lien for costs shall be collected and 
treated in the same matter as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, 
Public Act 206 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1983, as amended, being MCL 211.1 et seq. 
(k) ?Civil judgment. In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against 
the owner of the property on which the offending condition existed for the full costs incurred by the 
city in cleaning up and abating the offending condition. In such action, the city shall be entitled to 
recover its costs of suit, together with its reasonable attorney fees. 
(l) ?Reporting requirements for permittee. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by the 
discharger with applicable pretreatment standards set forth in this article or 90 days following 
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the treatment system by a new discharger, 
any discharger subject to this article shall submit to the city a report indicating the nature and 
concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge and the average 
maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall show that standards or requirements are being met 
on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is 
necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or 
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger and 
certified to by a qualified engineer. 
(m) ?Analytical requirements. All pollutant analysis including sampling techniques that are submitted as 
part of a discharge permit application or report, shall be performed in accordance with techniques as 
described in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment 
standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in 
question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the 
POTW. 
(n) ?Sample collection. Expect as indicated below, the user must collect samples using flow proportional 
composite collection techniques. The superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional 
sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a 
representative sample of the effluent being sampled. In addition, grab samples may be required to 
show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, 
cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be collected using grab sample 
techniques. 
(o) ?Noncompliance process report. Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance 
activities will be required to comply with this article, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the 
shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or 
implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. 
(1) ?Milestones. The schedule shall contain milestone dates for commencement and completion of 
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for 
the discharger to comply with the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, hiring 
an engineer, hiring the other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, executing 
contracts for major components, commencing construction and all other major acts necessary 
to achieve compliance with this article. 
(2) ?Time increments. Under no circumstances shall the city permit a time increment for any single 
step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine months. 
(3) ?Progress reports. Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the 
final date of compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the city, including no 
less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress 
represented by the milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this 
increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to 
return to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such 
progress reports to the city. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-131. - Operations upset. 
(a) ?Upset reports. Any discharger who experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger 
in a temporary state of noncompliance with this article shall inform the city thereof within 24 hours of 
the first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a 
written follow-up report shall be filed by the discharger with the city within five days. The report shall 
specify: 
(1) ?Description of the upset, the cause thereof, and the upset's impact upon the discharger's 
compliance status. 
(2) ?Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the 
noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(3) ?All steps taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other 
conditions of noncompliance. 
(b) ?Upset a defense. A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an affirmative 
defense to any enforcement action brought by the city against a discharger for any noncompliance 
with the article which rises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-132. - Records retention. 
    All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three years, any 
records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof 
relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis made by or in behalf of a discharger in connection 
with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are subject of administrative adjustment or 
any other enforcement or litigation activities pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the 
discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any 
and all appeals have expired. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Secs. 78-133—78-155. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - SEWER AND CONNECTIONS 


Sec. 78-156. - Connection required. 
    The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, 
recreation or other purposes, and from which sanitary sewage originates and which are situated within 
the city and which are not more than 200 feet from an available public sewer, are hereby required at the 
owners expense to install wastewater facilities therein in accordance with law and to connect such 
facilities directly with the available public sewer in acceptance with the provisions of this article within 90 
days after notification from the city. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Sec. 78-157. - Other laws. 
    The requirements of section 78-156 shall be in addition to any requirements that may be imposed by 
the United States, the state, the county or the city. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-158. - Engineering. 
    Plans and specifications for all public sewers to be constructed within the local unit shall be prepared 
by a registered professional engineer and approved by the local unit and director. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-159. - Construction permits. 
    If an owner requests to connect to the public sewer, the owner, prior to starting any construction, 
shall obtain a construction permit issued by the local unit and approved by the director. The owner who 
fails to obtain a permit from the city prior to work being performed is responsible for all costs that may 
occur. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Sec. 78-160. - Connection permits required. 
    No person shall uncover, make any connections or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public 
sewer or appurtenance thereof, including a connection to a wye branch without first obtaining a 
connection permit from the city which shall be approved by the director. A person who fails to obtain a 
permit from the city prior to work being performed is responsible for all costs that may occur. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Sec. 78-161. - Fees set by council. 
    All permit fees and inspection fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the local 
unit. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-162. - Construction procedures. 
    No openings shall be made to any public sewer without first obtaining a connection permit on the 
application form furnished by the city. All applications for a permit shall be made by the owner or the 
owner's authorized agent. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an application and 
inspection fee to defray the cost of processing the application and subsequent inspection of the 
construction or installation. All inspections shall be done in conformance with regulations as adopted by 
the city and approved by the director. Should conditions require more than one inspection or should a full-
time inspector be required, an additional inspection fee shall be charged. The removal of the cookie or 
stopper and connection to the public sewer shall be performed only in the immediate presence of the city 
inspector or his/her authorized representative. It shall be unlawful for any person connecting to a wye 
branch or a public sewer to cover any portion thereof until such time as same has been inspected and 
approved by the city inspector or his/her authorized agent. Such person shall give the city notice when 
the work is ready for inspection and shall leave the premises in a condition convenient for examination by 
the inspector. The person that applies for the permit shall be responsible to remove and replace all 
rejected work that does not conform to the city's specifications and standards as determined by the 
director, restore all public streets and alleys to a similar condition as existed prior to excavation as 
determined by the director, and shall make adjustments necessary to fully meet the requirements of this 
article, other rules and regulations hereafter established and the conditions of the permit, as determined 
by the director. Failure to pull a permit and or have work inspected prior to filling the hole, leaves the 
owner responsible for all current and future costs associated with their property's building lead and wye 
connection. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Sec. 78-163. - Maintenance cost. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, and maintenance shall be borne by 
the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be 
occasioned by the installation, connection, and maintenance of the wye branch and building lead. If a 
maintenance problem develops and it is determined, after inspection, that there is damage, problems with 
the building lead, including roots that have entered the building lead, or a crushed building lead, the 
allocation of cost to the responsible party of uncovering, repairing and incidental restoration shall be 
determined by using the definition of building lead. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Sec. 78-164. - Building leads, including the wye branch; use of old sewers. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, and maintenance, including 
inspection of the building lead shall be borne by the owner. 
    The wye branch shall be installed by the city or by a contractor on behalf of the city. The owner shall 
reimburse the city for all of the expenses incurred for the installation of the wye branch, including, but not 
limited to, permit fees, inspection fees, administrative costs, and actual construction costs. 
    A separate and independent building lead shall be provided for each building on a parcel of property 
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, and no building lead is available 
or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. 
    The front building may extend a sanitary sewer to the rear building, and the whole may be 
considered as one building lead after approval by the city. Old building leads and wye branches may be 
used in connection with the new buildings only when they are found, after examination and test, to meet 
all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Sec. 78-165. - Sewer elevation. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the 
basement floor. In all buildings in which any soil pipe is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, 
wastewater carried by such soil pipe shall be lifted by approved means and discharge to the building 
sewer. All excavations required for the installation of a sewer shall be open trench unless otherwise 
approved. Pipe laying, bedding and backfill shall not be placed until the work has been inspected and 
approved. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-166. - Connection of surface runoff to sewer. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspout, footing drains, areaway drains, sump pumps, or 
other sources of surface runoffs or groundwater and other sources of uncontaminated water to a sewer 
stub or building lead which is in turn is connected directly to a public sewer. Refer to the city's sanitary 
sewer inflow and infiltration reduction ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-167. - Guarding of excavations; restoration of public property. 
    All excavations for the wye branch or sewer shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights 
so as to protect the public from hazard, and shall be in conformance with the latest edition of the Michigan 
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property 
disturbed in the course of the construction shall be restored to the same or better condition than prior to 
excavation, by the party responsible for the damage. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-168. - Pipe and fittings. 
    The type and quality of sanitary sewer pipe and fittings used shall conform to the current 
specifications of the city at time the permit is issued, and/or shall be approved by the director. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-169. - Construction specifications. 
    All sewer connections, backfilling of trench, protection of existing structures and replacement of a 
site to its original conditions, and other items connected therewith, shall be done in full accordance with 
city specifications. 
    The use and construction of sewer connections shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations 
of the state plumbing code, insofar as they apply. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-170. - Backfill and paving. 
    Backfill must be 100 percent sand, compacted to city specifications. Gravel base and pavement shall 
correspond to existing materials, except when, in the opinion of the director, additional strength is 
required. In no case shall removed materials be used as backfill. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Secs. 78-171—78-190. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - SEWER EXTENSIONS 


Sec. 78-191. - Plans. 
    Plans and specifications for all sewer main extensions shall be prepared by a registered professional 
engineer and approved by the local unit. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-192. - Connections at wye. 
    All building lead connections shall be made at the wye branch in the public sewer designated for the 
property if such branch is available. Any connection not made at the designated wye branch in the public 
sewer shall be made only after the city installs, at the owner's sole expense, a wye branch for the 
designated property. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Sec. 78-193. - Testing. 
    It shall be unlawful to connect any sanitary sewer to the existing sewer system until it has been 
tested. Copies of the test results and procedures shall be kept on file for inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-194. - Downstream capacity. 
    No sewer extension shall be allowed unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift 
stations, force mains and the wastewater treatment plant, including capacity for BOD and suspended 
solids. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-195. - City to construct wye at owner's expense. 
    The city shall construct, at the owner's sole expense, a wye branch with enough space to allow the 
owner to finish the building lead from the property to the public sewer. As the owner of the property is 
reimbursing the city for all costs associated with the installation of the wye branch, the city shall extend 
the wye as determined by the owner; however, in no case shall the wye extend beyond the road right-of-
way. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 11-4-13) 


Secs. 78-196—78-215. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 


Sec. 78-216. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a) ?Except as provided in this section, no person shall discharge, permit to be discharged or cause to 
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes, directly or indirectly, to any public 
sewer. 
(1) ?Volatiles. Gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2) ?Acidity. Waters having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive 
property capable of causing damage to structures, equipment, treatment processes or 
personnel of the sewer system. 
(3) ?Temperature. Any water or wastes having a temperature higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(4) ?Obstructions. Solids or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size capable of 
causing obstruction to the flow sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the 
sewer system, such as, but not limited to, stone gravel, ashes, cinders, sand, concrete, paving 
material, mud, straw, sticks, plaster, cement, mortar, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, 
plastics, wood, brewery mash, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, and fleshings, entrails, paper 
dishes, cups, milk containers, or any other substances detrimental to the sewers or to the 
operation of the sewer system. 
(5) ?Garbage. Garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(6) ?Viscous materials. Any water or wastes which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of 
fats, waxes, oils or greases. 
(7) ?Holding tanks and septic tank sludge. Contents of septic, vehicular or marine holding tanks or 
other similar facilities, expect at the location designated in the confines of the treatment plant 
and under the conditions and provisions established by the superintendent. 
(8) ?Radioactive materials. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that 
they are in noncompliance with the regulations issued by the appropriate authority having 
control over their use and which will or may cause damage or hazards to sewer system or 
personnel operating the treatment plant. 
(9) ?Slugs. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug. 
(10) ?Other materials. Substances which either alone or by interaction with other waters or wastes: 
a. ?Solidify or become viscous in the sewer system. 
b. ?Release malodorous, noxious, or toxic substances. 
c. ?Cause excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable 
tanning solutions. 
d. ?Exert or cause high concentrations of suspended solids such as, but not limited to, lime 
slurs, diatomaceous earth and lime residues. 
e. ?Exert or cause high concentrations of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium 
chloride. 
f. ?Cause or exert COD that would increase operational expense or treatment problems. 
g. ?Cause high chlorine demand such as, but not limited to, nitrite, cyanide, throcyanate, sulfite 
and thiosulfate. 
h. ?Results in water or waste materials containing toxic or poisonous substances that tend to 
damage or interfere with any sewage treatment process or that may constitute a hazard to 
any person, animal, fish or aquatic life or that may tend to be a hazard in the receiving 
waters of the treatment plant. 
(11) ?Incompatible pollutants. Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed limits as determined 
by the county, local, state, and/or federal laws and regulations as determined and amended, 
referred to as effluent guidelines developed by the Environmental Protection Agency, or as 
modified by state or county regulations. 
(12) ?Pretreatment waste. Any sludge, precipitate or waste resulting from any industrial or 
commercial treatment, or pretreatment of any person's wastewater or air pollutants. 
(13) ?Unusual wastes. Any waters or wastes of such character and quantity that unusual attention 
or expense is required to handle them in the sewer system. 
(14) ?Excessive pollutants. Wastewaters containing in excess of the following: 
a. ?The allowable limits, as determined by the EPA, for any incompatible pollutant; or 
b. ?For the following specified pollutants, the following amounts: 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
300 mg/l 

Suspended Solids 
300 mg/l 

Phosphorus (T) 
15 mg/l 

Ammonia Nitrogen 
15 mg/l 

Oil and Grease 
55 mg/l 
mass limitations 
Copper 
0.7168 mg/l 
0.0885 lbs/day 
Lead 
1.004 mg/l 
0.124 lbs/day 
Nickel 
3.199 mg/l 
0.3949 lbs/day 
Cyanide 
0.028 mg/l 
0.004 lbs/day 
Cadmium 
0.0773 mg/l 
0.0095 lbs/day 
Silver 
0.009 mg/l 
0.0001 lbs/day 
Chromium (T) 
4.29 mg/l 
0.53 lbs/day 
Zinc 
8.126 mg/l 
1.0031 lbs/day 
Arsenic 
2.046 mg/l 
0.2526 lbs/day 
Mercury 
non-detect mg/l 
0.0 lbs/day 
Mercury analysis US EPA method 245.1 detection limits shall not exceed 0.2 UG/L 
 
(b) ?Calculation of equivalent mass and concentration limits (40 CFR 403.6(c)(2) and 40 CFR 
403.6(c)(5)) and/or the treatment works may convert mass per unit of production limits to equivalent 
mass per day or concentration limits, and they may be deemed pretreatment standards which 
industrial users will be required to comply within in lieu of the promulgated standards. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-217. - Limitation on wastewater strength. 
(a) ?National requirements. National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by the United 
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the act shall be met by all discharges of 
the regulated industrial categories. An application for modification of the national categorical 
pretreatment standards may be considered for submittal to the regional administrator by the city, 
when the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants, as 
defined by 40 CFR 403.7. 
(b) ?State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges to the treatment plant shall be 
met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more 
stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article, or any other applicable 
ordinance. 
(c) ?Right of revision of article. The city reserves the right to amend this article to provide for more 
stringent limitations or regulations on discharges to the treatment system where deemed necessary 
to comply with the objectives set forth in this article. 
(d) ?Dilution. No discharger shall increase the use of potable water or process water in any way, nor mix 
separate wastestreams for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for 
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the objectives set forth in this article. 
(e) ?Accidental discharges. Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of 
prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this article. Where judged necessary 
by the superintendent, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be 
provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and 
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be 
approved by the city before construction of facility begins. Each existing discharger shall complete 
and submit to the city review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city and 
shall not relieve the discharger from responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the 
requirement to meet the requirements of this article. 
(f) ?Notification of city. Dischargers shall notify the city immediately upon the occurrence of a slugload or 
accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this article. The notification shall include location of 
the discharge, the date, and the time, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective 
actions. Any dischargers who discharge a slugload of prohibited materials shall be liable for any 
expense, loss, damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city 
under state and federal law. 
(g) ?Procedure posting. Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the discharger's 
premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers 
shall instruct all employees who may cause such a discharge or discover such a discharge as to the 
emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-218. - Limitation on discharge. 
(a) ?Quantitative limitations. Quantitative limitations of discharge may be placed on BOD, suspended 
solids, phosphorus, and fecal coliform bacteria. Rates of discharge shall be controlled at the sources 
to prevent slugs from entering the system. The pH of wastes entering the sewer system shall be 
within the limits specified in subsection 78-216(2). 
(b) ?Incompatible pollutants. Persons discharging incompatible pollutants, other than those constituents 
described in section 78-216 which are strictly prohibited from being discharged into the sewer 
system, shall comply with Section 307 of the Act and related regulations by reducing to a level 
suitable for treatment of any such pollutant which interferes with, passes through or is otherwise 
incompatible with the treatment process. 
(c) ?Toxics. All persons discharging or proposing to discharge any toxic pollutant as defined by Section 
307(a)(1) of the Act, shall apply for permission from the superintendent. 
(d) ?Dilution. Attainment of allowed concentrations by dilution will not be allowed as a manner to meet 
discharge standards. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Secs. 78-219—78-240. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 6. - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE 


Sec. 78-241. - Grease, oil, sand and sediment traps or bar screens. 
(a) ?Traps specifications. Trap specifications shall be provided when, in the determination of the 
superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in 
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, sediment and other harmful ingredients; expect 
that such traps shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be 
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All traps shall be of a 
type and capacity approved by the superintendent. Grease and oil traps shall be constructed of 
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall 
be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers when bolted in 
place. They shall be gastight and watertight. 
(b) ?Owner's expense. Where installed, all grease, oil, sand and sediment traps and bar screens shall be 
provided by the owner at his expense and maintained for efficient operation at all times. 
(c) ?Bar screens. Bar screens shall be provided when, in the determination of the superintendent, they 
are necessary for the proper removal of rags, plastics, paper products or other materials which may 
enter the sewage system and cause blockage. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-242. - Control of toxic material. 
    All storage of toxic materials in any area or building shall be contained in such a manner that none of 
the materials spill or otherwise get into the sewer system in any manner. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-243. - Pretreatment. 
(a) ?Required. Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the standards established in this section 
and within the allowances of the discharge permit as required before discharging to the sewer 
system. All pretreatment costs to the acceptable level and monitoring and enforcement expenses of 
the city shall be at the owner's expense. 
    Detailed plans showing the facilities and operating procedures and effluent characteristics shall be 
submitted to the superintendent for review and approval before the construction of the facility. The 
approval of such plans and procedures will in no way relieve such persons from the responsibility of 
modifying the facility, if necessary, to produce an acceptable effluent. Any changes in the approved 
facilities or method of operation shall be reviewed prior to use by the superintendent. Any person to which 
pretreatment standards are applicable shall be in compliance with such standards. 
(b) ?Effluent limitations. The city is required to meet certain effluent limitations under federal and state 
regulations, as established and amended. The admission into the sewer system, directly or indirectly, 
of any wastes or waters exceeding the limits listed in this subsection is subject to review and 
approval by the superintendent to meet state and federal regulations: 
(1) ?A five-day BOD greater than 300 milligrams per liter. 
(2) ?Suspended solids greater than 300 milligrams per liter. 
(3) ?An average daily flow exceeding two percent of the total average flow of the sewer system. 
(4) ?A total phosphorus quantity greater than 15 milligrams per liter. 
(5) ?Any toxic substance that will interfere with the biological aspects of operation or will pass 
through the plant to adversely affect the receiving waters. 
(6) ?Any metals that will affect the proper treatment and disposal of wastes at the POTW. 
(c) ?Surcharges. Effluent limitations in excess of those set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall be 
surcharged to the user at the following rates: 
(1) ?Per pound of BOD, $0.0556. Max. allowed 500 mg/l. 
(2) ?Per pound of suspended solids, $0.0436. Max. allowed 3500 mg/l. 
(3) ?Per pound of phosphorus, $1.5485. Max. allowed 20 mg/l. 
    Such surcharge shall be in addition to any other sewer use charges. 
(d) ?Pretreatment standards. If determined necessary by the superintendent, the owner shall provide the 
necessary pretreatment or curtailment to stay within the limitations of this section. Nothing in this 
article shall prohibit the superintendent from requiring the lower constituent amount if it is determined 
necessary for the protection of the sewer system. If the limitations of this section are exceeded, then 
the user will be required to pay additional costs if it is determined by the superintendent that 
additional treatment expenses have been incurred. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Sec. 78-244. - Control manholes and monitoring facilities. 
(a) ?Installation of equipment. When the superintendent has determined that it is necessary to ascertain 
the character of the water or wastewater, industrial wastes and other substances discharged to the 
sewer system, or whether such discharges violates any provision of this article, or whether 
preliminary treatment of water or wastewater is required or provided, the user of such property 
served by the sewer system shall install approved control manholes on the building lead to allow 
observations, sampling, and measuring of all substances discharged therein. The cost of all 
manholes and all equipment determined to be necessary by the superintendent to be necessary for 
sampling and metering and all installation and operation of the sampling and metering equipment 
shall be at the expense of the user. 
(b) ?Manhole location. All control manholes shall be located on the user's property within ten feet of the 
property line, or as otherwise approved by the local unit and the superintendent. The control 
manholes shall be constructed on the building lead. If the property is fenced, a gate shall be 
constructed at the manhole location with provision for a lock to be provided to the local unit and 
superintendent. If the user does not want direct access to his property for security or other reasons, 
he shall at his expense construct a security fence around the control manhole of an area accessible 
to the local unit and the superintendent. The local unit and the superintendent may approve control 
manholes in the street right-of-way. 
(c) ?Facility plans. The user shall provide acceptable drawings to the local unit and superintendent for 
their records showing the locations of all building leads and control manholes. The manholes shall be 
located from both street lines and building lines. The drawings shall show the roadways and access 
points to the control manholes and any other data considered pertinent to the local unit and the 
superintendent. Ample space shall be provided around the manholes and shall be maintained free 
and clear by the owner at all times. 
(d) ?Inspections. The city and the superintendent may inspect the facilities of any user to determine 
whether the purpose of this article is being met and that all wastewater requirements are being 
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall 
allow the local unit and superintendent or his representative ready access at all reasonable times 
and provisions for emergency entrance to all parts or premises for the propose of inspection or 
sampling in the performance of their duties. Where a user has security measures in force, which 
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their business or onto their property, the 
user shall make necessary arrangement acceptable to the local unit and superintendent with the 
user's security personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the 
local unit and the superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of carrying 
out their responsibilities. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 


Secs. 78-245—78-250. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of November 4, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former div. 7, §§ 
78-251—78-261, in its entirety. Former div. 7 pertained to the stormwater utility, and derived from an 
ordinance of June 4, 2007. 


Secs. 78-251—78-264. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 8. - SANITARY SEWER INFLOW AND INFILTRATION REDUCTION 


Sec. 78-265. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to reduce the volume of storm water to the city sanitary sewer system; 
to provide for inspection of potential sources of storm water inflow and infiltration; and to provide for 
penalties for violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § I) 


Sec. 78-266. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this division, the definitions of the following words or terms shall control: 
    Sanitary sewage. Domestic wastes from residences and domestic type wastes from business 
buildings, institutions, industrial establishments and all other sources, and may also include ground water 
unintentionally seeping into the sanitary sewage pipe. 
    Sanitary sewer system. A sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface and subsurface 
waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage. A combination of water and water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, 
institutions, industrial establishments and any other sources, together with such subsurface, surface and 
storm water as may unintentionally be present. 
    Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying storm and/or sewage. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain. Any sewer or drain, either natural or artificial, which is intended 
expressly for the conveyance of storm and surface water, seepage, percolating or uncontaminated water, 
but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Storm water. All rainfall runoff, all other surface water, seepage, percolating or flowing through the 
soil. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § II) 


Sec. 78-267. - Discharge of storm water to sanitary sewer prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or drain, or cause to be discharged or drained, any 
storm water into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § III) 


Sec. 78-268. - Modifications and corrections to existing storm water systems required. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each owner of real property with the city to do or cause to be done the 
following: 
(1) ?Downspouts on all buildings shall be directed away from the building so that the storm water is 
discharged from the downspout a minimum of four feet from the building. 
(2) ?No owners shall sell real property, which is improved with a building without first obtaining from 
the city a certificate that states that no sump pump or other device which discharges storm 
water is connected to the sanitary sewer system. No purchaser shall purchase real property 
unless the seller has provided the purchaser with the required certificate of sump pump and 
sewer compliance prior to closing of the sale. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § IV) 


Sec. 78-269. - Disconnection during uncovering of sanitary sewer connection. 
    If any portion of the sewer or drainage system is uncovered and it is determined that storm water is 
being discharged or drained into the sanitary sewer, the storm sewer or storm water source shall be 
disconnected and directed into the storm water drainage system of the city. The disconnection shall be 
inspected by the city prior to covering up of the sanitary sewer and storm sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § V) 


Sec. 78-270. - Application for certificate—Procedures. 
    Certificates of compliance with this division shall be issued in accordance with the following 
procedures. 
(1) ?Application and fee. Applications for certificates of compliance with this division shall be filed 
with the city department of public works coordinator or his designee by the owner of real 
property at least ten days prior to the transfer of ownership, by deed, land contract sale or 
otherwise. Applications shall be submitted on the form furnished by the city department of public 
works coordinator and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $75.00. This fee shall be 
subject to re-determination by the city council of the city by resolution of the council. 
(2) ?Inspection. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city department of public works 
coordinator or his designee shall conduct an inspection of the property in order to determine 
compliance with the provisions of this division. If a violation is discovered during the inspection, 
the property owner shall be mailed a notice within three (3) business days of the inspection, 
which shall describe the violation and the action needed for compliance. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § VI) 


Sec. 78-271. - Enforcement. 
(a) ?Notice. Before commencing prosecution under this division, for the first violation, the enforcement 
officer shall notify the violator(s) of the existence of a violation under section 78-67 above. Such 
notice shall be in writing and served upon the violator(s), either personally or by first class mail sent 
to the last known address of the violator(s) or to be the common address of the property upon which 
the violation exists. The violator(s) shall be given five days from the date of personal service or 
seven days from the date of mailing the notice in which to remedy the violation or contact the 
department of public works coordinator to set up a timetable for compliance. 
(b) ?Civil infractions. If the violation is not remedied within the five-day period, the person found to be 
violating this division shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil 
fine $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions for this first violation. In addition to the civil fine provided 
in this division, the city shall also recover its costs, including all direct and indirect expenses to which 
the city has been put in connection with the violation. 
A violator of this division shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and judicial orders 
as are authorized under state law. 
(c) ?Repeat offenses. Repeat offenses under this division shall be subject to increased fines as provided 
by this section, below. As used in this section, "repeat offenses," means a second (or any 
subsequent) violation of the same requirement or provision of this division for which the person 
admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense 
under this division shall be as follows: 
(1) ?The fine for any offense, which is a first, repeat offense shall be $250.00, plus costs. 
(2) ?The fine for any offense, which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, 
shall be $500.00 each, plus costs. 
(d) ?Separate violation. Each day that a violation under this division continues to exist shall be 
considered a separate violation subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. 
(e) ?Threat to health, safety and welfare of the community. If the department of public works coordinator 
or code enforcement officer determines that situation causes or will cause an immediate, imminent 
and/or impending threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community, or if the condition which 
causes the violation of this division is not corrected within 90 days of the first notice of violation, the 
city may proceed to abate, remediate or otherwise eliminate the offending condition and may assess 
all costs incurred by the city, including attorneys' fees and other costs, against the real property. The 
city shall have a lien for the costs, which it incurs against the real property on which the offending 
condition existed. This lien for costs shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided 
for property tax lens under the general property tax act, Public Act 206 of the Michigan Public Acts of 
1983, as amended, being Section 211.1 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(f) ?Civil judgment. In addition to other remedies under this division, the city may bring an action against 
the owner of the property on which the offending condition existed for the full costs incurred by the 
city in cleaning up and abating the offending condition. In such action, the city shall be entitled to 
recover its costs of suit, together with its reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § VI) 


Sec. 78-272. - Appeal. 
    Where the enforcement of any part of this division constitutes a hardship, and upon appeal by the 
property owner, the city council may waive any such part of this division as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-6-07, § VII) 


Secs. 78-273—78-275. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 78-276. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business day means days during which the city hall is open to the public. 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land, building, premises, dwelling unit or apartment unit having 
any connection to the water distribution system of the city, or the sewage disposal system of the city. 
    Quarter years means respectively as follows: January, February and March; April, May and June; 
July, August and September; and October, November and December. 
(Code 1983, § 2.121) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Secs. 78-277—78-300. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - WATER RATES AND CHARGES 


Sec. 78-301. - Water rates. 
    There are hereby established monthly rates and charges for the use of and for the services supplied 
by the city's water supply system, based upon the meter readings of the amount of water consumed, if 
metered, or upon a monthly charge, as follows: 
(1) ?Metered premises. Metered premises shall be charged a standby charge, a consumption 
charge and fire line charge, if present. 
a. ?Standby charge: monthly rate and charges for the use of and for the services supplied by 
the city's water supply system for meter maintenance and replacement. The standby 
charge shall be determined by the size of the device line or meter, whichever is smaller. 
b. ?Consumption charge: monthly charge for amount of water used based on per 1,000 
gallons. 
c. ?Fire line charge: monthly rate and charge for the use of and for the services supplied by the 
city water system for a separate line that carries water for fire protection only. 
(2) ?Unmetered premises. Unmetered premises shall be charged a flat quarterly consumption 
charge. 
(3) ?Charges established from time to time. The city council shall, from time to time, establish by 
resolution any administrative charges, capital charges, commodity charges, service charges, 
debt service charges, special charges, and any other type of fee or charge related to the 
connection to, or use of, the water production and distribution system. 
(Code 1983, § 2.122; Ord. No. 95B, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. of 5-18-98; Amd. of 7-1-04; Ord. of 7-
11-11; Ord. No. 2014-04a, 3-3-14) 


Sec. 78-302. - Water turn-on fee. 
    There shall be a fee whenever the city is requested to turn on water services; provided, however, 
that whenever the city is requested to turn on water at times other than regular business hours of the 
department of public works, there will be imposed an additional fee which shall be calculated by adding 
together the actual wages paid and the actual cost of materials. No person shall turn on any water service 
unless authorized by the city manager. No person shall provide water to any premises other than their 
own. In the event that water services are turned off due to nonpayment, a fee shall be charged to turn 
water back on. The water turn-on fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2.123; Ord. of 5-18-98; Amd. of 7-1-04; Ord. No. 2013-05, 9-3-13) 


Sec. 78-303. - Treasurer's duty; billing and collection. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the city treasurer to render bills for water service and all other charges 
in connection therewith; to send such bills to the owners of the property to which water has been 
furnished; and to collect monies due for such services rendered by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2.124) 


Sec. 78-304. - Water bills; monthly and quarterly; due date. 
(a) ?Bills for the rates and charges as herein established by the city shall be sent to metered accounts 
and monthly to unmetered accounts and all metered customers using over 1,000,000 gallons per 
month based on a 12-month average. All bills shall be payable on the 15th business day after the 
date said bill is rendered and mailed. 
(b) ?Vacancy. The city will continue to bill all residential apartment owners the flat residential rate for 
each apartment whether or not that apartment is vacant. 
(Code 1983, § 2.125; Ord. of 5-18-98; Amd. of 6-3-02; Ord. of 7-11-11) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 11, 2011, changed the title of section 78-304 from 
"Water bills; monthly; due date" to "Water bills; monthly and quarterly; due date." The historical 
notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 


Sec. 78-305. - Penalties for unpaid bills. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, for unmetered premises a penalty of $15.00 
per 90-day period after the due date shall be charged for bills not paid as outlined in section 78-304 
hereof. For commercial or metered accounts a penalty of $5.00 per 30-day period after the due date 
shall be charged for bills not paid as outlined in section 78-304 hereof. 
(b) ?Two nonsufficient fund checks in a one-year period will result in acceptance of cash, money order, 
or cashier check only. 
(Code 1983, § 2.126; Ord. of 5-18-98; Ord. of 7-11-11) 


Sec. 78-306. - Shutoff for nonpayment. 
(a) ?The water supply may be shut off for any premises that is unmetered for which the bill remains 
unpaid for a period of 15 days after the bill is due. When shut off, water shall not be turned on except 
upon the payment in full of all delinquent charges, plus the fee for turning on water for nonpayment 
shutoffs as established by resolution of the city council. 
(b) ?The water supply may be shut off for any premises that is metered for which the bill remains unpaid 
for a period of 60 days after the bill is rendered and mailed. When shut off, water shall not be turned 
on except upon the payment in full of all delinquent charges, plus the fee for turning on water for 
nonpayment shutoffs as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2.127; Ord. of 5-18-98; Amd. of 7-1-04; Ord. of 7-11-11; Ord. No. 2013-05, 9-3-
13) 


Sec. 78-307. - Lien. 
    All the rates and charges of every kind and description as provided in this division for water shall 
constitute a lien on the property served. If not paid within six months after the due date, the amount of the 
deficiency shall be certified by the city treasurer on or before May 1 of each year, which amount shall be 
placed on the next general tax roll and shall be collected as a part of such tax roll. 
(Code 1983, § 2.128) 


Sec. 78-308. - Separability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this division is for any reason held 
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a 
separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining 
portion hereof. 
(Ord. of 5-18-98) 


Sec. 78-309. - Reservation. 
    This division shall not operate as an abatement of any action, charges or proceeding now pending or 
which may hereafter arise under or by virtue of any ordinance or part thereof repealed. 
(Ord. of 5-18-98) 


Sec. 78-310. - Ordinance repealed. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby 
repealed; subject to the reservation clause provided for in section 78-309. 
(Ord. of 5-18-98) 


Secs. 78-311—78-330. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - SEWER RATES AND CHARGES 


Sec. 78-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Debt service charge means interest payment, plus principal payment, plus 110 percent of bond 
coverage. 
    Normal domestic strength means sewage from a typical residence and not including any industrial or 
commercial rates, with the following discharge limitations: 
TSS 
300 
BO
D 
300 
PO
4 
? ?
8 
NH
S 
?25 
 
    Operation and Maintenance (O&M) means costs pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the 
treatment plant, not including debt retirement or overhead and administration. 
    Sewer service charge means debt service charges, O&M charges and overhead and administration 
charges. 
    User charge means O&M charges and overhead and administration. 
    User classes means residential, commercial, industrial, governmental and institutional users. 
(1) ?Residential user means a user of the system whose premises is used primarily as a residence 
for one or more persons. Transient dwellings shall not be included as they are considered 
commercial. 
(2) ?Commercial user means a user involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which 
discharges primarily domestic wastes. 
(3) ?Industrial user means any user that discharges primarily industrial wastes and shall be 
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual. 
(4) ?Governmental user means any federal, state or local government user of the wastewater 
facilities. 
(5) ?Institutional user means any user involved in a social, charitable, religious or educational 
function which discharges primarily domestic wastes. 
(Code 1983, § 2.129; Ord. No. 2014-03a, 3-3-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 78-332. - Sewer service rates for water metered premises. 
(a) ?Standard rates. There are hereby established charges for the use of the city's sanitary sewage 
disposal system based on the water meter readings of the amount of water consumed. Rates per 
gallon are calculated as follows: 
(1) ?Debt service rate is equal to interest payment, plus principle payment, plus 110 percent of bond 
coverage dollars, if needed. 
(2) ?Operation maintenance and repair rate equals O&M costs divided by annual billable flow 
equals the O&M rate per gallon. 
(3) ?Readiness to serve is a monthly charge computed by taking the overhead and administration 
dollars needed divided by the number of customers and divided by 12. The monthly rate 
multiplied by three equals the quarterly rate. Multi-unit residential dwellings shall be charged a 
wastewater (sanitary) sewer readiness to serve charge for each dwelling unit. 
(4) ?The total bill is equal to a total of readiness to serve charge, debt retirement charge and O&M 
charge. 
(5) ?The surcharge rate is charged for discharges over normal domestic strength of: 
TSS 300 mg/1 
BOD over 300 mg/1 
PO4 over 8 mg/1 
NH3 over 25 mg/1 
(b) ?Exceptions. If the water service is shut off by the city and the property is vacant there shall be no 
sewer service charge. There shall be no charge for industrial cooling water and other water which is 
not discharged to the sewer system (nondischarged water); provided that all of the following criteria 
are met by the user: 
(1) ?The nondischarged water shall be metered separately from any water which is discharged into 
the sewer system. 
(2) ?The user must establish to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee that none of the 
nondischarged water will be discharged into the city sewer system. 
(3) ?The separate meter and the installation thereof shall be approved by the city manager or his 
designee. 
(4) ?The separate meter shall be subject in all respects to the provisions of the code governing 
water meters including, without limitations, the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(c) ?Treatment plant. The only sewer charge billed to the city wastewater treatment plant shall be the 
readiness to serve charge as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(d) ?Sewage flow meters. Property owners may choose to provide and install at their own expense city-
approved sewage flow meters. 
(e) ?Flow meter approval. All flow meters and the installation thereof shall be approved by the 
wastewater treatment plant superintendent. 
(f) ?Unmetered premises. A flat charge per quarter shall be made against each dwelling house, 
apartment unit o other unmetered premises connected to the system and figured out according to 
subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section. 
(g) ?New or discontinued users. Unmetered premises which are connected to the sewer system for less 
than a full billing period shall be billed and paid on a prorated basis. There shall be no proration of 
rates for metered premises which are connected to the sewer system for less than a full billing 
period. 
(h) ?Special rates. For miscellaneous services not enumerated in this section, special rates shall be set 
as needed by the city council by resolution. 
(i) ?Nonwater users and dischargers. Should any customer be connected to the city sanitary sewer 
systems, but use no city water, and should that customer discharge no industrial or commercial 
process water to the sanitary sewers, then that customer shall be charged the same rate charged to 
residential customers. 
(j) ?Rate setting. The city council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution any administrative 
charges, capital charges, service charges, debt service charges, special charges and any other type 
of fee or charge related to the connection to, or use of, the sewer treatment process and distribution 
system. 
(k) ?Free service. No free service shall be provided to anyone served by the sewer system, and there 
shall be equal rates within and without the city. 
(l) ?Annual audit. The city will annually review the O&M accounts for the treatment plan and adjust O&M 
rate as necessary to meet the system expenses and to ensure continued proportionality to treatment 
costs. 
(Code 1983, § 2.129; Ord. of 5-18-98; Amd. of 7-1-04; Ord. No. 2014-03a, 3-3-14) 


Sec. 78-333. - Clerk's duty; billing and collection. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to render bills for sewer service and all other charges in 
connection therewith; to send such bills to the owners of the property to which service has been 
furnished; and to collect monies for such services rendered by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2.130) 


Sec. 78-334. - Monthly and quarterly bills; due date. 
    Bills for the rates and charges as established by the city in this division shall be sent monthly to 
metered accounts and quarterly to unmetered accounts. All bills shall be payable on the 15th business 
day after the date said bill is rendered and mailed. 
(Code 1983, § 2.131; Ord. of 5-18-98; Amd. of 6-3-02; Ord. of 7-11-11) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 11, 2011, changed the title of section 78-334 from 
"Monthly bills; due date" to "Monthly and quarterly bills; due date." The historical notation has 
been preserved for reference purposes. 


Sec. 78-335. - Penalties for unpaid bills. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, for unmetered premises a penalty of $15.00 
per 90-day period after the due date shall be charged for bills not paid as outlined in section 78-304 
hereof. For commercial or metered accounts a penalty of $5.00 per 30-day period after the due date 
shall be charged for bills not paid as outlined in section 78-334 hereof. 
(b) ?Two nonsufficient fund checks in a one-year period will result in acceptance of cash, money order or 
cashier check only. 
(Code 1983, § 2.132; Ord. of 5-18-98; Ord. of 7-11-11) 


Sec. 78-336. - Lien. 
    All the rates and charges for sewer service of every kind and description as provided for water in 
division 2 of this article shall constitute a lien on the property served, and if not paid within six months 
after the due date, the amount of the deficiency shall be certified to the city assessor by the city treasurer 
on or before May 1 of each year, which amount he shall place on the next general tax roll to be collected 
as a part of such tax roll. 
(Code 1983, § 2.133) 


Chapter 82 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; zoning, ch. 86. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 


Sec. 82-31. - Prohibited growths enumerated; declaration of such weeds to be a public nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant or any person having control or management of any lot, 
place or parcel of land within the city to permit or allow the presence thereon, or on any portion thereof, of 
noxious weeds of any kind, including Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of 
Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild 
carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed 
(ambrosia elatior) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix), hitchhiker or 
devils pitchfork (Bidens species), sow thistle (sonchus species), goldenrod, or any other varieties, species 
or plants which in the opinion of the city council is regarded as a common nuisance. The presence of 
such weeds upon any lot or parcel of land within the limits of the city is hereby declared to be a public 
nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 9.51; Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 82-32. - Duty to abate; exemption. 
(a) ?It is hereby made the duty of the owner or occupant or any person having control or management of 
any lot, place, area or parcel of land within the city upon which noxious, poisonous or injurious 
weeds, as described in section 82-31, are found growing or standing to destroy or cause the same to 
be destroyed in such manner as shall effectually prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves. 
Control shall be at such times as may be necessary in order to prevent such noxious, poisonous or 
injurious weeds from going to seed. No owner or occupant or any person, agent, firm or corporation 
having control or management of property in this city shall knowingly suffer any noxious, poisonous 
or injurious weeds, as described in section 82-31, to grow upon the land in noncompliance with the 
section, or shall permit such weeds to ripen so as to cause or present a danger of the spreading of 
such weeds. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, lands more than 200 feet from the nearest residential 
or the nearest commercial building, measured from the part of such building nearest to the land and 
more than 100 feet from the centerline of the nearest public street pavement, shall be exempt from 
the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 9.52; Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 82-33. - Other weeds grass and brush over six inches in height; duty of owner of land to abate; 
exemptions for certain lands; variances. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant or any person having control or management of any 
lot, place, area or parcel of land within the city to permit or allow the presence thereon of weeds, 
grass or brush exceeding a height of six inches above the ground level when such growth is within 
150 feet of the nearest residential, commercial, industrial or public building (examples of public 
buildings are any governmental buildings, park buildings, school buildings, and any building housing 
a non profit entity) measured from the part of the building nearest to such land, or within 100 feet of 
the centerline of the nearest public street pavement, and the growths are hereby declared to be a 
public nuisance. It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant and person in charge of such property 
upon which any of the weeds, grass or brush are permitted to remain to cause the growth to be cut 
down, destroyed or removed prior to its height reaching six inches. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the following lands shall be exempt from the 
provisions of this section: 
(1) ?Undeveloped wooded areas where tree growth is in excess of ten feet in height. 
(2) ?Lands where occupied lots have been developed without removing the original natural cover. 
(c) ?Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, the following lands shall be exempt from the 
provisions of this section, provided that the owner of the land petitions for exemption from the 
provisions of this section in writing to the city council: Lands for which, by reason of exceptional 
narrowness, shallowness, shape, inaccessibility, topographic features, or other extraordinary or 
exceptional conditions, the strict application of this article would result in peculiar or exceptional 
practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardships upon, the owner of such property; provided, 
however, that such relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of 
this article. In granting a variance, the council may attach thereto such conditions regarding the 
location, character and other features of the proposed uses, as it may deem reasonable in 
furtherance of the purpose of this article. In granting a variance, the council shall state the grounds 
upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. 
(Code 1983, § 9.53; Amd. of 8-4-03; Amend. of 6-7-10) 


Sec. 82-34. - Violation of article a civil infraction. 
    A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a civil infraction, which may be 
treated as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1983, § 9.54; Ord. No. 45C, § 1(a), 10-28-96; Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 82-35. - Notice to owner or occupant by publication to abate. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the department of public works of the city to give general notice to 
every owner or occupant, or any person, agent, firm or corporation having control or management of any 
land wherein noxious, poisonous or injurious weeds, or any weeds, grass or brush exceeding a height of 
six inches are growing, standing or present, to cut down, destroy or remove the growths. Such general 
notice shall be made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least once in each 
calendar year, and shall read substantially as follows: 
City of Vassar  
Notice of Provisions of the Weed Ordinance 
To: All owners, occupants or possessors of land in the City of Vassar. 
Notice is hereby given that in accordance with article II of chapter 82 of the Vassar City Code of 
Ordinances all noxious, poisonous or injurious weeds, or other weeds, grass or brush exceeding a 
height of six inches upon any property in the City of Vassar shall be cut down, destroyed or removed, 
as the case may be, to prevent growth in excess of six inches. A violation of these provisions shall 
constitute a civil infraction, which may be treated as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1983, § 9.55; Ord. No. 45C, § 1(b), 10-28-96; Amd. of 8-4-03) 


Sec. 82-36. - Notification, enforcement. 
(a) ?If a property covered by provisions of this article is not mowed in accordance to this article, and no 
exemption has been issued, a notice shall be sent by U.S. Mail to the owner of record of the 
property, and to the occupant, if not the owner, advising him or her of the requirements of this article 
and providing five days to comply with the provisions. One notice per parcel per season shall be 
deemed adequate notification for the entire mowing season. 
(b) ?All properties not in compliance with this article after the five-day period provided in subsection (a) 
of this section shall be mowed by the city, or a contractor of the city and charges billed to the owner 
of record. Any additional work required to mow the property such as litter removal will also be 
charged as provided. 
(c) ?Upon determination by the city that the condition of a property is a violation of this article and 
presents a potential threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the city may waive the five-day 
notification period required in subsection (a) of this section and cause the violation to be immediately 
corrected with all costs assessed against the property and billed to the owner of record. 
(d) ?All charges, which remain unpaid as of June 1 annually, shall become a lien against the subject 
property and shall be assessed against the property on the city tax roll. 
(Amd. of 8-4-03; Ord. No. 2016-02, 7-5-16) 


Chapter 86 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of May 6, 2002 amended chapter 86 in its entirety. The editor has treated said 
ordinance as repealing chapter 86, sections 86-1—86-7, 86-36—86-51, 86-86—86-91, 86-126—86-130, 
86-161—86-164, 86-196—86-198, 86-231—86-234, 86-266—86-269, 86-301—86-303, 86-336—86-338, 
86-371—86-377, 86-411—86-415, 86-446, 86-447, 86-481—86-487, 86-501—86-505, 86-521—86-537, 
86-571—86-581, and 86-611—86-618 and replacing it with a new chapter 86, sections 86-1—86-7, 86-
36—86-51, 86-86—86-91, 86-126—86-130, 86-161—86-164, 86-196—86-198, 86-231—86-234, 86-
266—86-269, 86-301—86-303, 86-336—86-339, 86-371—86-376, 86-446, 86-447, 86-481—86-487, 86-
501—86-505, 86-521—86-537, 86-571—86-581, and 86-611—86-618. Former chapter 86 pertained to 
similar material and derived from the Code of 1983, §§ 5.1, 5.4—5.12, 5.15—5.20, 5.25—5.28, 5.33—
5.36, 5.41—5.43, 5.48—5.50, 5.55—5.58, 5.63—5.65, 5.70—5.72, 5.77—5.83, 5.88—5.92, 5.97, 5.98, 
5.103—5.119, 5.131—5.141, 5.151—5.167, 5.181—5.188, 5.191—5.193; and from Ord. No. 79h, 
adopted Jan. 9, 1984; Ord. No. 79j, adopted Jan. 9, 1984; Ord. No. 79n, § 1, adopted Feb. 27, 1984; Ord. 
No. 79p, § 2, adopted June 25, 1984; Ord. No. 79q, adopted May 14, 1984; Ord. No. 79t, § 2, adopted 
July 9, 1984; Ord. No. 79w, adopted Dec. 12, 1988; Ord. No. 79x, adopted Dec. 12, 1988; Ord. No. 79y, 
part I, adopted June 13, 1994; Ord. No. 79z, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 16, 1995; Res. of Oct. 9, 1989; Ord. 
No. 101, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 1995; Ord. No. 79cc, adopted Aug. 26, 1996; Ord. No. 79DD, adopted 
Sept. 9, 1996; Ord. No. 79EE, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 1997; Ord. No. 79FF, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 1997 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 14; 
cemeteries, ch. 18; community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; health and 
sanitation, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, 
ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 86-1. - Preamble. 
    This chapter's provisions are established pursuant to the authority conferred by the City and Village 
Zoning Public Act 207, 1921, and other Public Acts of the State of Michigan in such case made and 
provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, 
comfort, conveniences and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city by protecting and conserving the 
character, and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; 
by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion 
of population; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and 
economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation and other public requirements; 
and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-2. - Rules of construction. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1) ?The particular shall control the general. 
(2) ?In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any 
caption or illustration the text shall control. 
(3) ?The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4) ?Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular 
number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates 
the contrary. 
(5) ?A building or structure includes any part thereof. 
(6) ?The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," 
or "occupied for." 
(7) ?The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated 
association or any other similar entity. 
(8) ?Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more 
items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either...or," the 
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a. ?"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b. ?"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly 
or in any combination. 
c. ?"Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply 
singly, but not in combination. 
(9) ?Terms not defined in section 86-3 shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or accessory means a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in 
connection with and located on the same zoning lot, unless otherwise specified, as the principal use to 
which it is related. When "accessory" is used in this chapter, it shall have the same meaning as the 
expression "accessory use." An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests. 
(2) ?Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room or similar accessory building or 
other structure. 
(3) ?Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial 
use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(4) ?Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such 
storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(5) ?Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which 
the zoning lot is located. 
(6) ?Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is 
located. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, 
and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in 
the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the 
consummated act of which may be referred to in this chapter as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartment means a suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family building, arranged and intended for 
a place of residence of a single family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping 
unit. 
    Architectural features of a building shall include cornices, eaves, gutters, courses, sills, lintels, bay 
windows, chimneys and decorative ornaments. 
    Automobile service station means the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning 
of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; and the 
overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade, but so located that 
the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the 
average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest 
intersecting streets, (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, 
unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to 
the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Building means a structure erected on the site, a mobile home or mobile structure, a 
premanufactured or precut structure, above or below the ground, designed primarily for the shelter, 
support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point 
of the roof surface (a maximum of 35 feet) for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the 
average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on 
sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building 
wall. 
    Building inspector means the city manager or official designated by the city, charged with the 
enforcement of this chapter. 
    Building line means a line formed by the exterior surface of the building opposite the front lot line, 
and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
    Child care organization means a facility for the care of children under 18 years of age, as licensed 
and regulated by the state under Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et 
seq.), as amended, and associated rules promulgated by the state department of social services. Such 
organizations shall be further defined as follows: 
(1) ?Family day care home means a private home in which one but less than seven minor children 
are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a 
parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, 
marriage or adoption. Family day care homes include homes that give care to an unrelated 
minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
(2) ?Group day care home means a private home in which more than six, but not more than 12 
minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day 
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the 
family by blood, marriage or adoption. Group day care home includes a home that gives care to 
an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly 
assemble for religious worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is 
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
    Clinic means an establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for 
examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists or similar professions. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, 
sciences, literature, politics or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or 
lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the 
relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and 
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-in means a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is 
dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons 
while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure. 
    Duplex means a building designed and used exclusively for residential purposes and containing two 
dwelling units separated by a common party wall or otherwise structurally attached. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means a building containing three or more dwelling units designed for 
residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth in the definition of the term 
"single-family dwelling." 
    Dwelling, single-family means a building containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for 
residential use, complying with the following standards: 
(1) ?It complies with the minimum square footage requirements of this chapter for the zone in which 
it is located. 
(2) ?It has a minimum width across any front, side or rear elevation of 20 feet and complies in all 
respects with the city building code, including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a 
dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for 
construction, and where such standards or regulations for construction are different than those 
imposed by the city building code, then such federal or state standards or regulations shall 
apply. 
(3) ?It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the 
city building code and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and 
constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code for single-
family dwellings. If the dwelling is a mobile home, such dwelling shall be installed pursuant to 
the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring 
system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the state mobile home 
commission, and shall have a perimeter wall as required in this subsection. 
(4) ?If a dwelling is a mobile home, each mobile home shall be installed with the wheels removed; 
additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis. 
(5) ?The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities 
approved by the county health department. 
(6) ?The dwelling contains a storage capability area in a basement located under the dwelling, in an 
attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction, which storage 
area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, 
whichever shall be less. 
(7) ?The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the 
vicinity, and shall have a roof overhang of not less than 12 inches on all sides, window sills, and 
roof drainage systems. 
(8) ?The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or other areas which are not constructed with 
similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the 
principal structure and construction of a foundation as required in this definition. 
(9) ?The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, 
all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to the 
mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the Mobile Home Construction and 
Safety Standards, as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended. 
Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength 
requirements. 
(10) ?The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home 
park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the 
ordinance of the city pertaining to such parks. 
(11) ?All construction required in this definition shall be commenced only after a building permit has 
been obtained in accordance with the applicable city building code provisions and requirements. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a building containing not more than two separate dwelling units designed 
for residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth in the definition of the 
term "single-family dwelling." 
    Erected means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on 
the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or 
municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water 
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including 
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic 
signals and hydrants in connection herewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the 
furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or 
welfare. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family means one or two persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted 
children (and including the domestic employees thereof) together with not more than two persons not so 
related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every 
additional group of two or fewer persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate 
family for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Farm means the carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as 
a source of income. 
    Floor area, residential (for the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a 
residential dwelling unit) means the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be 
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two 
buildings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached 
garages, breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor area, usable (for the purpose of computing parking) means that area used for or intended to be 
used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor 
area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, 
hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of usable floor area. 
Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of horizontal areas of the several floors of the 
building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely 
for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of 
the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, service means any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or where 
any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Gasoline service station means a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels 
directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor 
vehicles, but not including major automobile repair. 
    Grade means the ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories 
and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the 
building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by 
averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the dwelling. 
    Greenbelt strip means a strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs 
and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer area in carrying out the requirements of this 
chapter. 
    Hotel means a building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the 
dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of 
the following services are offered: 
(1) ?Maid service. 
(2) ?Furnishing of linen. 
(3) ?Telephone, secretarial or desk service. 
(4) ?Bellboy service. 
A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
    Junkyard means an open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, 
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and 
other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes automobile wrecking yards and 
includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk. 
    Kennel, commercial means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other 
household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded. Kennel shall also include any lot or 
premises where household pets are bred or sold. 
    Landscaped area means an area that is permanently devoted and maintained to the growing of 
shrubbery, grass and other plant material. 
    Landscaping means the improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass and shrubs and/or 
trees. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flowerbeds, ornamental objects such as fountains, 
statuary, and other similar natural objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing 
effect. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for 
the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of 
such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, 
together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may 
or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two 
streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a 
corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the 
curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight line extended, form an interior 
angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings, including accessory 
buildings. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the 
median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as described in this definition: 
(1) ?Front lot line means, in the case of an interior lot, that line separating such lot from the street; in 
the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, that line separating such lot from either street. 
(2) ?Rear lot line means that lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the 
rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet 
long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3) ?Side lot line means any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line 
separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another 
lot is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on 
file with the county register of deeds or in common use by the city or county officials, and which actually 
exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the 
remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through means any interior lot having frontage on two or more or less parallel streets as 
distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all sides of such lots adjacent 
to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where 
the building line or setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, zoning means a single tract of land, located within a single block, which, at the time of filing for a 
building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as 
a unit, under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, 
dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot 
therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include 
one or more lots of record. 
    Main building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is 
situated. 
    Main use means the principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for 
which the premises exist. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway 
for both the immediate city area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, 
parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets 
comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the 
general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the city, and 
includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may 
or may not be adopted by the planning commission and/or the council. 
    Mezzanine means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor 
area of such story. 
    Mobile home means any vehicle designed or constructed so as to permit its being used as a 
conveyance upon the public streets or highways and constructed in such a manner as will permit 
occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. 
    Mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for 
dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. 
    Mobile home (permanent) means a mobile home which is attached to a foundation from which it 
cannot be readily moved, and which is constructed in such a way that it meets all codes and ordinances 
of the city applicable to single-family dwellings. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, 
bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for 
compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Nonconforming building means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of 
the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to 
the provisions of the chapter in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of 
the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to 
the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause 
or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeated invasion of any physical characteristics of 
activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the 
generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 
(1) ?Noise; 
(2) ?Dust; 
(3) ?Smoke; 
(4) ?Odor; 
(5) ?Glare; 
(6) ?Fumes; 
(7) ?Flashes; 
(8) ?Vibration; 
(9) ?Shock waves; 
(10) ?Heat; 
(11) ?Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(12) ?Objectionable effluent; 
(13) ?Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night; 
(14) ?Passenger traffic; and 
(15) ?Invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic. 
    Nursery, plant materials means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage 
of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening 
or landscaping. The definition of the word "nursery" within the meaning of this chapter does not include 
any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives 
and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than 
three vehicles. 
    Open front store means a business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be 
extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open 
front store" shall not include automobile repair or gasoline service stations. 
    Outlot , when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot set aside for purposes 
other than a building site, park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
    Parking space means an area of definite length and width. Such area shall be exclusive of drives, 
aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted 
vehicles. 
    Planned unit development means a tract of land at least 20 acres in area, under single, corporation, 
firm, partnership or association ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, in a single 
development operation or a definitely programmed series of development operations, and according to an 
approved outline development plan and a preliminary site plan. 
    Preschool means an institution providing educational and developmental programs for children 
younger than compulsory school age. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for 
which the premises exist. 
    Public utility means a person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly 
authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, 
electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Regional center means a commercial complex providing for general merchandise, apparel, furniture 
and home furnishings in depth and variety as well as a range of services and recreational facilities built 
around one or two full line department stores of not less than 100,000 square feet, and containing not 
less than 400,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area overall. 
    Room , for the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, 
means a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not 
include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage. Plans 
presented showing one, two, or three bedroom units and including a den, library, or other extra room shall 
count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
    Screen means to conceal from view or to make difficult to see clearly. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space 
provisions of this chapter. 
    Sign means any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, pictures or trademarks erected on or 
otherwise affixed to a building, wall board, plate or any other structure, or on a vehicle or trailer, for the 
purpose of advertising or identifying an establishment, product, service, or activity. 
(1) ?Animated sign. A sign, other than a changeable copy sign, whereby the sign itself or the 
information conveyed incorporates or involves action, motion, or the appearance of action or 
motion, such as flashing lights, color changes, moving parts, reflective materials, scrolling 
messages, or video-like features. 
(2) ?Awning sign. A sign affixed flat against the surface of an awning. An awning is a retractable or 
fixed shelter constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework that projects from the 
exterior wall of a building. 
(3) ?Banner sign. A sign made of fabric, plastic, or other non-rigid material without an enclosing 
structural framework. 
(4) ?Billboard. A sign which identifies a use or advertises products and services not available on the 
site or parcel on which the sign is located. 
(5) ?Business center sign. A sign which advertises two or more businesses which: 
a. ?Are located on a single parcel of property; or 
b. ?Are connected by common walls, partitions, canopies, or other structural members to form 
a continuous building or group of buildings; or 
c. ?Share a common parking area; or 
d. ?Otherwise present the appearance of a single, contiguous business area. 
(6) ?Canopy sign. A sign affixed flat against the surface of a canopy. 
(7) ?Changeable message sign. A sign on which the message is changed mechanically, 
electronically or manually, including time/temperature signs. 
(8) ?Directional sign. A sign which gives directions, instructions, or facility information for the use on 
the lot or parcel on which the sign is located, such as parking or exit and entrance signs. 
(9) ?Ground or monument sign. A three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted freestanding 
sign, consisting of two or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message, 
business, group of businesses or center name is affixed. 
(10) ?Identification sign. A non-electric on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address, 
and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
(11) ?Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or 
services available on the premises. Examples of incidental signs include credit card signs, signs 
indicating the hours of business, no smoking signs, signs used to designate restrooms, and 
signs providing information on business affiliations. 
(12) ?LED sign. A sign in which the sign message is formed with the use of light emitting diodes on 
an otherwise blank background. 
(13) ?Marquee sign. A sign affixed flat against the surface of a theater marquee. A marquee is a 
permanent structure constructed of rigid materials that project from the exterior wall of a 
building. 
(14) ?Non-commercial message sign. A sign that is not related to or connected with trade and traffic 
or commerce in general and includes an election sign or a sign expressing an opinion or other 
point of view. 
(15) ?Obsolete sign. A sign that advertises a product that is no longer made, an event that has 
already occurred, or that advertises a business that has closed. 
(16) ?Pole or pylon sign. A permanently affixed sign which is erected upon or supported by the 
ground on one or more poles, uprights or braces. 
(17) ?Portable or movable sign. A sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently attached 
to the ground, a structure, or a building, including signs with wheels, poster panel signs, signs 
mounted on vehicles for advertising purposes, hot-air and gas filled balloons, pennants, 
streamers, ribbons, pinwheels, non-governmental flags and searchlights. 
(18) ?Poster panel signs. A sign that is located outside of a business on a daily basis for the 
purpose of providing the public with information about the business (e.g. products and services 
offered, daily specials etc.). Poster panel signs include sandwich signs and "A" frame signs. 
(19) ?Projecting sign. A sign, other than a wall sign, that is affixed to any building or wall and whose 
leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond such building or wall. 
(20) ?Roof sign. A sign erected above the roof line of a building. 
(21) ?Temporary sign. A sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, 
fabric, plastic or other light temporary material, with or a without structural frame, or any other 
sign intended for a limited period of display, but not including decorative display for holidays or 
public demonstration. 
(22) ?Wall sign. A sign painted or attached directly to and parallel to the exterior wall of a building. 
(23) ?Window sign. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
    Sign, accessory means a sign which is related to the principal use of the premises. 
    Sign, nonaccessory means a sign which is not related to the principal use of the premises. 
    Special exception means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction 
throughout the zoning division or district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to 
the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, 
appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning division or district 
as special exceptions, if specific provision for such special exceptions is made in this chapter. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine, included between the surface of one floor 
and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement 
shall not be counted as a story. 
    Story, half means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 
square feet with a clear height of seven feet, six inches. For the purposes of this chapter, the usable floor 
area is only that area having at least four feet of clear height between the floor and ceiling. 
    Street means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means 
of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or 
attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Telecommunication towers and facilities or tower means all structures and accessory facilities, 
including alternative tower structures, relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose 
of transmitting or receiving radio signals; including, but not limited to, radio towers, television towers, 
telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment 
buildings, private and commercial mobile radio service facilities, personal communication services towers 
(PCS), and cellular telephone towers. Not included in this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short 
wave receiving facilities; radio and television broadcast reception facilities; satellite dishes; federally 
licensed amateur (HAM) radio facilities; and governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal 
law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. 
    Temporary use of building means a use of building permitted by the board of appeals to exist during 
periods of construction of the main building or use, or for special events. 
    Trailer coach (mobile home) means any vehicle designed, used or so constructed as to permit its 
being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, and 
constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or 
more persons. 
    Trailer court (mobile home park) means any plot of ground upon which two or more trailer coaches, 
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicle designed as a travel unit for occupancy as a temporary or seasonal 
living unit and not exceeding 200 square feet in area. 
    Use means the principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or 
for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted when strict 
enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual 
property on which the variance is granted. The crucial points of variance are undue hardship, unique 
circumstances and applying to property. A variance is not justified unless all three elements are present in 
the case. A variance is not an exception. 
    Wall, obscuring means a structure or earth berm of definite height and location to serve as an 
obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Wind energy system means an electric generating system, consisting of one or more wind turbines 
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations, meteorological towers, electrical 
infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities. Such systems are 
designed for large scale energy generation, typically for electrical utilities, or to supplement other 
electricity sources as an accessory use for residential, commercial, and industrial buildings or facilities, 
wherein the power generated is used primarily for onsite consumption. All wind energy systems shall be 
considered personal property and subject to the provisions of the city's code of ordinances. 
    Wind turbine means a wind energy system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use 
of a wind turbine generator and may include a nacelle, rotor, tower, blades, and a pad transformer. 
    Yards means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed 
from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and as defined as follows: 
(1) ?Front yard means the open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the 
minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main 
building. 
(2) ?Rear yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the 
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main 
building. 
(3) ?Side yard means an open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from 
the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest 
point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2014-01, 2-3-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 86-4. - Schedule of applicable drawings. 
 
Yards 
 
Basic Structural Terms 
 
Interior, Through and Corner Lots 

 
Basement and Story 
 
Floor Area 
 
Building Line 
 
Building Height 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-5. - Vested rights. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights 
in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification of any permissible activities therein; 
and they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be 
necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-6. - Severance clause. 
    Sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph or 
provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect 
the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be 
unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-7. - Effective date. 
    A public hearing having been held hereon, the provisions of this chapter are hereby given immediate 
effect, pursuant to the provisions of section 4 of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 
125.581 et seq.), as amended. This chapter's provisions were made and passed on the following dates. 
Planning commission public hearing October 2, 2001. First reading and public hearing by city council April 
1, 2002. Second reading and public hearing by city council May 6, 2002. Adopted by the city council on 
May 6, 2002. Effective date of the ordinance May 22, 2002. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-8—86-35. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 


Sec. 86-36. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a zoning administrator, as 
designated by the city council, or by such deputies of his department as the zoning administrator may 
delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-37. - Duties of zoning administrator. 
(a) ?The zoning administrator shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, 
to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of 
this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the building inspector to approve any plans or issue any permits 
or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in 
detail and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(b) ?The zoning administrator shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this chapter is derived for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section 
86-523. 
(c) ?The zoning administrator shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this chapter 
are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as restrictive covenants or 
private agreements which may occur upon the granting of such permit. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-38. - Plot plan. 
    The zoning administrator shall require that all applications for building permits shall be accompanied 
by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(1) ?The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. 
(2) ?The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or 
moved, and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
(3) ?The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in 
residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4) ?Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining 
whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-39. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1) ?Not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any 
building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with 
all provisions of this chapter. 
(2) ?Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or 
repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" 
and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, 
type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other 
changes affecting or regulated by the city building code, state housing law, or this chapter, 
except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of such features. 
(3) ?Zoning permits expire one year after date of approval. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Amd. of 7-8-02) 


Sec. 86-40. - Certificates. 
(a) ?No land, building, or part thereof shall hereafter be occupied by or for any use unless and until a 
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the 
issuance of any certificate: 
(1) ?For new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of 
land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy 
is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(2) ?For new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or 
occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained 
for the new or different use. 
(3) ?Not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure, or part 
thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this 
chapter. 
(4) ?Required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered, shall 
be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy 
shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(5) ?Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as required by the city building code for 
new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing 
buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this 
chapter. 
(6) ?For existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, 
structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such 
buildings, structures or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions 
of this chapter. 
(7) ?Records. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building 
inspector, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or 
tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(8) ?For dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwelling shall not require 
separate certificates of occupancy, but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the 
dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(9) ?Application. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building 
inspector on forms furnished by him, and such certificates shall be issued within five days after 
receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure or part thereof, or the use of 
land, is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b) ?If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and 
cause thereof within the five-day period. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-41. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any 
building, structure or part thereof, shall notify the zoning administrator immediately upon the completion of 
the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-42. - Fees. 
    Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued 
under the provisions of this chapter may be collected by the zoning administrator in advance of issuance. 
The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the cost of 
inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-43. - Interpretation and application of chapter provisions. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum 
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or 
general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or 
interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the previous zoning ordinance, or with 
any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued 
pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this 
chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinances or by rules, regulations or 
permits; the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-44. - Planning commission. 
    The city planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in section 4, of Act 
No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.32 et seq.), as amended, and shall perform the 
duties of such commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-45. - Planning commission approval. 
(a) ?In cases where the city planning commission is empowered to approve certain use of premises 
under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other 
information as may be reasonably required by the planning commission for the proper consideration 
of the matter. 
(b) ?The planning commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify 
such parties, who may in its opinion be affected thereby, of the time and place of any hearing which 
may be held relative thereto as required under its rules or procedure. 
(c) ?The planning commission may impose such reasonable conditions or limitations in granting 
approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-46. - Changes and amendments. 
    The city council may from time to time, on recommendations from the planning commission, or on its 
own motion, or on petition, amend, supplement or change this chapter in accordance with the procedure 
established in Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.32 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-47. - Petition for amendment; fees. 
    Upon presentation of a petition for amendment of this chapter by the owner of real estate to be 
affected, such petition shall be accompanied by a fee. The amount of such fee shall be set by resolution 
of the city council and shall be placed in the general fund to partly defray the expense of publishing the 
required notices of public hearings, professional review of the petition, if needed, and the expenses of the 
public hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-48. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a) ?A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, 
subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each 
infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as provided by 
section 1-17. 
(b) ?Prior to the issuance of a municipal civil infraction notice or citation, the city shall give written notice, 
by first class mail, to any person in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, giving them 14 
days to correct the violation. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-49. - Public nuisance per se. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which 
is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter (February 13, 1978), and in 
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and 
may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-50. - Fines; imprisonment. 
(a) ?The owner of any building, structure or premises, or part thereof, where any condition in violation of 
this chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of 
such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction, shall be liable to the fines 
and imprisonment provided in section 1-17. 
(b) ?A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or 
continues. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-51. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided in this article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies 
provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-52. - Voluntary rezoning agreements. 
(a) ?Authority. The city council may, after a public hearing by the planning commission, enter into an 
agreement with a property owner to rezone property pursuant to the authority contained in MCL § 
125.3405, being part of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. 
(b) ?Application. Any offer to enter into a rezoning agreement shall be submitted to the clerk along with a 
rezoning agreement fee, in an amount established by motion of the city council. When a petitioner 
offers to enter into a rezoning agreement, the person shall be the fee owner of the premises 
concerned or else have the fee owner subscribe to the offer. Proposed rezoning agreements may 
only be initiated by a property owner and not by the municipality. 
(c) ?Pre-hearing meeting. Whenever an application for a voluntary rezoning agreement is submitted, a 
pre-hearing meeting shall be scheduled between the applicant and the planning commission. At the 
pre-hearing meeting, the applicant shall fully explain the agreement being proposed. The planning 
commission and the developer shall then discuss the proposed agreement and put it into appropriate 
form for a public hearing. 
(d) ?Public hearing and recommendation. After due notice, a public hearing shall be conducted by the 
planning commission as to the proposed rezoning agreement. The commission shall subsequently 
adopt recommendations as to the approval, approval with revisions, or denial of the proposed 
rezoning agreement. All procedural requirements for a rezoning shall be complied with. 
(e) ?Final decision. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the planning commission, the city council, 
shall undertake consideration of the proposed rezoning agreement. Any decision, which results in a 
rezoning agreement, shall be incorporated in a written document duly executed by the municipality 
and the property owner. Any such agreement shall be recorded with the register of deeds and shall 
run with the land. 
(f) ?Standards for decision. In deciding whether or not to approve a proposed rezoning agreement, the 
planning commission and the city council shall base their decisions on the following factors: 
(1) ?The terms of the offer must be reasonably related to the property covered in the agreement. 
(2) ?The proposed land use must be designed in such a way as to be compatible with surrounding 
land uses. 
(3) ?The proposed land use must be consistent with the goals and policies of the municipality. 
(g) ?Limitations on agreements. A rezoning agreement shall not be used to allow anything that would not 
otherwise be permitted in the proposed new zoning district. Any proposed variations from district 
requirements such as density, permitted uses, or lot size, shall only be granted by the zoning board 
of appeals pursuant to the variance standards contained in the zoning ordinance. Any agreement 
shall include a specific time period during which the terms of the agreement must be completed. 
(h) ?Zoning reversion. In the event that the terms of a zoning agreement are not fulfilled within the time 
specified in the agreement, the municipality shall initiate a proposed rezoning to revert the property 
back to the original classification. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 


Secs. 86-53—86-85. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 


Sec. 86-86. - Districts enumerated. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 
RA-1—One-family residential district 
RA-2—One-family residential district 
RA-3—One-family residential district 
RM-1—Multiple-family residential district 
RM-2—Multiple-family residential district 
O-S—Office service district 
B-1—Central business district 
B-2—General business district 
I-1—Light industrial district 
I-2—Heavy industrial district 
PUD—Planned unit development district 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-87. - Boundaries. 
(a) ?The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map, city zoning 
ordinance, which accompanies Ordinance No. 79 (2-13-1978), as amended, and which map with all 
notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much part of this chapter as if 
fully described in this article. 
(b) ?Unless shown otherwise, the boundaries of the district are lot lines, section lines, the centerlines of 
streets, alleys, roads or such lines extended, and the corporate limits of the city. 
(c) ?Where, due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning map accompanying Ordinance No. 
79, as amended, there is any uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any 
district boundaries, shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary 
lines shall be determined, upon written application, by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-88. - District boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the 
zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1) ?Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys 
shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2) ?Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as 
following such lot lines. 
(3) ?Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city 
limits. 
(4) ?Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between 
the main tracks. 
(5) ?Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and 
in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; 
boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes 
or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6) ?Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) 
through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the 
official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7) ?Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on 
the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1)—(6) of this 
section, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8) ?Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns 
which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such 
district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-89. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the city, one of the following conditions will apply: Land zoned or 
not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as an RA-3 district until a zoning map for 
such area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend the 
appropriate zoning districts for such area within three months after the matter is referred to it by the city 
council. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-90. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the city shall be vacated, such street, alley or 
other public way or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the 
property to which it attaches. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-91. - District requirements. 
    All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of articles XV and XVI of this 
chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-92—86-125. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - RA-1, RA-2, RA-3 ONE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 


Sec. 86-126. - Intent of article. 
    The RA-1, RA-2, and RA-3, one-family and two-family residential districts, are described to be 
composed of low density residential home development. The regulations of this article are intended to 
provide for stability and protect and encourage the residential character of the district along with other 
residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-127. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a one-family and two-family residential district (RA-1, RA-2, RA-3), no building or land shall be 
used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless 
otherwise provided for in this chapter: 
(1) ?One-family detached dwellings, provided that house trailers, travel trailers, trailer coaches and 
mobile homes shall not be permitted. A one-family detached dwelling shall be attached to a 
foundation from which it cannot be readily removed. 
(2) ?Two-family dwellings and duplexes in only RA-2 district. 
(3) ?Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(4) ?Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or secondary schools offering 
courses in general education, and not operated for profit. 
(5) ?Municipal office buildings. 
(6) ?Public utility and public service buildings (without storage yards) when operating requirements 
necessitate the locating of such facilities within the one-family district to serve the immediate 
vicinity. 
(7) ?Home occupations in residential dwellings which pose no change of character to the residential 
neighborhood in which they are located. Any use may be permitted which meets all required 
standards as follows: 
a. ?Exterior storage of equipment, materials or any items related to the home occupation is not 
permitted. 
b. ?Storage of vehicles rated over one-ton capacity on the residential lot is not permitted. 
c. ?Exterior display of merchandise is prohibited. 
d. ?Off-street parking spaces must be provided in compliance with section 86-525, in addition 
to those normally required for each dwelling on the lot. Off-street parking for more than two 
cars occur in the required front yard setback area, unless approved by the zoning board of 
appeals. 
e. ?Each home occupation is permitted one announcement sign of not more than three square 
feet in area. Such sign shall not be illuminated. 
f. ?There shall be no more than one home occupation in a single dwelling unit. 
g. ?Employees in addition to the resident family are prohibited. 
h. ?The applicant for an occupancy permit shall demonstrate that the proposed home 
occupation will not produce fumes, vibration, odors, dust, smoke, noise or other condition 
which poses a nuisance to adjoining properties and the neighborhood in which it is located. 
i. ?Such occupation shall not require exterior construction features, equipment or machinery 
not customarily included in a residential structure. 
j. ?A site plan shall be filed with the zoning administrator in accordance with section 86-536. 
k. ?A home occupation shall not occupy more than 30 percent of usable floor area of a 
principal building, or 240 square feet of accessory buildings in aggregate. 
l. ?Whenever a property owner complies with the requirements of this section, the zoning 
administrator shall issue an occupancy permit under section 86-40. Failure to comply on a 
continuing basis with the requirements of this section shall result in revocation of the 
occupancy permit. Should revocation occur, the home occupation shall immediately cease 
to operate. 
(8) ?Permanent private swimming pools shall be permitted as an accessory use within the rear yard 
only provided they meet the following requirements: 
a. ?There shall be a minimum distance of not less than five feet between the adjoining property 
line or alley right of way and the outside of the swimming pool wall. Side yard setbacks 
shall apply to side yards if greater than ten feet. 
b. ?There shall be a distance of not less than four feet between the outside swimming pool wall 
and any building located on the same lot. 
c. ?Reserved. 
d. ?No permanent private swimming pool shall be located in an easement. 
e. ?A permanent private swimming pool shall be located within an area enclosed by a solid 
wall or fence of chain link fence, not less than four feet in height, which cannot be readily 
climbed by children. All fence gates must be locked when the pool is not in use so that they 
may not be readily opened by children. For pools constructed partially or wholly above the 
ground, a fence shall not be required that the wall of the pool is at least four feet in height, 
and provided that no ladder, deck or other structure provides access to the pool while it is 
unattended. 
f. ?A permanent private swimming pool is defined as a swimming pool structure, whether in 
ground, above ground, inflatable or framed, that is accessed all year around. 
g. ?A temporary private swimming pool is a structure not needing a permit, whether inflatable 
or framed, that is erected no earlier than April 15 of each year and removed by October 15 
of that same year and shall be in compliance with regulations a-e listed above. 
h. ?Corner lot property owners, who are unable to meet rear yard only location requirements 
for a temporary private swimming pool, have the ability to request permission from the 
planning commission to place such temporary structure in a front yard. Such request shall 
not be allowed for a permanent private swimming pool. 
(9) ?Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to the permitted uses described in this 
section. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2014-09, 12-1-14) 


Sec. 86-128. - Special exception uses. 
    The following special exception uses shall be permitted in the RA-1, RA-2, RA-3 districts, subject to 
the conditions hereafter imposed for each use; and subject further to the review and approval of the city 
zoning board of appeals. The review and approval process of the zoning board of appeals shall be 
conducted at a public meeting, and public notice of the time, date and place of the meeting shall be given 
in the manner required by state law. 
(1) ?Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?The site shall be so located as to provide for ingress and egress from such site directly 
onto a major or secondary thoroughfare. 
b. ?The principal buildings on the site shall be set back from abutting properties zoned for 
residential uses not less than 15 feet. 
c. ?Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in article XII of this chapter may be 
allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum 
requirements by one foot for each foot of building that exceeds the maximum height 
allowed. 
(2) ?Recreational areas and recreational facilities and preschools, primarily intended to serve city 
residents, subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?The proposed site development shall be determined by the planning commission as not 
being contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter and not injurious to the surrounding 
neighborhood. 
b. ?This determination shall be made at a public hearing conducted by the planning 
commission upon notification of 100 percent of the property owners abutting the proposed 
site by written notice of the hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(3) ?Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering 
courses in general, technical or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the 
following conditions: 
a. ?Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least 20 acres in area and 
shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b. ?All ingress to and egress from such site shall be directly onto a major thoroughfare. 
c. ?No building other than a structure for residential purposes shall be closer than 75 feet to 
any property line. 
(4) ?Planned unit development projects (PUD) shall be permitted only on lots with a total area size 
of not less than 20 acres, pursuant to and in accordance with article XI of this chapter. 
(5) ?Home occupations in accordance with section 86-127 shall be permitted and shall further 
permit up to two employees in addition to the resident family. 
(6) ?Family and/or group day care homes subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?The family and/or group day care home is not located closer than 150 feet to any of the 
following: 
1. ?Another licensed family and/or group day care home 
2. ?Another adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the 
adult foster care facility licensing act, Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 
1979 (MCL 400.701 et seq.), as amended; 
3. ?A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven or 
more people licensed under article 6 of the public health code, Act No. 368 of the 
Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq.); or 
4. ?A community correction center, resident home, halfway house or other similar facility 
which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the department of 
corrections. 
b. ?The family or group home owner must be licensed by the state department of social 
services. 
c. ?The family or group homeowner shall maintain control of noise to protect the surrounding 
neighborhood. 
d. ?The owner of the family or group day care home maintains the property consistent with the 
visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
e. ?The family or group day care home does not exceed 12 hours of operation during a 24-
hour period between Monday through Friday. 
f. ?License holders and immediate family shall be the sole residents of the premises except 
that exchange students and foster care may be permitted to reside on the premises. 
g. ?For each family or group day care home, one additional full-time employee or licensed 
contractor or independent contractor or other person, in addition to the licensed 
homeowner, shall be permitted. A substitute employee for the provider may be permitted in 
the event of an emergency. 
h. ?The family or group day care home provides one parking space for each dwelling unit and 
one parking space for each additional full-time or part-time employee. 
i. ?The distances specified in subsection (1) of this section shall be measured along a road, 
street or place maintained by the state, the county or the city and generally open to use by 
the public for the purpose of vehicular traffic, not including an alley. 
j. ?A single, nonilluminated, nonanimated sign of not more than one square foot in area which 
identifies the family or group day care home may be affixed on the building. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12) 


Sec. 86-129. - Authorization for family or group day care homes. 
(a) ?Requests for operation of a family or group day care home shall be submitted in writing to the city's 
zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals will conduct a public hearing on the request 
following written notification to all properties within 300 feet of the applicant's property. 
(b) ?If the zoning board of appeals approves the request, a written permit valid for one year shall be 
issued to the applicants. The applicant will be required to request approval of a new permit. In those 
cases where no complaints have been registered with the city a new permit will be approved by the 
city zoning administrator. If two or more complaints are from at least two different households, a new 
permit request must be submitted to the zoning board of appeals which will conduct a public hearing 
on the request after written notice to all properties within 300 feet of the applicant's property. 
(c) ?The family and/or group day care home permit will become null and void upon sale or transfer of the 
property. 
(d) ?A complete floor plan of the dwelling and a complete off-street parking plan shall be submitted with 
the initial request for operation of a family or group day care facility. 
(e) ?For those applications which require zoning board of appeals involvement, an application fee of 
$150.00 shall be required. For annual renewals which do not require zoning board of appeals 
approval, an application fee of five dollars shall be required. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-130. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XII of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, and providing the minimum 
size of lot permitted by land use and the maximum density permitted in RA-1, RA-2, RA-3 residential 
districts. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-131—86-160. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - RM-1 AND RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 


Sec. 86-161. - Intent of article. 
    The RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-
family dwelling structures and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the 
nonresidential districts and the lower density one-family residential districts. The multiple-family districts 
are further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type unit in an otherwise low density, 
single-family community. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-162. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be 
erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1) ?All uses permitted as regulated in the RA-1, RA-2 and RA-3 residential districts. 
(2) ?Up to four multiple-family units in RM-1 district; five or more multiple-family units in RM-2 
district. 
(3) ?Housing for the elderly. 
(4) ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-163. - Special exception uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the RM-1 and RM-2 districts, subject to the conditions 
imposed in this section for each use, and subject further to the review and approval of the zoning 
administrator for compliance with the health, safety and welfare objectives of the city and pursuant to this 
chapter: 
(1) ?General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for the treatment of persons who 
are mentally ill or have contagious disease, when the following conditions are met: 
a. ?All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least 60,000 square 
feet. 
b. ?The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets 
shall be at least 30 feet from front, rear and side yards for all two-story structures. For 
every story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least ten feet. 
(2) ?Convalescent homes, not to exceed a height of two stories when the following conditions are 
met: 
a. ?The maximum coverage shall not exceed 50 percent for all buildings, including principal 
structures and those incident to the principal structure. 
b. ?The maximum extent of development shall not exceed 30 patient units per acre. 
(3) ?Tourist homes and tourist rooms as part of a dwelling when the following conditions are met: 
a. ?Such uses shall be permitted only within a dwelling occupied by the proprietor and shall be 
incidental to the use as a year-round residential dwelling. 
b. ?The property shall abut a major or secondary thoroughfare on at least one side. 
c. ?Such use shall display not more than a total of four square feet of sign area. Where such 
sign is illuminated such illumination shall be of a nonflashing type and shall be effectively 
screened from abutting residences. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-164. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XII of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings and providing the minimum size 
of lot permitted by land use and the maximum density permitted in the RM-1 residential district. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-165—86-195. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - O-S OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT 


Sec. 86-196. - Intent of article. 
    The O-S office service district is designed to accommodate office buildings and uses providing basic 
personal services, and are, as a use district, intended to serve as transitional areas between residential 
and commercial districts. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-197. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an O-S office service district, no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following 
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1) ?Office buildings for any of the following types of occupations: executive, administrative and 
professional. 
(2) ?Medical and dental offices, including clinics, except veterinary. 
(3) ?Prescription pharmacies and laboratories. 
(4) ?Banks, post offices and other governmental office buildings. 
(5) ?Churches. 
(6) ?Municipal buildings, and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer 
stations, exchanges or substations. 
(7) ?Public utility and public services buildings and uses (without storage yards) where operating 
requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities within the O-S district to serve the 
immediate vicinity. 
(8) ?Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-198. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XII of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings and providing the minimum size 
of a lot by a permitted land use in the O-S district. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-199—86-230. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VII. - B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 


Sec. 86-231. - Intent of article. 
    The B-1 central business district is designed to serve the needs of the entire city area and the 
consumer population within and beyond the city limits. The district will provide for office buildings, retail 
stores and related activities. The district regulations are designed to promote convenient pedestrian 
shopping and stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by 
prohibiting automotive related services and nonretail uses which tend to break up such continuity. 
Residential uses may be permitted as special exception uses but only in the second story or other upper 
story of any building in the B-1 central business district. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-232. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-1 central business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected 
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1) ?Any retail business which supplies commodities on the premises within a completely enclosed 
building including, but not limited to, foods, drugs, liquor, furniture, clothing, dry goods, notions 
or hardware. 
(2) ?Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises within a 
completely enclosed building. 
(3) ?Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, except those having the character of a 
drive-in. 
(4) ?Theaters, assembly halls and concert halls when completely enclosed. 
(5) ?Offices and office buildings of an executive, administrative or professional nature. 
(6) ?Banks, with drive-in facilities permitted when such facilities are incidental to the principal 
function of the bank. 
(7) ?Municipal buildings and post offices. 
(8) ?Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorators or similar trades, in connection 
with which not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the building or part of the building 
occupied by such establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, 
finishing or refinishing its products or merchandise, and provided that the ground floor premises 
facing upon and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices or 
display. All storage of materials shall be within the confines of the building. 
(9) ?Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit. 
(10) ?Newspaper offices and printing plants. 
(11) ?Warehouse and storage facilities shall be permitted when incident to and physically 
connected with any principal use permitted, provided that such facility be within the confines of 
the building or part thereof occupied by such establishment. 
(12) ?Other uses which are similar to the uses described in this section and subject to the following 
restrictions: 
a. ?All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with 
consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail from premises 
where produced. 
b. ?All business servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be 
conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
c. ?Outside display for the purpose of conducting retail sales is permitted for all licensed 
merchants on private property; providing other provisions of this article are adhered to. 
d. ?Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, the zoning administrator 
may allow the placement of goods and merchandise for retail sales each year for what is 
commonly referred to as "sidewalk days." 
e. ?Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, the zoning administrator 
may allow the placement of goods for retail sales on a public sidewalk or public street by a 
nonprofit organization recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as a charitable 
organization or a licensed retail merchant. The organization or merchant shall obtain a 
permit from the zoning administrator which shall specify the locations and time period 
covered by the permit, and the merchant or organization must provide proof to the city as a 
named insured. The permit shall be issued without charge. The zoning administrator may 
deny the permit if there is a reason to believe that the activity to be covered by the permit, 
its requested locations or time interval would interfere with the rights of others to use the 
public sidewalk or street, interfere with the ability of city employees to carry out their jobs, 
or the right of the public to unobstructed travel along a public street or public sidewalk. 
(13) ?Utility and public service office buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating 
requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities within the district to serve the immediate 
vicinity. No building or structure shall be located in any required front or side yard. 
(14) ?Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(15) ?Tourist homes, bed and breakfasts and respites that meet the following requirements: 
a. ?Provide 24-hour on-site management when paying guests are in residence with on-site 
management residing solely on the second floor. 
b. ?Length of stay is limited to 16 days in any 30-day period. 
c. ?Each bedroom must be located in the principle structure. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-233. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XII of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings and providing the minimum size 
of a lot permitted in the B-1 central business district. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-234. - Special exception uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, 
and subject further to the review and approval of the zoning administrator for compliance with health, 
safety and welfare objectives of the city and pursuant to this chapter: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings, when all of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
a. ?The single-family dwelling or proposed single-family dwelling is located in the second story 
or other upper story of any building in the B-1 central business district. 
b. ?No single-family dwelling or any other residential use shall be permitted on the first story, 
ground story, mezzanine floor or basement of any building. 
c. ?No portion of a single-family dwelling, including but not limited to, the bathroom, kitchen or 
sleeping quarters of a single-family dwelling located on the second story or other upper 
story shall be permitted in the first floor or story, ground floor or story, or basement of any 
building in the central business district. 
d. ?The review and determination of the zoning administrator that the single-family dwelling 
complies with all the requirements of this chapter, and of the building code, the housing 
code, the fire code and any other health or safety code of the city. 
(2) ?Two-family dwellings, when all of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
a. ?The two-family dwelling or proposed two-family dwelling is located in the second story or 
other upper story of a building in the B-1 central business district, except that no building 
designed and constructed to be used as a single-family dwelling at the time the building 
was originally constructed may be used as a two-family dwelling. 
b. ?No two-family dwelling or any other residential use shall be permitted on the first story, 
ground story, mezzanine floor or basement of any building. 
c. ?No portion of a two-family dwelling, including but not limited to, the bathroom, kitchen or 
sleeping quarters of a two-family dwelling located on the second story or other upper story 
shall be permitted in the first story, ground story, or basement of any building in the central 
business district. 
d. ?The review and determination of the zoning administrator that the two-family dwelling 
complies with all the requirements of this chapter, and of the building code, the housing 
code, the fire code and any other health or safety code of the city. 
(3) ?Multiple-family dwellings, when all of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
a. ?The multiple-family dwelling or proposed multiple-family dwelling is located in the second 
story or other upper story of a building in the B-1 central business district, except that no 
building designed and constructed to be used as a single-family dwelling at the time the 
building was originally constructed may be used as a multiple-family dwelling. 
b. ?No multiple-family dwelling or any other residential use shall be permitted on the first story, 
ground story, mezzanine floor or story or basement of any building. 
c. ?No portion of a multiple-family dwelling, including but not limited to, the bathroom, kitchen 
or sleeping quarters of a multiple-family dwelling located on the second story or other 
upper story shall be permitted in the first story, ground story, or basement of any building in 
the central business district. 
d. ?The review and determination of the zoning administrator that the multiple-family dwelling 
complies with all the requirements of this chapter, and of the building code, the housing 
code, the fire code and any other health or safety code of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-235—86-265. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VIII. - B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 


Sec. 86-266. - Intent of article. 
    The B-2 general business district is designed to provide a diversity of businesses along major 
thoroughfares in the city. Unlike the pedestrian-oriented B-1 central business district, this district 
regulations are designed to provide convenient access by automobiles for goods and services. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-267. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-2 general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected 
except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1) ?All principal uses as permitted in a B-1 central business district. 
(2) ?New automobile sales or showroom, farm implement dealers and any accessory parking or 
outdoor sales areas. 
(3) ?Bus passenger stations. 
(4) ?Funeral homes. 
(5) ?Private clubs or lodge halls. 
(6) ?Governmental offices and functions and public utility offices and functions and service yards, 
but not including outdoor storage. 
(7) ?Clinics. 
(8) ?Completely enclosed automobile car washes. 
(9) ?Dry cleaning establishments and self-service laundries. 
(10) ?Bowling alleys and pool and billiard parlors. 
(11) ?Storage of materials or goods to be sold at retail establishments, provided such storage is 
within a building or is enclosed as not to be visible to the public from any abutting residential 
district or public street. 
(12) ?Churches or other uses similar to the above uses. 
(13) ?Accessory structures customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(14) ?Tourist homes, bed and breakfasts and respites that meet the following requirements: 
a. ?Provide 24-hour on-site management when paying guests are in residence with on-site 
management residing solely on the second floor. 
b. ?Length of stay is limited to 16 days in any 30-day period. 
c. ?Each bedroom must be located in the principle structure. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-268. - Special exception uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the B-2 general business district, subject to the conditions 
imposed in this section for each use, and subject further to the review and approval of the zoning 
administrator for compliance with the health, safety and welfare objectives of the city pursuant to this 
chapter: 
(1) ?Outdoor sales space for the sale of new and used automobiles, farm equipment, house trailers 
and travel trailers subject to the following: 
a. ?Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection 
of any two streets. 
b. ?No major repair or refinishing shall be done on the lot outside of a building. 
(2) ?Motel, subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?Access shall not conflict with adjacent business uses. 
b. ?Each unit shall contain not less than 200 square feet of floor area. 
c. ?No kitchen or cooking facilities are to be provided, except for units for the use of the 
manager or caretaker. 
(3) ?Drive-in restaurants and open front stores, subject to the following: 
a. ?A setback of at least 30 feet from the street right-of-way line of any existing or proposed 
major thoroughfare must be maintained. 
b. ?Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 30 feet from intersection of any two 
streets. 
(4) ?Miniature golf courses, outdoor children's amusement parks and similar uses, subject to the 
following: 
a. ?A children's amusement park shall be fenced on all sides with a four-foot fence or wall. 
b. ?Parking shall be provided, off a right-of-way, and shall be located adjacent to the above 
use and fenced with a four-foot fence or wall. 
(5) ?Automobile service station for the sale of gasoline, oil and accessories, subject to the following: 
a. ?Curb cuts for access shall not be permitted at such locations that tend to create traffic 
hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. 
b. ?The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet, and so arranged that sufficient space is 
available for motor vehicles which are required to wait for service. 
c. ?Major automobile repair, engine and body repair, steam cleaning and undercoating when 
conducted on the site shall be within a completely enclosed building. The storage of 
wrecked automobiles on the site shall be obscured from public view. No automobile or 
vehicle of any kind shall be stored in the open for a period exceeding seven days. 
d. ?All restroom doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and residential districts. 
(6) ?All uses permitted in RA-1 and RA-2 one-family residential districts and all uses permitted in 
RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family residential districts, provided that such uses shall be permitted 
only as to structures which are now in existence and which would otherwise be nonconforming 
uses under this chapter or any amendment thereto. 
(7) ?Medical marihuana facilities licensed as a secure transporter, medical marihuana provisioning 
center or safety compliance facility, as established by subsection 50-2(e) of this Code, subject 
to the following conditions: 
a. ?The medical marihuana facility shall not be within a 500-foot radius from any parcel within 
the city with a school, church or public library located on it. Measurement of the 500-foot 
radius shall be made from the lot line of the lot upon which the proposed medical 
marihuana facility will be situated to the lot line of the lot upon which the school, church or 
public library is situated and shall be the shortest distance between the respective lot lines. 
b. ?The applicant for a special exception use must have received prior approval from the city 
administration as established by subsection 50-2(e) of this Code. 
c. ?Acceptance of a special exception use permit hereunder constitutes consent by permit 
holder to reasonable inspection by city personnel without prior notice, including police, for 
purposes of ensuring compliance with laws and regulations. 
d. ?The applicant for a special exception use must provide evidence of compliance with all 
state statutes related to the requested medical marihuana facility. 
e. ?A medical marihuana facility issued a permit under this chapter and operating in this city, 
shall comply with the following operational requirements, which shall be reviewed and 
amended from time to time. Whenever any operational requirements contained in this 
section directly conflict with state law, state law shall control: 
1. ?Permit holder shall maintain, at all times, a centrally-monitored security and alarm 
system. 
2. ?Permit holder shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
3. ?No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed to enter into the premises without a 
parent or legal guardian. 
4. ?No pictures or drawings depicting marihuana or any marihuana paraphernalia shall 
appear on the outside of the premises, or shall be visible from outside of the 
premises. The words "marihuana," "cannabis" and any words used or intended to be 
used to convey the presence of marihuana shall not appear on the outside of the 
premises per state law. 
5. ?All marihuana in whatever form stored at the premises shall be kept in a secure 
manner and shall not be visible from outside the premises, nor shall it be grown, 
processed, exchanged, displayed or dispensed outside the premises. 
6. ?No marihuana may be consumed or ingested on the premises except as otherwise 
permitted by applicable state law. 
7. ?For all marihuana establishments, the odor of marihuana must not be perceptible at 
the exterior of the building at the licensed premises or at any adjoining use of the 
property. Marihuana growing and processing facilities must implement appropriate 
ventilation and filtration systems to satisfy the odor nuisance standard described 
above. Provisioning centers and safety compliance facilities are not required to install 
filtration equipment on the licensed premises but must satisfy the same odor 
threshold. While the city does not mandate any particular equipment specifications 
with regard to filtration, all marihuana establishments are strongly encouraged to 
adopt best management practices with regard to implementing state-of-the-art 
technologies in mitigating marihuana odor, such as air scrubbers and charcoal 
filtration systems. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2017-04 , 10-2-17) 


Sec. 86-269. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XII of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings and providing minimum size of 
lot by permitted land use in the B-2 general business district. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-270—86-300. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IX. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 


Sec. 86-301. - Intent of article. 
    The I-1 light industrial district is designed to accommodate wholesale activities, warehousing and 
industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the I-1 district and have 
no detrimental effect on the surrounding districts. An I-1 district is structured to permit, along with 
specified uses, the manufacturing, assembly, treatment and processing of finished and semifinished 
products from previously prepared material. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-302. - Principal uses permitted. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 light industrial district, subject to the conditions 
imposed in this section for each use, and subject further to the review and approval of the zoning 
administrator for compliance with the health, safety and welfare objectives of the city pursuant to this 
chapter: 
(1) ?Medical marihuana facilities licensed as a grower or processor, as established by subsection 
50-2(e) of this Code, subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?The medical marihuana facility shall not be within a 500-foot radius from any parcel within 
the city with a school, church or public library located on it. Measurement of the 500-foot 
radius shall be made from the lot line of the lot upon which the proposed medical 
marihuana facility will be situated to the lot line of the lot upon which the school, church or 
public library is situated and shall be the shortest distance between the respective lot lines. 
b. ?The applicant must have received prior approval from the city administration as established 
by subsection 50-2(e). 
c. ?Acceptance of permit hereunder constitutes consent by permit holder to reasonable 
inspection by city personnel without prior notice, including police, for purposes of ensuring 
compliance with laws and regulations. 
d. ?The applicant must provide evidence of compliance with all state statutes related to the 
requested medical marihuana facility. 
e. ?A medical marihuana facility issued a permit under this chapter and operating in this city, 
shall comply with the following operational requirements, which shall be reviewed and 
amended from time to time. Whenever any operational requirements contained in this 
section directly conflict with state law, state law shall control: 
1. ?Permit holder shall maintain, at all times, a centrally-monitored security and alarm 
system. 
2. ?Permit holder shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
3. ?No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed to enter into the premises without a 
parent or legal guardian. 
4. ?No pictures or drawings depicting marihuana or any marihuana paraphernalia shall 
appear on the outside of the premises, or shall be visible from outside of the 
premises. The words "marihuana," "cannabis" and any words used or intended to be 
used to convey the presence of marihuana shall not appear on the outside of the 
premises per state law. 
5. ?All marihuana in whatever form stored at the premises shall be kept in a secure 
manner and shall not be visible from outside the premises, nor shall it be grown, 
processed, exchanged, displayed or dispensed outside the premises. 
6. ?No marihuana may be consumed or ingested on the premises except as otherwise 
permitted by applicable state law. 
7. ?For all marihuana establishments, the odor of marihuana must not be perceptible at 
the exterior of the building at the licensed premises or at any adjoining use of the 
property. Marihuana growing and processing facilities must implement appropriate 
ventilation and filtration systems to satisfy the odor nuisance standard described 
above. Provisioning centers and safety compliance facilities are not required to install 
filtration equipment on the licensed premises but must satisfy the same odor 
threshold. While the city does not mandate any particular equipment specifications 
with regard to filtration, all marihuana establishments are strongly encouraged to 
adopt best management practices with regard to implementing state-of-the-art 
technologies in mitigating marihuana odor, such as air scrubbers and charcoal 
filtration systems. 
(2) ?Any use with the principal function of research, design and experimental product development 
when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(3) ?The following uses shall be permitted: 
a. ?Warehousing and wholesale establishments. 
b. ?The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products, 
including bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, 
hardware and cutlery; tool, die gauge, and machine shops. 
c. ?The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only 
previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
d. ?Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other 
molded rubber products. 
e. ?Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices and 
radios and phonographs. 
f. ?Laboratories: experimental, film or testing. 
g. ?Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, heating and 
ventilating equipment, cornices and eaves. 
h. ?Ministorage facilities. 
1. ?The area used for all structures must occupy less than 50 percent of the property and 
must be at least three acres in size. Access to the facility shall be from a public street. 
The storage units shall be arranged so that the ends of the units are parallel with the 
front of the lot, however, alternate arrangement could be considered by the planning 
commission. Internal driveway aisles shall be designed with one 15-foot-wide 
loading/unloading lane and one 15-foot travel lane. The use of the ministorage units 
shall be limited to storage only, and shall not be used for any auction other than four 
auctions per year held by the owner of the ministorage facility for the purpose of 
disposing of material forfeited by clients of that facility. Nor shall it be used for sales or 
transfer business; for the servicing, repair or fabricating of any vehicle, boat, trailer, 
appliance or similar item; or for the operation of power tools, compressors, kilns or 
other similar equipment. 
2. ?Exterior lighting as required in section 86-532. 
3. ?The storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers or explosive 
materials, as defined in the fire code, or toxic materials is expressly prohibited. 
i. ?Correctional or vocational facility for juvenile offenders. 
(4) ?Nonaccessory signs. 
(5) ?Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage 
requirements or activities, including lumberyards, building materials, outlets, garage sales, 
upholsterer, cabinetmaker, outdoor boat or house trailer, automobile, or agricultural implement 
sales; and uses which serve convenience needs of the industrial district, including eating and 
drinking establishments, banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, automobile 
service stations, motel or bowling alley, trade or industrial schools, or medical or other offices 
serving the I-1 light industrial district. 
(6) ?Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(7) ?Accessory buildings and uses incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2017-04 , 10-2-17) 


Sec. 86-303. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XII of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, providing the minimum size of 
lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the I-1 light industrial 
districts. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-304—86-335. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE X. - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 


Sec. 86-336. - Intent of article. 
    The I-2 heavy industrial district is established for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities 
including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to 
some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 heavy industrial district is so structured to permit, in 
addition to I-1 light industrial uses, the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semifinished or 
finished products from raw materials. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-337. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-2 heavy industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected 
except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1) ?All principal uses permitted in an I-1 light industrial district. 
(2) ?Trucking facilities. 
(3) ?The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from 
previously prepared materials including bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, 
feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or 
semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns. 
(4) ?Storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards, public utility buildings, 
telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, gas regulator 
stations, water supply and sewage disposal plants, water and propane tank holders, railroad 
transfer and storage tracks, railroad rights-of-way, and freight terminals. 
(5) ?Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber or storage of contractor's 
equipment and supplies. 
(6) ?Central dry cleaning plants or laundries. 
(7) ?Automotive repair garages, auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when 
completely enclosed. 
(8) ?Commercial kennels. 
(9) ?Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the 
district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district. 
(10) ?Heating and electric power generating plants. 
(11) ?Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods 
or products which shall conform with the performance standards set forth in article XV of this 
chapter. 
(12) ?Junkyards, provided such are entirely enclosed within an eight-foot high obscuring wall. No 
burning shall be permitted on such site and all industrial process shall be conducted within a 
completely enclosed building. 
(13) ?Waterfront marinas. 
(14) ?Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-338. - Special exception uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 heavy industrial district, subject to the conditions 
imposed in this section for each use, and subject further to the review and approval of the board of 
appeals for compliance with the health, safety and welfare of the city pursuant to this chapter: 
(1) ?Telecommunication towers and facilities or towers, subject to the following: 
a. ?The setbacks for each tower from adjacent right-of-way and/or property lines shall be not 
less than one time the height of each tower above the ground. 
b. ?Unless specifically waived by the board of appeals, a wood fence six feet in height shall be 
constructed on the boundary property lines. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-339. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XII of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, providing the minimum size of 
lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the I-2 heavy industrial 
districts. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-340—86-370. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XI. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 


Sec. 86-371. - Intent of article; minimum requirements. 
(a) ?The intent of this article is to provide a degree of flexibility in regard to the use, area, height, bulk 
and placement regulations for relatively large-scale developments which qualify as planned unit 
developments. These may include, but are not limited to, housing developments, shopping centers, 
industrial districts, office districts, and medical and educational complexes. 
(b) ?A development may be of such large size as to justify permitting certain incidental uses not normally 
permitted in the zoning district. Permitting these uses as special exceptions can in certain cases 
increase convenience, be compatible with the overall character of the district, and not be injurious to 
the adjoining properties. 
(c) ?A planned unit development shall be considered a unique use of land which, although comprised of 
numerous structures of varying types, shall be accorded regulatory treatment under this chapter as a 
single entity. Subject to the foregoing statements of intent for this article, the board of appeals may, 
upon application, approve a planned unit development through issuance of a special exception 
permit. Within each planned unit development the use, area, height, bulk and placement regulations 
of the zoning district may be modified; provided, however, that such modifications shall comply with 
the provisions of this article and the standards established in article XIII of this chapter. While it is the 
intent of this article to promote diverse and innovative design, and it is to be anticipated that each 
planned unit development will possess a unique and distinctive design, all planned unit 
developments shall promote the spirit and intent of this chapter, as well as the public health, safety 
and welfare, and each shall be given equal regulatory consideration, recognizing the principles of 
due process, in accord with the procedures specified in this article and the procedures required for 
approval of special exceptions. 
(d) ?A planned unit development must constitute a land area of at least 20 acres to be occupied by 
principal buildings with more than 25,000 square feet of usable floor area. The development shall be 
designed as an entity, intended to be substantially completed within three years if less than 50 acres, 
and five years if more than 50 acres. 
(e) ?All planned unit developments in RA-1, RA-2 and RA-3 districts shall be in compliance with the 
following regulations: 
(1) ?A maximum of ten percent of the total developed area may be utilized for uses that are 
permitted in the B-1 and B-2 business districts. 
(2) ?A maximum of five percent of the total developed area may be utilized for industrial uses that 
are permitted in I-1 light industrial district and which are deemed compatible pursuant to this 
chapter, with the residential character of the planned unit development. 
(3) ?No business or industrial use or any building devoted primarily to a commercial or industrial 
use shall be built or established prior to the residential buildings or uses which it is developed or 
intended to serve. 
(4) ?The minimum area, dimensions and setbacks of individual buildings and lots may be reduced, 
provided the total number and density of dwellings shall be increased by no more than 20 
percent greater than that which would ordinarily result under the district regulations. Land 
accruing from reduction in lot requirements shall be laid out, developed and perpetually 
reserved for open space, recreational and conservation purposes. 
(5) ?A minimum of 20 percent of the land developed in any residential planned unit development 
shall be reserved for common open space and noncommercial recreational facilities for the 
residents and users of the area being developed. 
(6) ?A maximum of 15 percent of the total developed area may be utilized for multiple-family 
residential use. 
(7) ?The minimum yard setbacks along the perimeter of the planned unit development shall be 
equal to the setback requirements of the existing districts of RA-1, RA-2, and RA-3. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-372. - Criteria of determination. 
    The planning commission in determining its recommendation for approval or disapproval and the 
board of appeals in determining its approval or disapproval of the proposed planned unit development 
shall determine and report that the proposal meets, in addition to the specifications of section 86-372 and 
this article, the following requirements: 
(1) ?A planned unit development proposal shall comply with the intent and purposes of this article. 
(2) ?A planned unit development proposal shall promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3) ?A planned unit development proposal shall: 
a. ?Be compatible with existing adjacent development; 
b. ?Be of a population density which will not overburden existing or immediately projected 
schools, parks, roadways, public utilities and other public facilities; 
c. ?Incorporate a transportation pattern consistent and complementary with existing and 
immediately projected transportation systems in the city; 
d. ?Be designed in a manner to ensure healthful living conditions and adequate light, air and 
accessibility for fire and police and recreation needs for the inhabitants and users of the 
development, as well as adjacent residents; and 
e. ?Be compatible with the objectives and specific elements of the general development plan 
officially adopted by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-373. - Filing of application. 
(a) ?An application and site plan for a proposed planned unit development shall be filed in triplicate with 
the zoning administrator and shall contain the following: 
(1) ?Cover letter signed by owner and/or prospective developer holding an equitable interest in the 
property in question, indicating: 
a. ?Legal description, ownership, location and acreage of property. 
b. ?Existing zoning classifications. 
c. ?General description of proposed development and estimated timetable of construction. 
(2) ?A site plan showing: 
a. ?The proposed schedule of usable floor areas and land areas by category of use, building 
ground coverage, square feet net lot area and preserved open space per dwelling unit, 
number of parking spaces, and such other information necessary to satisfy the intent and 
requirements of this article. 
b. ?A declaration of restrictions to be placed on the property when subdivided to ensure that 
the planned character and uses will be preserved and protected. 
(b) ?If all required information is submitted, the zoning administrator shall refer the application and site 
plan to the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-374. - Action of the planning commission. 
(a) ?Upon receipt of the application and site plan the planning commission shall schedule and hold a 
public hearing on the proposal in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in 
section 86-45. 
(b) ?The planning commission shall review and evaluate the proposal, including the application and site 
plan, in accordance with the criteria specified in this article and shall prepare and forward to the 
zoning board of appeals its report. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-375. - Action of the zoning board of appeals. 
    Upon receipt of the planning commission's report, the zoning board of appeals shall review such 
report and the application and site plan and may further consider the regulations and criteria specified in 
sections 86-372 and 86-373. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-376. - Effect of approval of zoning board of appeals. 
    The approval of the application by the zoning board of appeals shall allow the zoning administrator to 
issue a zoning compliance permit in conformity with the application as approved. Upon the abandonment 
of a particular planned unit development authorized under this section or upon the expiration of six 
months from the authorization hereunder of a planned unit development which has not by then been 
commenced, the authorization shall expire. However, the authorization may be renewed by the board of 
appeals upon application by the developer. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-377—86-445. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XII. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS; SUBDIVISION OPEN SPACE PLAN 


Sec. 86-446. - Height, bulk, density and area use restrictions. 
    The schedule of height, bulk, density and area use regulations is as follows: 

Min
imu
m 
Lot 
Maximu
m Height  
of 
Structure
s 
Minimum Yard 
Setback  
(per lot in feet) 








Sides** 



Use District Area in Square Feet Width in Feet In  Stories In Feet Front Least One Total  of Two Rear Minimum  Floor Area  Per Unit (square feet) Maximum  Percentage  of Lot Area  Covered By  All Buildings 
RA-1 one-family residential 7,200  (1), (2) 60 2½ 30 25 6(2), (3) 15(3) 35(2) 900 30 
RA-2 one-family and two-family residential (1) (2)  9,600 80 2½ 30 25 8(2),(3) 20(3) 35(2) 1,400 30 
RA-3 one-family residential (2)  12,000 100 2½ 30 40(2) 10(2), (3) 25(3) 35(2) 2,000 30 
RM-1 multiple-family residential 7,200 — 3 35 40 10 25 35 (4) 30 
RM-2 multiple family residential 7,200 — 3 35 40 10 25 35 (4) 30 
OS 
offi
ce 
ser
vice 
—
 
—
 
2½ 
35 
25(
5) 
(6), 
(7) 
(6), 
(7) 
(7), 
(8) 
No
ne 
(9) 
B-1 
cen
tral 
bus
ine
ss 
—
 
—
 
4 
50 
No
ne 
(7) 
(7) 
(7), 
(8) 
No
ne 
(9) 
B-2 
gen
eral 
bus
ine
ss 
—
 
—
 
2½ 
35 
25(
2), 
(5) 
(6), 
(7), 
(10) 
(6), 
(7), 
(10) 
(7), 
(8), 
(10) 
No
ne 
(9) 
I-1 
ligh
t 
ind
ustr
ial 
—
 
—
 
2½ 
35 
25(
2), 
(7), 
(12) 
50(
7), 
(11) 
65(
7), 
(11) 
(7), 
(11)
, 
(13) 
No
ne 
(9) 
I-2 
hea
vy 
ind
ustr
ial 
—
 
—
 
3 
40 
25(
2), 
(5), 
(12) 
75 
(7), 
(11) 
100 
(7), 
(11) 
(7), 
(11)
, 
(13)
, 
(15) 
No
ne 
(9) 
 
Footnotes: 
(1) ?Refer to section 86-447 regarding exceptions to lot area and related density controls. 
(2) ?For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, the setback shall equal the height of 
the main building or the setback required in section 86-127 or this section, whichever is greater. 
(3) ?The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than ten feet when there is a common 
rear yard relationship in such block and a common side yard relationship with the block directly 
across the common separating street. In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an 
adjacent lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than the required minimum front 
yard of the district. 
(4) ?The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be: 
a. ?Efficiency—350 square feet 
b. ?One-bedroom apartment—500 square feet 
c. ?Two-bedroom apartment—700 square feet 
d. ?Three bedroom apartment—800 square feet 
Plus an additional eighty (80) square feet for each additional bedroom. 
(5) ?Parking shall be permitted in the front yard after approval of the parking plan layout and points 
of access by the zoning administrator. The setback shall be measured from the nearest side of 
existing and/or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
(6) ?No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines, unless otherwise provided in the 
building code. On the exterior side yard which borders on a residential district, there shall be 
provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side or residential street. If walls of 
structures, facing such interior side lot lines, contain windows, or other openings, side yards of 
not less than ten feet shall be provided. 
(7) ?A four-foot obscuring wall, fence or greenbelt strip shall be provided on those sides of the 
property abutting land zoned for residential use. 
(8) ?Loading space shall be provided in the rear lot as follows: ten square feet per front foot of 
building, and five square feet per front foot of building in the B-1, B-2 and O-S districts. Where 
an alley exists at the rear of buildings, rear setback and loading requirements may be computed 
from the center of such alley. 
(9) ?The maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined by the use and the provisions of 
required off-street parking, loading and unloading, and required yards. 
(10) ?On unplatted land or on parcels or development areas of three acres or more in area, required 
side and rear yards shall be 60 feet in depth when abutting a residential district. 
(11) ?No building shall be closer than 50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district 
when such property line abuts any residential district. Upon application to the zoning board of 
appeals, wherein such body determines the abutting residential district to be an area in 
transition which may become nonresidential in the future, this subsection may be waived by the 
board and substitute distances may be provided. 
(12) ?Off-street parking for visitors may be permitted within the required front yard provided that 
such off-street parking is not located within 30 feet of the front lot line. The board of appeals 
may permit the front yard requirement to be reduced to not less than ten feet for buildings 
constructed prior to the effective date of Ordinance 79; provided, however, that minimum off-
street parking requirements can still be met. 
(13) ?All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall 
or fence, not less than six feet high, or with a chainlink fence and a greenbelt strip to obscure all 
view from adjacent residential, office or business districts or a public street. 
(14) ?Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio as required in section 86-527, 
and shall be computed separately from off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-447. - Subdivision open space plan. 
(a) ?Lot dimensions in the RA-2 and RA-3 one-family residential districts may be reduced in accord with 
the following schedule, provided the number of residential lots shall be no greater than if the land 
area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for each 
one-family district under section 86-446. 
(1) ?All calculations of density for residential development shall be predicated upon the RA-2 and 
RA-3 one-family districts having the following gross densities, including roads: 
RA-2 = 3.4 dwelling units per acre; and 
RA-3 = 2.7 dwelling units per acre. 
(2) ?Lot widths shall not be less than 60 feet. 
(3) ?Lot depths shall not be less than 120 feet. 
(4) ?Minimum yard setbacks as indicated in section 86-446 shall be provided. 
(5) ?Lot depths may be reduced to not less than 100 feet when such lots border on land dedicated 
to the common use of the subdivisions as indicated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b) ?For each square foot of land gained under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, within a 
residential subdivision, through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements, as 
outlined in section 86-446, equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot 
owners in the subdivision in a manner approved by the city or may, if approved by the city, be 
dedicated to the city. 
(c) ?The area to be dedicated for the common use of the subdivision or the city shall in no instance be 
less than two acres and shall be in a location and shape approved by the city. A parcel divided by a 
road or stream shall be considered one parcel. 
(d) ?Access shall be provided to areas dedicated for the common use of the subdivision for those lots 
not bordering on such dedicated areas by means of streets or pedestrian accessways. 
(e) ?In approving the application of this section, the city shall consider the following objectives: 
(1) ?To provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open 
fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets. 
(2) ?To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential 
areas. 
(3) ?To encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area while recognizing a 
reduction in development costs and by allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on 
the site. 
(4) ?To encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of 
the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(f) ?Under this section's approach, the developer or subdivider shall dedicate the total park area (see 
subsection (b) of this section) at the time of filing of the final plat on all or any portion of the plat, 
unless otherwise agreed to by the city. 
(g) ?Application for approval of a subdivision open space plan shall be submitted at the time of 
submission of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-448—86-480. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XIII. - BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES 


Sec. 86-481. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bed and breakfast facility means any residential dwelling in which rooms are rented to paying guests 
on an overnight basis with not more than one meal served daily, with the entire service to be included in 
one stated price. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 86-482. - Purpose of article. 
    It is the intent of this article to provide regulations for the operation of bed and breakfast facilities. 
These regulations are intended to ensure compatibility between bed and breakfast facilities and adjacent 
development. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-483. - Zoning requirements. 
    Bed and breakfast facilities may be permitted as a special exception use in all residential zoning 
districts except RA-3 district and may also be permitted as a special exception use in legal, 
nonconforming residential structures (used solely for residential purposes) in OS, B-1 and B-2 zoning 
districts. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-484. - Building requirements. 
    The structures in which the bed and breakfast operation is located must meet the following 
requirements: 
(1) ?The building must meet the minimum size requirements for residential structures within that 
particular zone. 
(2) ?The building must have a minimum of two exits. 
(3) ?Each bedroom used for the bed and breakfast operation should have a minimum of 100 square 
feet for two occupants and a minimum of 160 square feet for a family of two adults and two 
children. 
(4) ?Each bedroom must be equipped with a smoke detector. 
(5) ?Each bedroom must be located in the principal structure on the property. No bed and breakfast 
bedrooms are allowed in outbuildings. 
(6) ?External changes or modifications for the purpose of accommodating the bed and breakfast 
operation are prohibited. 
(7) ?Bed and breakfast bedrooms shall not be located in basements or other below ground areas 
which do not meet the light and ventilation requirements of BOCA. 
(8) ?Sleeping and bath areas rented to paying guests on an overnight basis shall not occupy 
greater than 30 percent of the usable floor area of the dwelling. 
(9) ?Guests at bed and breakfast facilities must have access to indoor restroom facilities in the 
building. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-485. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a) ?Off-street parking areas for guests must be provided on the property of the bed and breakfast 
facility. The number of required parking spaces will be one space for each bed and breakfast 
bedroom, plus one per owner occupancy, plus the basic number of spaces required by this chapter. 
(b) ?All off-street parking areas shall be paved with a hard surface. An off-street parking plan shall be 
submitted as part of the application for approval of a bed and breakfast facility. (Note: This 
requirement is not intended to encourage applicants to place hard-surfaced parking areas over what 
would normally be considered lawn or yard areas. Rather, in the case of single-family dwellings, it is 
intended to require the driveway on the property to be hard-surfaced.) 
(c) ?There shall be no offensive illumination of the parking areas. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-486. - Other requirements. 
(a) ?No more than two adults and two children may occupy a bed and breakfast bedroom at any one 
time. 
(b) ?The owner and paying guests of a bed and breakfast facility are prohibited from conducting parties, 
receptions, banquets and other activities. 
(c) ?The maximum length of stay in a bed and breakfast facility shall not exceed 16 consecutive days 
per visit. 
(d) ?A single, nonilluminated, nonanimated sign which identifies the bed and breakfast facility of not 
more than one square foot in area may be erected on the front wall of the building. One freestanding, 
nonilluminated, nonanimated sign of not more than three square feet shall be permitted. 
(e) ?The bed and breakfast facility must be the principal residence of the owner of the facility, and the 
owner must reside on the premises. 
(f) ?A bed and breakfast facility may not have more than two outside employees. 
(g) ?Each bed and breakfast facility must maintain a guest register. 
(h) ?Breakfast is the only meal that may be served as part of the bed and breakfast operation. 
(i) ?Bed and breakfast facilities must comply with state health department rules and requirements 
regarding food service. 
(j) ?Bed and breakfast bedrooms shall not contain cooking facilities, and the house kitchen shall not be 
enlarged for the purpose of accommodating the bed and breakfast operation. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-487. - Authorization to operate; permit required. 
(a) ?Requests for operation of bed and breakfast facilities shall be submitted in writing to the city's 
zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals will conduct a public hearing on the request 
following written notification to all properties within 300 feet of the applicant's property. 
(b) ?If the zoning board of appeals approves the request, a written permit valid for one year shall be 
issued to the applicants. The applicant will be required to request approval of a new permit at least 
30 days prior to the expiration of the old permit. In those cases where no complaints have been 
registered with the city, a new permit will be approved by the city zoning administrator. If two or more 
complaints have been registered with the city, and those complaints are from at least two different 
households, a new permit request must be submitted to the zoning board of appeals which will 
conduct a public hearing on the request after written notice has been served to all properties within 
300 feet of the applicant's property. 
(c) ?The bed and breakfast facility permit will automatically become null and void upon sale or transfer of 
the property. 
(d) ?A complete floor plan of the dwelling unit and an off-street parking plan shall be submitted with the 
initial request for operation of a bed and breakfast facility. 
(e) ?For those applications which require zoning board of appeals involvement, an application fee of 
$150.00 shall be required. For annual renewals which do not require zoning board of appeals 
approval, an application fee of five dollars shall be required. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-488—86-500. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XIV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS 


Sec. 86-501. - Purpose of article. 
    This article represents an effort to control the detrimental secondary effects associated with the adult 
entertainment businesses. The intent of this article is not to infringe upon any individual's First or 
Fourteenth Amendment rights; its purpose is instead to protect property values, to control crime rates, to 
prevent youth exposure to adult materials and to control traffic congestion. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-502. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment with the principal activity of selling or renting materials 
including, but not limited to, books, magazines, newspapers, videotapes, video discs, and motion picture 
films, characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of any of the following: human genitals, pubic 
regions, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or acts of sadomasochism. 
    Adult entertainment business means a business which excludes minors by virtue of age and which 
involves a combination of one or more of the following types of business: adult bookstore, adult motion 
picture theater, adult personal service business, adult novelty business or adult nightclub. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an establishment with the principal activity of displaying, whether 
to an audience in a common theater or to individuals in private viewing booths, motion pictures or other 
materials characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of any of the following: human genitals, pubic 
regions, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or acts of sadomasochism. 
    Adult nightclub means a business with the principal activity of providing entertainment by nude or 
partially nude performers. 
    Adult novelty business means a business with the principal activity of selling sex toys, such as 
devices of simulated human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation. 
    Adult personal service business means a business with the principal activity of one person, while 
nude or partially nude, providing personal services of a sexual nature for another person on an individual 
basis in a closed room including, but not limited to, such activities as massage parlors, modeling studios, 
wrestling studios and individual performances. This does not include any activity performed by a person 
in accordance with a license issued to that person by the state. 
    Adult physical culture business means any establishment, club, parlor, or business by whatever 
name designated, which provides, offers or advertises, or is equipped or arranged so as to provide as 
part of its services, either on or off the premises, massages, body rubs, body painting, tattooing, body 
piercing, physical stimulation, baths, or other similar treatment by any person. The following uses shall 
not be included within the definition of an adult physical culture business: 
(1) ?Establishments which routinely provide such services by licensed physician, a licensed 
chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a state certified physical or massage therapist, a licensed 
practical; 
(2) ?Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment; 
(3) ?Continuing instruction in martial or performing arts or in organized athletic activities; 
(4) ?Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical offices; or, 
(5) ?Health spas and/or salons which offer only massage services, limited to the scalp, face, the 
neck or shoulders only. 
    Church means a building used for regular public worship services and exempt from taxation under 
the General Property Tax Act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.), as 
amended. 
    Minor means persons under the age of 18 years. 
    Partially nude means exposing any of the following body parts: genitals, pubic area, buttocks or 
female breasts. 
    Principal activity means a use accounting for more than 20 percent annually of a business' gross 
proceeds, display space, floor space, live entertainment time or movie display time. 
    Public park means any park owned and maintained by the city. 
    School means a public or private school offering education to students enrolled in kindergarten or 
one or more grades of one through 12. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. of 12-6-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 86-503. - Location. 
    An adult entertainment business may be located in the city only in areas zoned B-2 general business 
or I-1 light industrial and only in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1) ?No such business shall be permitted within a 300-foot radius of any residential zone, or a 
preexisting school, public park or church. Measurement of the 300-foot radius shall be made 
from the outermost boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which the proposed adult entertainment 
business will be situated. 
(2) ?No such business shall be permitted within a 300-foot radius of an existing adult entertainment 
business. Measurement of the 300-foot radius shall be made from the outermost boundaries of 
the lot or parcel upon which the proposed adult entertainment business will be situated. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. of 12-6-04) 


Sec. 86-504. - Use regulations. 
(a) ?No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the premises of an adult entertainment 
business. 
(b) ?The proprietor, owner or operator of an adult entertainment business shall deny access of the 
premises to any person under the age of 18 as either an employee or a customer. 
(c) ?All windows, doors and other apertures of an adult entertainment business shall be blackened, 
obstructed or otherwise covered to prevent anyone outside the establishment from viewing its 
interior. 
(d) ?No person operating an adult entertainment business shall permit the premises to be used for acts 
of prostitution or to be frequented by known prostitutes who have been convicted of the act of 
prostitution within the last 24 months, or to be frequented by any person convicted of being a 
customer of prostitutes within the last 24 months. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-505. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
    The height, yard, lot area, lot width, building coverage, sign and parking requirements of an adult 
entertainment business shall conform to the requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Secs. 86-506—86-520. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XV. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 


Sec. 86-521. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Wherever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, 
restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, 
then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance 
impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of 
such ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-522. - Scope of chapter. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and 
maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or 
part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-523. - Nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming structures, and 
nonconforming uses of structures and premises. 
(a) ?Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted 
there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful 
before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted 
under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these 
nonconformities to continue until they are removed. It is further the intent of this chapter that 
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for 
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Nonconforming uses are 
declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A 
nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be 
extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of 
additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a 
nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. To avoid undue hardship, nothing 
in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of 
any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this chapter is derived and upon which actual building construction has been 
carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction 
materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or 
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, 
such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that 
work shall be carried on diligently. 
(b) ?Nonconforming lots of record. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-
family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the 
effective date of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, 
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply 
even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally 
applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying 
to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is 
located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of appeals. 
If two or more vacant lots or combinations of vacant lots and portions of vacant lots with continuous 
frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage (February 13, 1978) or amendment 
of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and 
area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this 
chapter, and no portion of such parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes 
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of 
any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this 
chapter. 
(c) ?Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only). Where at the time of passage of 
this chapter (February 13, 1978) lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the 
regulations imposed by this chapter, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise 
lawful, provided: 
(1) ?No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater 
area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption (February 13, 1978) or 
amendment of this chapter. 
(2) ?No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or 
parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption (February 13, 
1978) or amendment of this chapter. 
(3) ?If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one 
year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter 
for the district in which such land is located. 
(4) ?No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in 
connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(d) ?Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption 
(February 13, 1978) or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this 
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or other 
requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains 
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1) ?No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its 
nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its 
nonconformity. 
(2) ?Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by 
any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it 
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3) ?Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter 
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(e) ?Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. If a lawful use of a 
structure, or of a structure and land in combination exists at the effective date of adoption (February 
13, 1978) or amendment of this chapter, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of 
this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the 
following provisions: 
(1) ?No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is 
located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered 
except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2) ?Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were 
manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption (February 13, 1978) or 
amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such 
building. 
(3) ?If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and 
premises, may as a special exception be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that 
the board of appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find 
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing 
nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require appropriate 
conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4) ?Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is 
superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and 
the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(5) ?When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is 
discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year 
period (except when government action impeded access to the premises), the structure, or 
structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the 
regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(6) ?When nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal 
or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction 
for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage or dilapidation to an extent of more than 
50 percent of the replacement cost at time of destruction. 
(f) ?Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a 
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, 
or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not 
exceeding 20 percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or 
nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing 
when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. If a nonconforming structure or portion of a 
structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of 
repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by 
reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in 
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Nonconforming porches built 
within the required setback of a dwelling unit are exempt from the provisions of this section provided 
such porches are reconstructed in the current layout and with the same dimensions. Nothing in this 
chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building 
or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon 
order of such official. 
(g) ?Class A nonconforming uses or structures. It is recognized that the continuation of certain 
nonconformities may be appropriate. To address these circumstances, the zoning ordinance 
establishes procedures to allow the planning commission to designate specific nonconforming uses 
or structures as "Class A." 
(1) ?Effect of Class A designation. 
a. ?Class A nonconforming uses may be reestablished if the housing structure is damaged or 
destroyed. 
b. ?Class A nonconforming uses may be reestablished when otherwise meeting the standards 
for abandonment of the use. The Class A nonconforming use may not be reestablished if it 
is replaced with a conforming use. 
c. ?Class A nonconforming uses, structures housing nonconforming uses and nonconforming 
structures may be repaired and maintained. 
d. ?Class A nonconforming structures may be rebuilt if the structure is damaged or destroyed. 
e. ?Rights granted nonconforming uses and structures listed above are contingent on 
compliance with any standards imposed by the Planning Commission as part of the Class 
A designation, including compliance with any approved site plan. 
(2) ?Class A designation process. 
a. ?An applicant for Class A designation shall submit an application and a fee of $250.00 to the 
city manager or their designee. 
b. ?Notice of a public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
city at least 15 days before the date of the public hearing and mail such notice to all 
persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the property. 
c. ?The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the Class A designation. 
d. ?The planning commission shall approve with conditions or deny the request for Class A 
designation. 
e. ?The planning commission may impose conditions on an approval. The condition may 
include compliance with a site plan of the site. 
(3) ?Standards for approval of Class A designation. In order to approve a use for Class A 
designation the use or structure must have been lawful at its inception. In addition, the following 
criteria shall be used by the planning commission in evaluating a use to determine if 
continuation of the use or structure would be appropriate: 
a. ?Continuance of the use or structure does not significantly depress property values of 
nearby properties. 
b. ?Continuance of the use or structure would not be contrary to the public health, safety or 
welfare or the spirit of this chapter. 
c. ?No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions of this chapter 
with which the use or structure does not conform. 
d. ?The property cannot be reasonable used as currently zoned. 
(4) ?Revocation of Class A designation. 
a. ?Revocation of a Class A designation may be initiated by the city manager or their designee 
or the planning commission. 
b. ?Revocation of Class A designation shall comply with the procedures outlined in subsection 
86-523(g)(2), Class A designation process. 
c. ?Class A designation may only be revoked if the nonconforming use or structure violated a 
condition of approval. 
All nonconforming uses or structures not designated Class A shall be Class B nonconforming uses or 
structures. Class B nonconforming uses and structures shall comply with all the provisions of section 86-
523. 
(h) ?Uses under special exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use which is permitted as a 
special exception, in a district under the terms of this chapter, shall not be deemed a nonconforming 
use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
(i) ?Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of 
any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises, provided there is no change in 
the nature or character of such nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2014-08, 8-4-14) 


Sec. 86-524. - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following 
regulations: 
(1) ?Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, 
and must conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to the main building. 
(2) ?Buildings accessory to residential buildings shall not be erected in any required yard, except a 
rear yard. 
(3) ?Buildings accessory to residential buildings not exceeding one story or 14 feet in height may 
occupy not more than 25 percent of a required rear yard, plus 40 percent of any nonrequired 
rear yard, provided that in no instance shall the accessory building exceed the ground floor area 
of the main building. 
(4) ?No detached building accessory to a residential building shall be located closer than ten feet to 
any main building nor shall it be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. In 
those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory 
building shall not be closer than one foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory 
building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
(5) ?No detached accessory building in RA-1, RA-2, RM-1, RM-2, and O-S districts shall exceed 
one story or 14 feet in height. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to 
equal the permitted maximum height of structures in such districts, subject to the board of 
appeals review and approval. 
(6) ?When a building accessory to a residential building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of 
which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, such building shall 
not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot in the rear of such corner lot. A 
building accessory to a residential building shall in no case be located nearer than ten feet to a 
street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-525. - Required off-street parking—Generally. 
    Off-street parking required in conjunction with all land and building uses shall be provided as 
prescribed in this section: 
(1) ?The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with this 
section. For uses not specifically mentioned in this section, off-street parking requirements shall 
be established by the zoning administrator from requirements for similar uses. 
(2) ?Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never be changed to any other 
uses unless and until equal required facilities are provided elsewhere. Off-street parking existing 
at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived in connection with the 
operation of an existing building, shall not be reduced to an amount less than would be required 
in this section for such building or use. 
(3) ?Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which 
case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements 
for the several individual uses computed separately. However, in cases of dual functioning of 
off-street parking where operating hours do not overlap, the board of appeals may grant a 
special exception based on the peak hour demand. 
(4) ?Required off-street parking shall be for the use of occupants, employees, visitors and patrons, 
and shall be limited in use to motor vehicles. The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for 
sale or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. Off-street parking, whether public or private, for 
nonresidential uses shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is 
intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the 
off-street parking lot, without crossing any major street. 
(5) ?When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the 
requirements of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be 
disregarded, and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
(6) ?The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in 
accordance with the following schedule: 
Off-street parking tables by use and number of minimum spaces per unit of measure. 
Use 
Par
kin
g  
Spa
ce 
Per 
Uni
t of 
Me
asu
re 
a. 
Resid
ential 
table: 



1. 
O
n
e-
fa
m
il
y, 
t
w
o-
fa
m
il
y 
1 
For 
eac
h 
dw
elli
ng 
unit
. 

2. 
M
ul
ti
pl
e-
fa
m
il
y 
2 
For 
eac
h 
dw
elli
ng 
unit
. 

3. 
R
es
id
e
nt
ia
l 
h
o
u
si
n
g 
fo
r 
th
e 
el
d
er
ly 
1 
For 
eac
h 
two 
unit
s of 
resi
den
t 
hou
sing
, 
plu
s 
one 
spa
ce 
for 
eac
h 
em
plo
yee
. 


E
m
pl
o
y
e
e 
of 
1 
Ge
ner
al 
occ
upa
ncy
, 
the
n 
1½ 
per 
unit 
shal
l be 
pro
vid
ed. 
b. 
Instit
ution
al 
table: 



1. 
C
h
ur
c
h
es 
or 
te
m
pl
es 
1 
For 
eac
h 
fou
r 
sea
ts 
or 
six 
feet 
of 
pe
ws 
in 
the 
mai
n 
unit 
of 
wor
shi
p. 

2. 
H
o
s
pi
ta
ls 
1 
For 
eac
h 
one 
bed
. 

3. 
H
o
m
es 
fo
r 
th
e 
a
g
e
d 
a
n
d 
c
o
n
v
al
es
c
e
nt 
h
o
m
es 
1 
For 
eac
h 
two 
bed
s. 

4. 
El
e
m
e
nt
ar
y 
a
n
d 
ju
ni
or 
hi
g
h 
sc
h
o
ol
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
em
plo
yee
, 
tea
che
r or 
ad
min
istr
ato
r; in 
add
itio
n to 
the 
req
uire
me
nts 
of 
the 
aud
itor
ium
. 


S
e
ni
or 
hi
g
h 
sc
h
o
ol
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
tea
che
r, 
em
plo
yee
, 
ad
min
istr
ato
r, 
plu
s 
one 
for 
eac
h 
ten 
stu
den
ts 
in 
add
itio
n to 
the 
req
uire
me
nts 
of 
the 
aud
itor
ium
. 

5. 
Pr
iv
at
e 
cl
u
b
s, 
lo
d
g
es 
1 
For 
eac
h 
thr
ee 
per
son
s 
allo
we
d 
wit
hin 
the 
ma
xim
um 
occ
upa
ncy 
loa
d as 
est
abli
she
d 
by 
loc
al, 
cou
nty 
or 
stat
e 
fire, 
buil
din
g or 
hea
lth 
cod
es. 

6. 
Pr
iv
at
e 
g
ol
f, 
te
n
ni
s 
a
n
d 
s
p
or
ti
n
g 
cl
u
b
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
two 
me
mb
er 
fam
ilies 
or 
indi
vid
ual 
me
mb
ers. 

7. 
G
ol
f 
c
o
ur
se
s 
o
p
e
n 
to 
th
e 
g
e
n
er
al 
p
u
bl
ic 
(e
xc
e
pt 
m
in
ia
tu
re 
or 
p
ar
-3 
g
ol
f 
c
o
ur
se
s) 
6 
For 
eac
h 
one 
golf 
hol
e, 
plu
s 
one 
for 
eac
h 
one 
em
plo
yee
. 

8. 
Fr
at
er
ni
ty 
or 
s
or
or
it
y 
1 
For 
eac
h 
five 
me
mb
ers 
or 
one 
for 
eac
h 
two 
bed
s, 
whi
che
ver 
is 
gre
ate
r. 

9. 
St
a
di
u
m
s, 
s
p
or
ts 
ar
e
n
as
, 
or 
si
m
il
ar 
pl
ac
e 
of 
o
ut
d
o
or 
as
se
m
bl
y 
1 
For 
eac
h 
thr
ee 
sea
ts 
or 
six 
feet 
of 
ben
che
s. 

1
0. 
T
h
e
at
re
s, 
a
u
di
to
ri
u
m
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
thr
ee 
sea
ts, 
plu
s 
one 
for 
eac
h 
two 
em
plo
yee
s. 
c. 
Busin
ess 
and 
com
merci
al 
table: 



1. 
Pl
a
n
n
e
d 
c
o
m
m
er
ci
al 
or 
s
h
o
p
pi
n
g 
c
e
nt
er 
lo
ca
te
d 
in 
a 
B-
2 
di
st
ri
ct 
1 
For 
eac
h 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
are
a. 

2. 
A
ut
o 
w
as
h 
1 
For 
eac
h 
one 
em
plo
yee
, in 
add
itio
n 
res
erv
oir 
par
kin
g 
spa
ces 
equ
al 
in 
nu
mb
er 
to 
five 
tim
es 
the 
ma
xim
um 
cap
acit
y of 
the 
aut
o 
was
h 
for 
aut
om
obil
es 
aw
aiti
ng 
ent
ran
ce 
to 
the 
aut
o 
was
h 
shal
l be 
pro
vid
ed. 
Ma
xim
um 
cap
acit
y of 
the 
aut
o 
was
h 
for 
the 
pur
pos
e of 
det
er
min
ing 
the 
req
uire
d 
res
erv
oir 
par
kin
g 
shal
l 
me
an 
the 
gre
ate
st 
nu
mb
er 
pos
sibl
e of 
aut
om
obil
es 
und
erg
oin
g 
so
me 
pha
se 
of 
was
hin
g at 
the 
sa
me 
tim
e, 
whi
ch 
shal
l be 
det
er
min
ed 
by 
divi
din
g 
the 
len
gth 
in 
feet 
of 
eac
h 
was
h 
line 
by 
20. 

3. 
B
e
a
ut
y 
p
ar
lo
r 
or 
b
ar
b
er 
s
h
o
p 
2 
For 
eac
h of 
the 
bea
uty 
or 
bar
ber 
cha
irs. 

4. 
B
o
w
li
n
g 
al
le
ys 
5 
For 
eac
h 
one 
bo
wli
ng 
lan
e. 

5. 
D
a
n
c
e
h
al
ls, 
p
o
ol
, 
bi
lli
ar
d 
p
ar
lo
rs
, 
ro
ll
er 
or 
sk
at
in
g 
ri
n
ks
, 
e
x
hi
bi
ti
o
n 
h
al
ls, 
a
n
d 
as
se
m
bl
y 
h
al
ls 
w
it
h
o
ut 
se
at
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
thr
ee 
per
son
s 
allo
we
d 
wit
hin 
the 
ma
xim
um 
occ
upa
ncy 
loa
d as 
est
abli
she
d 
by 
loc
al, 
cou
nty, 
stat
e 
fire, 
buil
din
g or 
hea
lth 
cod
es. 

6. 
Es
ta
bl
is
h
m
e
nt
s 
fo
r 
sa
le 
a
n
d 
c
o
n
s
u
m
pt
io
n 
o
n 
th
e 
pr
e
m
is
es 
of 
b
e
v
er
a
g
e, 
fo
o
d 
or 
re
fr
es
h
m
e
nt
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
spa
ce. 

7. 
F
ur
ni
tu
re 
a
n
d 
a
p
pl
ia
n
c
e 
re
ta
il 
st
or
es
, 
h
o
u
se
h
ol
d 
e
q
ui
p
m
e
nt
, 
re
p
ai
r 
s
h
o
p
s, 
s
h
o
w
ro
o
m 
of 
a 
pl
u
m
b
er
, 
d
e
c
or
at
or
, 
el
e
ct
ri
ci
a
n, 
cl
ot
hi
n
g 
a
n
d 
s
h
o
e 
re
p
ai
r, 
cl
e
a
n
er
s 
a
n
d 
la
u
n
dr
y, 
a
n
d 
ot
h
er 
si
m
il
ar 
tr
a
d
es 
1 
For 
eac
h 
800 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
are
a. 
For 
tha
t 
floo
r 
are
a 
use
d in 
pro
ces
sing
, 
one 
add
itio
nal 
spa
ce 
shal
l be 
pro
vid
ed 
for 
eac
h 
two 
per
son
s 
em
plo
yed 
the
rein
. 

8. 
A
ut
o
m
o
bi
le 
se
rv
ic
e 
st
at
io
n
s 
2 
For 
eac
h 
lubr
icat
ion 
stal
l, 
rac
k or 
pit; 
plu
s 
one 
for 
eac
h 
gas
olin
e 
pu
mp. 

9. 
La
u
n
dr
o
m
at
, 
a
n
d 
c
oi
n-
o
p
er
at
e
d 
dr
y 
cl
e
a
n
er
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
two 
ma
chi
nes
. 

1
0. 
M
in
ia
tu
re 
a
n
d 
p
ar
-3 
g
ol
f 
c
o
ur
se
s 
3 
For 
eac
h 
one 
hol
e, 
plu
s 
one 
for 
eac
h 
one 
em
plo
yee
. 

1
1. 
M
or
tu
ar
y 
es
ta
bl
is
h
m
e
nt 
1 
For 
eac
h 
50 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
ass
em
bly 
roo
m 
floo
r 
spa
ce, 
parl
ors 
and 
slu
mb
er 
roo
ms. 

1
2. 
M
ot
el
, 
h
ot
el 
or 
ot
h
er 
c
o
m
m
er
ci
al 
lo
d
gi
n
g 
es
ta
bl
is
h
m
e
nt
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
one 
occ
upa
ncy 
unit
, 
plu
s 
one 
for 
eac
h 
em
plo
yee
. 

1
3. 
M
ot
or 
v
e
hi
cl
e 
sa
le
s 
a
n
d 
se
rv
ic
e 
es
ta
bl
is
h
m
e
nt
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
spa
ce 
of 
sale
s 
roo
m, 
plu
s 
one 
for 
eac
h 
one 
aut
o 
ser
vice 
stal
l in 
the 
ser
vice 
roo
m. 

1
4. 
R
et
ai
l 
st
or
es 
e
xc
e
pt 
w
h
er
e 
ot
h
er
w
is
e 
s
p
e
ci
fi
e
d 
in 
th
is 
s
u
b
se
ct
io
n 
(6
) 
1 
For 
eac
h 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
spa
ce. 

1
5. 
B
a
n
ks 
1 
For 
eac
h 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
spa
ce. 

1
6. 
B
u
si
n
es
s 
of
fi
c
es 
(e
xc
e
pt 
as 
in
di
ca
te
d 
in 
s
u
b
se
ct
io
n 
(6
)c
.1
7 
of 
th
is 
se
ct
io
n) 
1 
For 
eac
h 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
spa
ce. 

1
7. 
Pr
of
es
si
o
n
al 
of
fi
c
es 
of 
d
o
ct
or
s, 
d
e
nt
is
ts
, 
or 
si
m
il
ar 
pr
of
es
si
o
n
s 
1 
For 
eac
h 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
are
a in 
wai
ting 
roo
ms, 
and 
one 
for 
eac
h 
exa
min
ing 
roo
m, 
den
tal 
cha
ir 
or 
sim
ilar 
use 
are
a. 
d. 
Indus
trial 
table: 



1. 
In
d
u
st
ri
al 
5 
Plu
s 
one 
for 
eve
ry 
1½ 
em
plo
yee
s in 
the 
larg
est 
wor
kin
g 
shif
t, 
or 
one 
for 
eve
ry 
550 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
spa
ce, 
or 
whi
che
ver 
is 
det
er
min
ed 
to 
be 
gre
ate
r. 
Spa
ce 
on 
site 
shal
l 
also 
be 
pro
vid
ed 
for 
all 
con
stru
ctio
n 
wor
ker
s 
duri
ng 
peri
ods 
of 
pla
nt 
con
stru
ctio
n. 

2. 
W
h
ol
es
al
e 
es
ta
bl
is
h
m
e
nt
s 
5 
Plu
s 
one 
for 
eve
ry 
one 
em
plo
yee 
in 
the 
larg
est 
wor
kin
g 
shif
t, 
or 
one 
for 
eve
ry 
1,7
00 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
usa
ble 
floo
r 
spa
ce, 
whi
che
ver 
is 
gre
ate
r. 
 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-526. - Same—Space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Wherever the off-street parking requirements in section 86-525 require the building of an off-street 
parking facility such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance 
with the following standards and regulations: 
(1) ?No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued by the zoning 
administrator. Application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as may be determined by 
the zoning administrator, and shall be accompanied with two sets of plans for the development 
and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully 
complied with. 
(2) ?Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum 
requirements: 
Par
kin
g 
pat
ter
n  
(in 
deg
ree
s) 
Ma
neu
veri
ng 
lan
e 
wid
th  
(in 
feet
) 
Par
kin
g 
spa
ce 
wid
th 
0 
(pa
rall
el 
par
kin
g) 
12 
8 
30 
to 
53 
12 
8½ 
54 
to 
74 
15 
8½ 
75 
to 
90 
20 
9 
 
Par
kin
g 
spa
ce 
len
gth  
(in 
feet
) 
Tot
al 
wid
th 
of 
one 
tier 
of 
spa
ces 
plu
s 
ma
neu
veri
ng 
lan
e 
(in 
feet
) 
Tot
al 
wid
th 
of 
two 
tier
s of 
spa
ces 
plu
s 
ma
neu
veri
ng 
lan
e 
(in 
feet
) 
23 
20 
28 
20 
32 
52 
20 
36
½ 
58 
20 
40 
60 
 
(3) ?All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing 
directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
(4) ?Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives 
shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned 
other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family 
residential use. 
(5) ?All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90-degree 
pattern may permit two-way movement. 
(6) ?Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot, located in an area zoned for other 
than single-family residential use, shall be at least 25 feet distant from any adjacent property 
located in any single-family residential district. 
(7) ?All driveways within residential zoned districts shall be located at least three feet from the lot 
line. 
(8) ?Where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district, a continuous chain link 
fence or greenbelt strip shall be provided on all sides contiguous to the residential district. The 
greenbelt strip shall include landscape materials of shrubs and trees that will result in 
substantial screening of the parking lot and vehicles from the abutting residential districts. 
(9) ?The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this 
section shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications 
approved by the planning commission. The parking area shall be surfaced within one year of 
the date the permit is issued. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all 
surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water 
onto adjacent property or toward buildings, and plans shall meet the approval of the planning 
commission. The planning commission may waive the requirement for asphaltic or concrete 
surfacing if they determine that crushed limestone would be consistent with the use, would be 
consistent with the character of the surrounding area and would not cause a nuisance due to 
dust, ponding water or tracking of mud onto public streets for no more than a 48-month period. 
In granting the waiver the planning commission may impose conditions necessary to ensure 
that the proposed parking lot meets these standards. 
(10) ?All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined 
within and directed onto the parking area only. 
(11) ?The zoning board of appeals, upon application of the property owner to the building inspector, 
may modify the fence or greenbelt requirements pursuant to this chapter where it is shown that 
under such unusual and unique circumstances, no good purpose would be served by such 
requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12) 


Sec. 86-527. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or 
distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, 
adequate space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use 
of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1) ?All spaces shall be provided as required in section 86-446 noted after minimum rear yards, 
except as provided for I districts in this section. 
(2) ?All spaces shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in 
area, with clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided 
with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, 
durable and dustless surface. All spaces in I districts shall be provided in the following ratio of 
spaces to floor area: 
Gro
ss 
floo
r 
are
a 
(in 
squ
are 
feet
) 
Min
imu
m 
loa
din
g 
and 
unl
oad
ing 
spa
ce 
req
uire
d 
0—
1,4
00 
No
ne 
1,4
01
—
20,
000 
On
e 
spa
ce 
20,
001
—
100
,00
0 
On
e 
spa
ce, 
plu
s 
one 
spa
ce 
for 
eac
h 
20,
000 
squ
are 
feet 
in 
exc
ess 
of 
20,
001 
squ
are 
feet 
100
,00
1 
and 
ove
r 
Fiv
e 
spa
ces 
 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-528. - Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district. 
    Because the uses referred to in this section possess unique characteristics, making it impractical to 
include them in a specific use district classification, they shall be permitted by the board of appeals under 
the conditions specified, and after a public hearing. These uses require special consideration since they 
service an area larger than the city and require sizeable land areas, creating problems of control with 
reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this 
section is as follows: 
(1) ?Trailer coach parks. Trailer coach parks shall only be permitted within the I-1 districts and only 
on parcels not isolated or surrounded on more than three abutting sides by the I-1 district. A 
trailer coach park shall be located along the I-1 district edge, wherein such district abuts an RM-
1 district, and the trailer coach park shall have one entire side abutting the RM-1 district. Trailer 
coach parks shall be further subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
a. ?In a trailer coach park, no structure shall exceed a height of 25 feet or two stories. 
b. ?The trailer coach park shall be permitted on parcels of five acres or more. 
c. ?An open area shall be provided on each trailer coach lot to ensure adequate natural light 
and ventilation to each trailer coach and to provide sufficient area for outdoor uses 
essential to the occupants of the trailer coach. Trailer coach lots shall average not less 
than 3,000 square feet in area exclusive of drives, open space in the trailer court or other 
open areas not specifically for trailer coach occupancy. The minimum width for trailer 
coach lots shall be 35 feet. 
d. ?No trailer coach shall be located closer than 25 feet from any building within the court or 
any property line bounding the court. No building or trailer coach shall be located closer 
than 25 feet from any public street right-of-way nor less than 40 feet from any major arterial 
street. 
e. ?The trailer court site shall be enclosed by a masonry wall four feet eight inches high 
adjacent to all abutting properties and public right-of-way. The wall shall be located within 
the trailer court site. 
f. ?Each trailer coach site shall have the following minimum yard requirements: 
Side yard ..... ten feet 
Rear yard ..... eight feet 
Front yard ..... ten feet 
g. ?The trailer court shall have direct access to a major arterial street by directly abutting 
thereon. 
h. ?Trailer coach lots shall abut a service drive. All service drives shall have widths as 
scheduled in subsection (1)j of this section and shall be designed and graded for proper 
drainage according to standard road building practice, and be approved by the city 
engineer prior to opening of the trailer court. All service drives shall be constructed of 
concrete of 8-6-8 M.S.H. grade A 3,500 pound concrete within one year after the issuance 
of a permit. A cash security guaranteeing monies for such work will be issued to the city in 
the amount of a bona fide bid from parties performing such work. 
i. ?Trailer courts shall provide an approved entrance road not less than 30 feet wide, also 
contingent upon city engineer and county road commission approval. 
j. ?Schedule of service drive widths: 
1. ?One-way traffic street with no parking, minimum 16 feet. 
2. ?Two-way traffic street with no parking, minimum 24 feet. 
3. ?One-way traffic street with parallel parking one side, minimum 22 feet. 
4. ?Two-way traffic street with parallel parking one side, minimum 30 feet. 
5. ?One-way traffic street with parallel parking two sides, minimum 32 feet. 
6. ?Two-way traffic street with parallel parking two sides, minimum 40 feet. 
k. ?Parking spaces on service drives shall be clearly marked. 
l. ?All service drives shall be provided with curbs and gutters and be properly drained. 
m. ?The trailer court shall be designed to provide a concrete walk at least 36 inches wide from 
the entrance of the park to all trailer coach sites and all required service facilities. 
n. ?Streetlights and yardlights sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians 
at night shall be provided, and shall be so located and shaded as to direct the light away 
from adjacent properties. 
o. ?Two concrete automobile parking spaces shall be required for each trailer site. One such 
space may be placed in the service drive, provided parking is permitted on the service 
drive in accordance with subsection (1)j of this section, and further provided that each 
space so provided shall be a minimum of 23 feet in length. 
p. ?Arrangements shall be made for all local distribution lines for telephone or electric services, 
exclusive of main supply and perimeter feed lines to be placed entirely underground 
throughout the trailer court area. The city council may waive or modify this subsection 
where, in its judgment, circumstances exist which render compliance impractical. 
q. ?Conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to the service 
companies by the proprietor and/or developer or within public ways. Those telephone and 
electrical facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict 
with other underground utilities. All telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in 
accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service 
commission. 
r. ?All trailer court development shall further comply with state law. 
s. ?There shall not be less than 360 square feet of floor space within each trailer coach for the 
first two occupants, and an additional 100 square feet of floor space for each occupant 
over two. 
t. ?There shall be provided for each trailer court a recreation area equal in size to at least 200 
square feet per mobile home site. Such recreation area shall be no longer than 1½ times 
its width. Such area shall be graded, developed, sodded and maintained by the 
management, so as to provide recreation for the residents of the trailer court. 
u. ?The front yard, and any side yard adjacent to a street shall be landscaped within one year, 
and the entire trailer court shall be maintained in a good, clean, presentable condition at all 
times. 
v. ?No business of any kind shall be conducted in any trailer court except for separate, 
permanent structures which contain facilities such as the management's office, laundry and 
dry cleaning facilities or similar uses which are designed to serve only the residents of the 
trailer court. 
w. ?There shall be no storage of any kind under trailer coaches unless skirted. 
x. ?All fences, other than the greenbelt surrounding the court, shall be uniform in height, and 
shall not exceed 30 inches in height, and shall be constructed in such a manner as to 
provide firefighters access to all sides of each trailer coach. 
y. ?Trailer coach sites shall be provided with a concrete apron of not less than ten feet wide by 
50 feet long and six inches in depth. 
z. ?Prior to the issuance of a permit for construction on a trailer court site, a site plan shall be 
submitted to the planning commission for approval and in accordance with the following: 
1. ?Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the 
requirements of this chapter. No site plan shall be approved until such plan has been 
reviewed by the building department, fire department, police department and city 
engineer, for compliance with the standards of their respective departments. 
2. ?The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
i. ?Legal description of site. 
ii. ?A scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. 
iii. ?The area of the site in acres. 
iv. ?Date, north point and scale. 
v. ?The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the 
subject property to abutting properties. 
vi. ?The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and 
all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject property. 
vii. ?The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed service drives, 
sidewalks, parking areas, greenbelts and individual trailer coach sites. 
viii. ?The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 
ix. ?The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer, engineer or 
person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
3. ?In the process of reviewing the site plan, the planning commission shall consider: 
i. ?The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress 
from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to 
pedestrian traffic. 
ii. ?The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking 
areas, and may make such requirements with respect to any matter as will 
ensure safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the 
site and in relation to access streets, and satisfactory and harmonious 
relationships between development on the site and existing and prospective 
development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
Actual construction of the trailer court shall be in accordance with the site plan. 
(2) ?Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used 
only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of 
ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in B-2 districts only when the 
site in question abuts an I-1 district. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following 
conditions: 
a. ?The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the zoning administrator as to 
adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects. 
b. ?Points of ingress and egress shall be accessible to the outdoor theater from abutting major 
thoroughfares of 120-foot right-of-way or greater, and shall not be accessible from any 
residential street. 
c. ?All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting 
space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-529. - Performance standards. 
    No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the 
following standards of use, occupancy and operation, which standards are hereby established as the 
minimum requirements to be maintained within such area: 
(1) ?Smoke. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be discharged into the 
atmosphere from any single source of emission, smoke of a density equal to or darker than no. 
2 of the Ringelmann chart except: 
a. ?Smoke of a density equal to but not darker than no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart may be 
emitted for not more than three minutes in any 30-minute period. 
b. ?Smoke of a density equal to but not darker than no. 3 of the Ringelmann chart may be 
emitted for not more than three minutes in any 60-minute period, but such emissions shall 
not be permitted on more than three occasions during any 24-hour period. 
Method of measurement. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann 
chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made 
a part of this chapter, shall be the standard. However, the umbrascope readings of smoke 
densities may be used when correlated with the Ringelmann chart. 
(2) ?Dust, dirt and fly ash. No person shall operate or cause to be operated, maintained or cause to 
be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of 
coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating, while using such 
process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and approved equipment means, 
methods, devices or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids or fumes 
emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with such process, furnace or 
combustion device so that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 
grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Method of measurement. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices, these 
conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not 
exceed 50 percent at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the ASME Test 
Code for dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely 
eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The building inspector 
may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved 
provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and fly ash have been made. 
(3) ?Open storage. The open storage of any industrial equipment, vehicles and all materials, 
including wastes, shall be screened from public view, from a public street and from adjoining 
properties by an enclosure consisting of a wall not less than the height of the equipment, 
vehicles and materials stored. Whenever such open storage is adjacent to a residential zone in 
either a front, side or rear lot line relationship, whether immediately abutting or across a right-of-
way from such zone, there shall be provided an obscuring masonry wall or wood fence of at 
least six feet in height. 
(4) ?Glare and radioactive materials. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding, or 
acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a 
manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public 
nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, and including 
electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed 
quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property 
line. 
(5) ?Fire and explosive hazards. The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum 
gases, and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations, as established by state 
law. 
(6) ?Noise. Objectionable sounds, including those of an intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as 
not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(7) ?Odors. Creation of offensive odors shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-530. - Plant materials. 
    Whenever in this chapter a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted within six months 
from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained 
with permanent plant materials to provide a screen to abutting properties. Suitable materials equal in 
characteristics to the plant materials listed with the spacing as required shall be provided. 
(1) ?Plant material spacing. Plant material spacing shall be as follows: 
a. ?Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four feet from the fence line or property line. 
b. ?Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in 
rows. 
c. ?Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers. 
d. ?Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than six feet on centers. 
e. ?Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers. 
f. ?Tree-like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten feet on centers. 
g. ?Large, deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four feet on centers. 
(2) ?Suggested plant materials. Suggested plant materials are as follows: 
a. ?Evergreen trees (minimum size, five feet in height): 
1. ?Juniper; 
2. ?Hemlock; 
3. ?Fir; 
4. ?Pine; 
5. ?Spruce; and 
6. ?Douglas fir. 
b. ?Narrow evergreens (minimum size, three feet in height): 
1. ?Columnar hinoki cypress; 
2. ?Blue columnar Chinese juniper; 
3. ?Pyramidal red cedar; 
4. ?Swiss stone pine; 
5. ?Pyramidal white pine; 
6. ?Irish yew; 
7. ?Douglas arbor—vitae; and 
8. ?Columnar giant arbor—vitae. 
c. ?Tree-like shrubs (minimum size, four feet in height): 
1. ?Flowering crab; 
2. ?Mountain ash; 
3. ?Redbud; 
4. ?Hornbeam; 
5. ?Magnolia; 
6. ?Russian olive; 
7. ?Dogwood; 
8. ?Rose of Sharon; and 
9. ?Hawthorn. 
d. ?Large deciduous shrubs (minimum size, six feet in height): 
1. ?Honeysuckle; 
2. ?Mock-orange; 
3. ?Lilac; 
4. ?Cotoneaster; 
5. ?Euonymus; 
6. ?Buckthorn; 
7. ?Viburnum; 
8. ?Forsythia; 
9. ?Ninebark; 
10. ?Hazelnut; and 
11. ?Privet. 
e. ?Large deciduous trees (minimum size, eight feet in height): 
1. ?Oak; 
2. ?Planetree (sycamore); 
3. ?Linden; 
4. ?Sugar maple or Norway maple; 
5. ?Beech; 
6. ?Honeylocust; and 
7. ?Hop hornbeam. 
(3) ?Trees not permitted. Trees not permitted shall be as follows: 
a. ?Box elder; 
b. ?Soft maples (red or silver); 
c. ?Elms; 
d. ?Poplars; 
e. ?Willows; 
f. ?Horse chestnut (nut bearing); 
g. ?Tree of heaven; and 
h. ?Catalpa. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-531. - Signs. 
(a) ?Intent. The purpose of this article is to regulate signs and protect the public safety, health and 
welfare; minimize the quantity and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss 
of visibility; preserve property values and enhance the visual appearance and quality of life within the 
city. The requirements contained herein are intended to be content neutral. The following objectives 
are accomplished by making the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, 
placement, construction, illumination and other aspects of signs in the city in order to: 
(1) ?Protect the public right to receive messages and other types of information protected by the 
First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
(2) ?Maintain and improve the image of the city by encouraging signs of consistent size which are 
compatible with and complementary to related buildings and uses and have a balanced 
relationship with their surroundings. 
(3) ?Prevent off-premise signs from conflicting with other land uses. 
(4) ?Eliminate potential conflicts between business signs and traffic control signs, which could 
create confusion and hazardous consequences and have a negative impact on traffic safety and 
visual appearance. 
(5) ?Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or 
disrepair and will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses. 
(b) ?Signs not requiring a permit. A sign of the following type shall be permitted on all parcels in the city 
without the issuance of a sign permit, subject to all other requirements of this article: 
(1) ?Device signs. Permanent signs on vending machines, ATM's, gas station pumps, or other 
containers indicating only the contents or purpose of such devices, provided that the sign area 
of each device shall not exceed three square feet and there are no more than one sign per 
device. 
(2) ?Directional signs. All directional signs required for the purpose of orientation, when established 
by the city, county, state or federal government, shall be permitted in all use districts. 
(3) ?Flags. Flags provided there shall be no more than three flags per lot, the maximum size of 
each flag shall be 50 square feet, and the flag poles comply with relative height limitations. The 
flag of the United States and the State of Michigan are permitted without the limitations included 
in this subsection. 
(4) ?Employment signs. "Help wanted" signs soliciting employees for the place of business where 
posted, provided that the maximum area for all such signs shall not exceed six square feet, 
there is a limit of one sign per entrance door and the sign is limited to three consecutive months. 
(5) ?Enclosed signs. Any sign that is located completely within a building and is not visible from the 
outside. 
(6) ?Historical signs. Plaques or signs sanctioned by the U.S. Department of the Interior's National 
Register of Historic Places or the state historic preservation office, designating a building or 
premises as a historic structure or premises not to exceed six (6) square feet. 
(7) ?Identification signs. In R districts for each dwelling unit, one nameplate not exceeding two 
square feet in area, indicating the name of the occupant. For structures other than dwelling 
units, one identification sign not exceeding ten square feet, except a church bulletin board, not 
exceeding 18 square feet. 
(8) ?Incidental signs. Small signs, emblems, or decals informing the public of goods, facilities, or 
services available on the premises. The total of all such incidental signs shall not exceed two 
square feet. 
(9) ?Non-conforming signs. Legal non-conforming signs existing on the effective date of the 
adoption of this chapter. Removal of the sign shall constitute an elimination of the non-
conforming status. 
(10) ?Non-commercial message sign (political). Nonilluminated temporary signs promoting political 
parties, candidates, or proposals so long as such signs are removed within ten days after the 
completion of election activities. Signs in place beyond ten days are declared to be a nuisance. 
Signs in residential areas shall not exceed six square feet. Signs in nonresidential districts shall 
not exceed 32 square feet. 
(11) ?Public signs. Public signs, authorized signs by a government body or public utility, including 
traffic signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, warnings of a hazard, and similar signs. 
(c) ?Temporary signs. 
(1) ?Temporary sign regulations table. 
T
y
p
e
 
o
f 
S
i
g
n
 
M
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
S
i
z
e
 
M
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
H
e
i
g
h
t
 
M
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
N
u
m
b
e
r
 
P
e
r
m
i
t
t
e
d
 
D
u
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
a
n
d
 
O
t
h
e
r
 
R
e
q
u
i
r
e
m
e
n
t
s
 
Tempora
ry signs 
not 
requiring 
a permit 
G
a
r
a
g
e
 
s
a
l
e
 
s
i
g
n
s
 
i
n
 
r
e
s
i
d
e
n
t
i
a
l 
d
i
s
t
r
i
c
t
s
 
5
 
s
q
u
a
r
e
 
f
e
e
t
 
4
 
f
e
e
t
 
1
 
p
e
r
 
l
o
t
, 
2
 
o
n
 
c
o
r
n
e
r
 
l
o
t
 
(
1
 
f
a
c
i
n
g
 
e
a
c
h
 
s
t
r
e
e
t
) 
S
h
a
l
l 
b
e
 
e
r
e
c
t
e
d
 
n
o
 
m
o
r
e
 
t
h
a
n
 
1
0
 
b
u
s
i
n
e
s
s
 
d
a
y
s
 
b
e
f
o
r
e
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
m
o
v
e
d
 
w
i
t
h
i
n
 
1
 
b
u
s
i
n
e
s
s
 
d
a
y
 
a
f
t
e
r
 
t
h
e
 
s
a
l
e
 
S
i
g
n
s
 
u
s
e
d
 
f
o
r
 
a
d
v
e
r
t
i
s
i
n
g
 
l
a
n
d
 
o
r
 
b
u
i
l
d
i
n
g
s
 
f
o
r
 
r
e
n
t
, 
l
e
a
s
e
 
a
n
d
/
o
r
 
f
o
r
 
s
a
l
e
 
s
h
a
l
l 
b
e
 
p
e
r
m
i
t
t
e
d
 



L
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
l
a
n
d
 
o
r
 
b
u
i
l
d
i
n
g
 
i
n
t
e
n
d
e
d
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
r
e
n
t
e
d
, 
l
e
a
s
e
d
 
a
n
d
/
o
r
 
s
o
l
d
. 
P
o
s
t
e
r
 
p
a
n
e
l 
s
i
g
n
s
 
(
s
a
n
d
w
i
c
h
 
s
i
g
n
s
, 
A
-
f
r
a
m
e
s
) 
(
c
) 
7
 
s
q
u
a
r
e
 
f
e
e
t
 
p
e
r
 
s
i
d
e
; 
1
4
 
s
q
u
a
r
e
 
f
e
e
t
 
t
o
t
a
l 
3
.
5
 
f
e
e
t
 
m
a
x
i
m
u
m
 

O
n
l
y
 
p
e
r
m
i
t
t
e
d
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
B
-
1
 
a
n
d
 
B
-
2
 
z
o
n
i
n
g
 
d
i
s
t
r
i
c
t
s
 
Tempora
ry signs 
requiring 
a permit 
S
p
e
c
i
a
l 
d
e
c
o
r
a
t
i
v
e
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
s
 
o
r
 
s
i
g
n
s
 
u
s
e
d
 
f
o
r
 
h
o
l
i
d
a
y
s
, 
p
u
b
l
i
c
 
a
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
m
e
n
t
s
 
o
r
 
p
r
o
m
o
t
i
o
n
 
o
f 
c
i
v
i
c
 
w
e
l
f
a
r
e
 
o
r
 
c
h
a
r
i
t
a
b
l
e
 
p
u
r
p
o
s
e
s
 
w
h
e
n
 
n
o
t
 
u
s
e
d
 
f
o
r
 
a
 
c
o
m
m
e
r
c
i
a
l 
p
u
r
p
o
s
e
 
w
h
e
n
 
a
u
t
h
o
r
i
z
e
d
 
b
y
 
t
h
e
 
z
o
n
i
n
g
 
a
d
m
i
n
i
s
t
r
a
t
o
r
. 



I
n
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
i
n
g
 
s
u
c
h
 
a
u
t
h
o
r
i
z
a
t
i
o
n
, 
t
h
e
 
c
i
t
y
 
s
h
a
l
l 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
 
t
h
e
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
i
n
g
 
s
t
a
n
d
a
r
d
s
:  
•
?
T
h
e
 
s
i
z
e
, 
c
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
r
, 
a
n
d
 
n
a
t
u
r
e
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
 
o
r
 
s
i
g
n
 
s
h
a
l
l 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
 
t
h
e
 
p
r
o
p
o
s
e
d
 
s
i
t
e
 
o
f 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
 
f
o
r
 
p
r
o
p
e
r
 
s
c
a
l
e
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
l
a
t
i
o
n
s
h
i
p
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
s
i
t
e
 
a
n
d
 
a
d
j
o
i
n
i
n
g
 
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
i
e
s
.  
•
?
T
h
e
 
d
u
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
r
 
t
i
m
e
 
p
e
r
i
o
d
 
d
u
r
i
n
g
 
w
h
i
c
h
 
t
h
e
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
 
o
r
 
s
i
g
n
 
w
i
l
l 
b
e
 
u
t
i
l
i
z
e
d
 
s
h
a
l
l 
c
o
i
n
c
i
d
e
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
p
u
r
p
o
s
e
 
f
o
r
 
w
h
i
c
h
 
i
t
 
w
a
s
 
a
p
p
r
o
v
e
d
.  
•
?
T
h
e
 
p
u
r
p
o
s
e
(
s
) 
f
o
r
 
w
h
i
c
h
 
t
h
e
 
s
i
g
n
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
 
i
s
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
e
r
e
c
t
e
d
.  
•
?
T
h
e
 
a
r
r
a
n
g
e
m
e
n
t
s
 
m
a
d
e
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
m
o
v
a
l 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
s
i
g
n
 
o
r
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
 
a
f
t
e
r
 
t
h
e
 
t
e
r
m
i
n
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
f 
i
t
s
 
u
s
e
f
u
l
n
e
s
s
.  
•
?
T
h
e
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
p
r
o
p
o
s
e
d
 
s
i
g
n
 
o
r
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
 
o
n
 
l
i
g
h
t
 
a
n
d
 
a
i
r
 
c
i
r
c
u
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
f
o
r
 
l
o
t
s
 
w
h
i
c
h
 
a
r
e
 
b
o
t
h
 
a
d
j
o
i
n
i
n
g
 
a
n
d
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
s
u
r
r
o
u
n
d
i
n
g
 
n
e
i
g
h
b
o
r
h
o
o
d
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
p
r
o
p
o
s
e
d
 
s
i
g
n
 
o
r
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
.  
•
?
W
h
e
t
h
e
r
 
o
r
 
n
o
t
 
t
h
e
 
s
i
g
n
 
o
r
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
 
w
i
l
l 
c
o
n
s
t
i
t
u
t
e
 
a
 
t
r
a
f
f
i
c
 
h
a
z
a
r
d
. 
C
o
n
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n
 
s
i
g
n
s
 
s
h
o
w
i
n
g
 
n
a
m
e
s
 
o
f 
b
u
i
l
d
i
n
g
 
c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t
o
r
s
, 
p
r
o
f
e
s
s
i
o
n
a
l 
f
i
r
m
s
, 
a
n
d
 
l
e
n
d
i
n
g
 
i
n
s
t
i
t
u
t
i
o
n
s
 
o
n
 
s
i
t
e
s
 
u
n
d
e
r
 
c
o
n
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n
 
2
0
 
s
q
u
a
r
e
 
f
e
e
t
 
i
n
 
a
r
e
a
 
4
 
f
e
e
t
 
i
n
 
h
e
i
g
h
t
 

•
?
N
o
t
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
n
e
a
r
e
r
 
t
h
a
n
 
1
0
 
f
e
e
t
 
t
o
 
a
 
p
u
b
l
i
c
 
r
i
g
h
t
-
o
f
-
w
a
y
.  
•
?
C
o
n
f
i
n
e
d
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
s
i
t
e
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
c
o
n
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n
, 
c
o
n
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n
 
s
h
e
d
, 
o
r
 
t
r
a
i
l
e
r
.  
•
?
R
e
m
o
v
e
d
 
w
i
t
h
i
n
 
1
4
 
d
a
y
s
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
b
e
g
i
n
n
i
n
g
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
u
s
e
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
. 
I
l
l
u
m
i
n
a
t
e
d
 
p
o
r
t
a
b
l
e
 
s
i
g
n
s
 
f
o
r
 
s
p
e
c
i
a
l 
e
v
e
n
t
s
, 
s
u
c
h
 
a
s
 
g
r
a
n
d
 
o
p
e
n
i
n
g
s
, 
f
a
i
r
s
 
a
n
d
 
f
e
s
t
i
v
a
l
s
, 
a
n
d
 
a
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
m
e
n
t
s
 
o
f 
n
e
w
 
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s
, 
s
e
r
v
i
c
e
 
o
r
 
m
a
n
a
g
e
m
e
n
t
, 
a
n
d
 
i
n
c
l
u
d
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
e
v
e
n
t
 
2
0
 
s
q
u
a
r
e
 
f
e
e
t
 
i
n
 
a
r
e
a
 
o
n
 
a
n
y
 
s
i
d
e
. 
1
0
 
f
e
e
t
 
i
n
 
h
e
i
g
h
t
. 

•
?
U
p
 
t
o
 
4
 
p
e
r
 
y
e
a
r
.  
•
?
T
h
e
 
s
i
g
n
 
i
s
 
n
o
t
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
c
l
o
s
e
r
 
t
h
a
n
 
1
0
 
f
e
e
t
 
t
o
 
a
 
s
t
r
e
e
t
 
r
i
g
h
t
-
o
f
-
w
a
y
.  
•
?
N
o
 
p
o
r
t
a
b
l
e
 
s
i
g
n
 
s
h
a
l
l 
b
e
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
i
n
 
s
u
c
h
 
a
 
m
a
n
n
e
r
 
a
s
 
t
o
 
i
n
t
e
r
f
e
r
e
 
w
i
t
h
 
v
e
h
i
c
u
l
a
r
 
o
r
 
p
e
d
e
s
t
r
i
a
n
 
t
r
a
f
f
i
c
 
f
l
o
w
 
o
r
 
v
i
s
i
b
i
l
i
t
y
.  
•
?
P
o
r
t
a
b
l
e
 
s
i
g
n
s
 
s
h
a
l
l 
b
e
 
l
i
m
i
t
e
d
 
t
o
 
1
4
 
d
a
y
s
 
p
e
r
 
e
v
e
n
t
 
p
e
r
i
o
d
.  
•
?
P
r
i
o
r
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
e
s
t
a
b
l
i
s
h
m
e
n
t
 
o
f 
a
 
p
o
r
t
a
b
l
e
 
s
i
g
n
, 
a
n
 
a
p
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
f
o
r
 
a
 
p
e
r
m
i
t
 
s
h
a
l
l 
b
e
 
f
i
l
e
d
, 
a
c
c
o
m
p
a
n
i
e
d
 
b
y
 
a
n
y
 
r
e
q
u
i
s
i
t
e
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
i
n
g
 
f
e
e
s
 
w
h
i
c
h
 
m
a
y
 
b
e
 
e
s
t
a
b
l
i
s
h
e
d
 
b
y
 
c
i
t
y
 
c
o
u
n
c
i
l 
r
e
s
o
l
u
t
i
o
n
, 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
z
o
n
i
n
g
 
a
d
m
i
n
i
s
t
r
a
t
o
r
. 
N
o
n
a
c
c
e
s
s
o
r
y
 
s
i
g
n
s
 
p
e
r
t
a
i
n
i
n
g
 
t
o
 
r
e
a
l 
e
s
t
a
t
e
 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
w
i
t
h
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
c
i
t
y
 
a
n
d
 
d
e
s
i
g
n
e
d
 
t
o
 
p
r
o
m
o
t
e
 
t
h
e
 
s
a
l
e
 
o
f 
l
o
t
s
 
o
r
 
h
o
m
e
s
 
w
i
t
h
i
n
 
a
 
s
u
b
d
i
v
i
s
i
o
n
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
w
i
t
h
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
c
i
t
y
 
m
a
y
 
b
e
 
p
e
r
m
i
t
t
e
d
 
o
n
 
a
 
t
e
m
p
o
r
a
r
y
 
b
a
s
i
s
 
i
n
 
a
n
y
 
u
s
e
 
d
i
s
t
r
i
c
t
 



•
?
S
h
a
l
l 
n
o
t
 
b
e
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
u
p
o
n
 
s
u
b
d
i
v
i
d
e
d
 
l
a
n
d
 
u
n
l
e
s
s
 
s
u
c
h
 
l
a
n
d
 
i
s
 
p
a
r
t
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
s
u
b
d
i
v
i
s
i
o
n
 
b
e
i
n
g
 
a
d
v
e
r
t
i
s
e
d
 
f
o
r
 
s
a
l
e
.  
•
?
S
h
a
l
l 
b
e
 
s
u
b
j
e
c
t
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
q
u
i
r
e
m
e
n
t
s
 
a
n
d
 
c
o
n
d
i
t
i
o
n
s
 
o
f 
a
l
l 
c
o
d
e
s
 
a
n
d
 
o
r
d
i
n
a
n
c
e
s
 
o
f 
t
h
e
 
c
i
t
y
.  
•
?
A
p
p
r
o
v
e
d
 
b
y
 
t
h
e
 
z
o
n
i
n
g
 
a
d
m
i
n
i
s
t
r
a
t
o
r
 
a
n
d
 
a
 
t
e
m
p
o
r
a
r
y
 
p
e
r
m
i
t
 
i
s
s
u
e
d
. 
(
p
a
r
t
) 
B
a
n
n
e
r
s
 
a
n
d
 
p
e
n
n
a
n
t
s
 
Discr
etio
n of 
the 
zoni
ng 
admi
nistr
ator 
and 
cons
ideri
ng 
the 
follo
wing
:  
Mus
t be 
secu
rely 
attac
hed 
to a 
build
ing 
or 
struc
ture 
M
a
y
 
b
e
 
e
r
e
c
t
e
d
 
2
 
t
i
m
e
s
 
p
e
r
 
c
a
l
e
n
d
a
r
 
y
e
a
r
, 
f
o
r
 
a
 
m
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
o
f 
1
4
 
d
a
y
s
 
e
a
c
h
 
t
i
m
e
. 
 
(2) ?Poster panel (sandwich board, A-frames) signs. Poster panel signs may be placed only within 
the B-1 central business and B-2 general business districts at the public entrances to retail, 
personal service or restaurant businesses, on either private property or the public sidewalk, 
subject to the following requirements: 
a. ?Clearance for pedestrians. The sign shall be located a minimum of three feet from the edge 
of the curb and must be located so that at least a four-foot wide sidewalk is maintained 
between the sign and the building wall for pedestrian traffic flow and safety. 
b. ?Number. There shall be only one sign permitted for each building address for which there is 
provided a separate entrance, regardless of the number of tenants in the building. 
c. ?Storage. Each sign shall be placed outside only during the hours when the business is 
open to the general public, and shall be stored indoors at all other times. Any sign which is 
found to be not in compliance with this requirement may be confiscated by city code 
enforcement officials. A second violation will result in loss of the sign permit for a period of 
one year. 
d. ?Hazard. A portable sidewalk sign shall not occupy or obstruct the use of any fire lane or 
required off-street parking. Any sign which creates a visual or safety hazard may be 
ordered to be removed by the police chief. 
e. ?Maintenance. All sign frames shall be constructed of a weather-proof material and shall be 
kept in good repair. 
f. ?Businesses not fronting on Huron Ave./M-15. Directional poster panel signs for downtown 
businesses not fronting on Huron Ave./M-15 are permitted to be placed on Huron Ave./M-
15 corners subject to the following provisions: 
1. ?One directional sidewalk sign is allowed per corner, representing multiple businesses 
if necessary. 
2. ?The sign shall be placed in a location that does not interfere with other signage or 
features in the vicinity. 
3. ?No sign above a height of 30 inches from the established street grades shall be 
permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-
way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along 
each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
4. ?All other provisions of the sign ordinance shall be complied with. 
g. ?Quality. Hand-lettered or stenciled sign faces are prohibited, with the exception of 
restaurant daily specials. All sign faces shall be professionally created in conformance with 
the specifications for sidewalk signs adopted by the city downtown development authority. 
(d) ?Prohibited signs. 
Pro
hibi
ted 
Sig
ns 
Tab
le 
Any 
sig
n 
not 
exp
res
sly 
per
mit
ted
. 
Stri
ng 
ligh
ts. 
Spi
nne
rs, 
stri
ngs 
of 
ligh
t 
bul
bs, 
pen
nan
ts, 
or 
stre
am
ers, 
hun
g 
ove
rhe
ad 
to 
dra
w 
att
enti
on 
to a 
bus
ine
ss 
or 
its 
me
rch
and
ise 
on 
dis
pla
y. 
In 
no 
cas
e 
doe
s 
this 
rest
rict 
the 
use 
of 
stri
ng 
ligh
ts 
for 
holi
day
s or 
reli
gio
us 
eve
nts. 
Mo
vin
g or 
ani
ma
ted 
sig
ns. 
Exc
ept 
as 
oth
erw
ise 
exp
ress
ly 
pro
vid
ed, 
no 
sign 
shal
l 
con
tain 
any 
mo
vin
g or 
ani
mat
ed 
par
ts 
nor 
hav
e 
the 
app
ear
anc
e of 
hav
ing 
any 
mo
ve
me
nt 
or 
ani
mat
ion. 
No 
sign 
shal
l 
em
plo
y 
any 
flas
hin
g, 
mo
vin
g, 
osci
llati
ng, 
blin
kin
g, 
or 
vari
abl
e 
inte
nsit
y 
ligh
t or 
inte
rmi
tte
nt 
ligh
ts 
res
em
blin
g 
the 
flas
hin
g 
ligh
ts 
cus
to
mar
ily 
use
d in 
traf
fic 
sign
als, 
or 
poli
ce, 
fire, 
am
bul
anc
e, 
or 
res
cue 
veh
icle
s, 
or 
ligh
ts 
so 
brig
ht 
as 
to 
be 
blin
din
g or 
dist
ract
ing 
to a 
veh
icle 
driv
er. 
Infl
ata
ble 
sig
ns. 
Sig
ns 
tha
t 
are 
co
mp
rise
d in 
par
t or 
wh
olly 
of a 
ball
oon 
or 
any 
oth
er 
infl
ate
d 
obj
ect 
or 
cha
ract
er. 
Obs
olet
e 
sig
ns, 
as 
defi
ned
. 
Por
tabl
e or 
mo
vab
le 
sig
ns, 
as 
defi
ned
, 
exc
ept 
wh
ere 
exp
ress
ly 
per
mit
ted 
in 
this 
arti
cle. 
Sig
ns 
tha
t 
obs
tru
ct 
acc
ess. 
Sig
ns 
whi
ch 
obs
truc
t 
fre
e 
acc
ess 
or 
egr
ess 
fro
m a 
req
uire
d 
doo
r, 
win
do
w, 
or 
oth
er 
req
uire
d 
exit
. 
Sig
ns 
tha
t 
obs
tru
ct 
vie
w 
of 
roa
d 
sig
ns. 
Sig
ns 
tha
t 
obs
truc
t 
any 
app
rov
ed 
traf
fic 
con
trol 
dev
ice, 
roa
d 
sign
, or 
sign
al 
fro
m 
vie
w; 
inte
rfer
e 
wit
h 
sigh
t 
dist
anc
e 
nec
ess
ary 
for 
traf
fic 
saf
ety; 
or 
dist
ract 
fro
m 
visi
bilit
y of 
exis
ting 
traf
fic 
sign
s or 
dev
ices
. 
Sig
ns 
tha
t 
con
fus
e 
traf
fic.  
1.?
Any 
sign 
whi
ch 
ma
kes 
use 
of 
the 
wor
ds 
"st
op"
, 
"lo
ok", 
or 
"da
nge
r", 
or 
any 
oth
er 
wor
ds, 
phr
ase
s, 
sy
mb
ols, 
or 
cha
ract
ers, 
in 
suc
h a 
ma
nne
r as 
to 
inte
rfer
e 
wit
h, 
mis
lea
d, 
or 
con
fus
e 
traf
fic.  
2.?
Sig
ns 
whi
ch 
in 
any 
wa
y 
sim
ulat
e or 
cou
ld 
be 
con
fus
ed 
wit
h 
the 
ligh
ting 
of 
em
erg
enc
y 
veh
icle
s or 
traf
fic 
sign
als; 
the
re 
shal
l be 
no 
red, 
yell
ow, 
or 
gre
en 
illu
min
atio
n 
on 
any 
sign 
loc
ate
d in 
the 
sa
me 
line 
of 
visi
on 
as a 
traf
fic 
con
trol 
syst
em, 
nor 
inte
rfer
enc
e 
wit
h 
visi
on 
clea
ran
ce 
alo
ng 
any 
hig
hw
ay, 
stre
et, 
or 
roa
d or 
at 
any 
inte
rse
ctio
n of 
two 
or 
mo
re 
stre
ets. 
Ille
gal 
sig
ns. 
Any 
sign 
unl
awf
ully 
inst
alle
d, 
ere
cte
d, 
or 
mai
ntai
ned
. 
Sni
pe 
sig
ns. 
Sig
ns 
atta
che
d to 
a 
utili
ty 
pol
e, 
fen
ce 
or 
affi
xed 
to a 
tre
e 
exc
ept 
as 
ma
y 
oth
erw
ise 
be 
per
mit
ted 
by 
this 
arti
cle. 
Ro
of 
sig
ns. 
Sig
ns 
shal
l 
not 
be 
ere
cte
d 
on 
any 
par
t of 
a 
buil
din
g's 
roo
f 
unl
ess 
the
re 
is 
no 
pra
ctic
al 
ava
ilab
le 
wal
l 
are
a 
on 
the 
fro
nt 
of 
the 
buil
din
g to 
per
mit 
the 
allo
we
d 
wal
l 
sign
, in 
whi
ch 
cas
e 
the 
pla
nni
ng 
co
mm
issi
on 
ma
y 
gra
nt 
an 
ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
wai
ver. 
Roa
d 
fur
nit
ure 
sig
ns. 
Sig
ns 
on 
stre
et 
fur
nitu
re, 
suc
h as 
ben
che
s 
and 
tras
h 
rec
ept
acle
s, 
not 
incl
udi
ng 
co
mm
em
ora
tive 
pla
que
s or 
eng
ravi
ngs
. 
Fire 
hyd
ran
ts. 
Any 
sign 
not 
atta
che
d to 
a 
buil
din
g 
and 
ere
cte
d 
wit
hin 
ten 
feet 
of a 
fire 
hyd
ran
t. 
Sig
ns 
in 
pub
lic 
righ
t-
of-
wa
y or 
on 
city
-
ow
ned 
pro
per
ty. 
Unl
ess 
oth
erw
ise 
pro
vid
ed 
in 
the
se 
reg
ulat
ion
s, 
no 
sign
, 
exc
ept 
tho
se 
est
abli
she
d 
by 
the 
City 
of 
Vas
sar, 
Tus
col
a 
Cou
nty, 
stat
e or 
fed
eral 
gov
ern
me
nts 
shal
l be 
loc
ate
d 
in, 
pro
ject 
or 
ove
rha
ng 
into 
any 
pub
lic 
righ
t-
of-
wa
y or 
ded
icat
ed 
eas
em
ent, 
or 
else
wh
ere 
on 
city
-
ow
ned 
pro
per
ty 
exc
ept 
tha
t 
sign
s 
two 
feet 
by 
thr
ee 
feet 
shal
l be 
per
mit
ted 
to 
ove
rha
ng 
the 
pub
lic 
righ
t-
of-
wa
y 
wit
hin 
the 
do
wnt
ow
n 
dev
elo
pm
ent 
dist
rict 
wit
h 
the 
exp
ress 
app
rov
al 
of 
the 
do
wnt
ow
n 
dev
elo
pm
ent 
aut
hori
ty. 
All 
sign
s 
ado
pte
d 
und
er 
this 
sec
tion 
mu
st 
be 
unif
or
m 
in 
reg
ard
s to 
size
, 
lett
erin
g, 
col
orin
g, 
mo
unti
ng 
and 
hei
ght 
abo
ve 
the 
sid
ew
alk. 
Sig
ns 
per
mit
ted 
und
er 
this 
sec
tion 
are 
onl
y 
allo
we
d in 
the 
DD
A 
dist
rict. 
All 
sign
s 
ove
r 
pub
lic 
righ
ts-
of-
wa
y 
and 
sid
ew
alks 
mu
st 
be 
at 
leas
t 84 
inc
hes 
abo
ve 
the 
city 
righ
t-
of-
wa
y. 
Uns
afe 
sig
ns. 
Any 
sign 
or 
sign 
stru
ctur
e 
whi
ch 
the 
pla
nni
ng 
co
mm
issi
on, 
wit
h 
the 
rec
om
me
nda
tion 
of 
the 
buil
din
g 
offi
cial 
has 
det
er
min
ed:  
1.?
Is 
stru
ctur
ally 
uns
afe;  
2.?
Con
stit
ute
s a 
haz
ard 
to 
saf
ety 
or 
hea
lth 
by 
rea
son 
of 
ina
deq
uat
e 
mai
nte
nan
ce, 
dila
pid
atio
n, 
or 
aba
ndo
nm
ent;  
3.?
Con
stit
ute
s a 
haz
ard 
to 
saf
ety 
or 
hea
lth 
by 
rea
son 
of 
blo
ckin
g 
vie
ws;  
4.?
Is 
cap
abl
e of 
cau
sing 
ele
ctri
c 
sho
ck 
to a 
per
son 
wh
o 
co
me
s in 
con
tact 
wit
h it;  
5.?
Is 
unl
awf
ully 
inst
alle
d, 
ere
cte
d, 
or 
mai
ntai
ned
;  
6.?
Is 
loc
ate
d in 
pub
lic 
stre
et 
or 
utili
ty 
righ
t-
of-
wa
y, 
exc
ept 
wh
ere 
exp
ress
ly 
per
mit
ted 
her
ein;  
7.?
Is 
not 
kep
t in 
goo
d 
rep
air, 
suc
h 
tha
t it 
has 
bro
ken 
par
ts, 
mis
sing 
lett
ers, 
or 
non
-
ope
rati
ona
l 
ligh
ts; 
or  
8.?
Do
es 
not 
me
et 
app
lica
ble 
req
uire
me
nts 
of 
Stat
e 
Buil
din
g 
Cod
e. 
Sea
rch 
ligh
ts, 
as 
defi
ned
. 
 
(e) ?Schedule of sign regulations—Property used for non-residential purposes. 
(1) ?Property used for non-residential purposes. 
Typ
e of 
Sig
n 
Ma
xim
um 
Are
a 
Hei
ght 
Illu
min
atio
n 
# 
Per
mit
ted
/Ot
her 
Pro
visi
ons 
Wal
l 
sign 
(a) 
The 
less
er 
of 
10 
per
cen
t of 
the 
are
a of 
the 
fro
nt 
fac
e of 
the 
buil
din
g or 
ten
ant 
spa
ce, 
or 3 
squ
are 
feet 
for 
eac
h 
line
al 
feet 
of 
buil
din
g 
fro
nta
ge 
or 
ten
ant 
spa
ce 
i) 
Mu
st 
not 
exc
eed 
ma
x. 
buil
din
g 
hei
ght 
in 
dist
rict  
ii) 
Mu
st 
not 
be 
hig
her 
tha
n 
wal
l 
upo
n 
whi
ch 
it is 
atta
che
d  
iii) 
Bot
to
m 
of 
sign 
mu
st 
be 
at 
leas
t 8 
feet 
abo
ve 
gro
und 
lev
el 
or 
sid
ew
alk 
Per
mit
ted 
i) 
Mu
st 
not 
ext
end 
bey
ond 
the 
end
s of 
the 
wal
l on 
whi
ch 
it is 
atta
che
d  
ii) 
Sig
n 
ma
y 
not 
be 
mo
re 
tha
n 
12 
inc
hes 
thic
k, 
me
asu
red 
fro
m 
the 
wal
l on 
whi
ch 
it is 
atta
che
d 
Aw
nin
gs 
and 
can
opi
es 
i) 
Lett
erin
g 
ma
y 
cov
er 
ma
xim
um 
of 
1/3 
of 
aw
nin
g or 
can
opy  
ii) 
Lett
erin
g 
shal
l 
not 
pro
ject 
abo
ve, 
bel
ow 
or 
bey
ond 
the 
phy
sica
l 
dim
ens
ion
s of 
the 
aw
nin
g or 
can
opy 
Bot
to
m 
of 
aw
nin
g or 
can
opy 
mu
st 
be 
at 
leas
t 7 
feet 
abo
ve 
gro
und 
lev
el 
or 
sid
ew
alk 
i) 
Not 
per
mit
ted 
und
er 
aw
nin
g or 
can
opy
, 
exc
ept 
for 
gas 
stat
ion 
can
opy  
ii) 
Buil
din
g 
mo
unt
ed 
ligh
ting 
ma
y 
indi
rect
ly 
illu
min
ate 
the 
are
a 
abo
ve 
the 
aw
nin
g or 
bel
ow 
the 
aw
nin
g 
Indi
vid
ual 
lett
ers 
shal
l 
not 
be 
larg
er 
tha
n 9 
inc
hes 
fro
m 
top 
to 
bot
to
m 
Dir
ecti
ona
l 
sign
s 
4 
squ
are 
feet 
per 
sign 
4 
feet 
ma
xim
um 
Per
mit
ted 
Det
er
min
ed 
by 
zon
ing 
ad
min
istr
ato
r 
Mo
nu
me
nt 
sign
s 
(b) 
Are
as 
zon
ed 
B-1 
and 
B-2  
20 
squ
are 
feet 
per 
sid
e; 
40 
squ
are 
feet 
tot
al  
Oth
er 
are
as  
56 
squ
are 
feet 
per 
sid
e; 
112 
squ
are 
feet 
tot
al 
8 
feet 
ma
xim
um 
Per
mit
ted 
On
e 
per 
eac
h 
sid
e of 
par
cel 
faci
ng 
a 
stre
et 
Bus
ine
ss 
cen
ter 
sign
, 
incl
udi
ng 
for 
mul
tipl
e 
ten
ant 
co
mm
erci
al 
or 
sho
ppi
ng 
cen
ters 
and 
mul
tipl
e 
ten
ant 
offi
ce 
buil
din
gs 
64 
squ
are 
feet 
per 
sign 
fac
e; 
128 
tot
al 
squ
are 
feet 
for 
bot
h 
sid
es 
Are
as 
zon
ed 
B-1 
and 
B-2  
10 
feet 
ma
x.  
Oth
er 
are
as  
16 
feet 
ma
x. 
Per
mit
ted 
i) 1 
per 
Bus
ine
ss 
Cen
ter  
ii) 
Indi
vid
ual 
bus
ine
sse
s 
are 
not 
allo
we
d to 
hav
e 
indi
vid
ual 
pol
e/p
ylo
n 
sign
s. 
Wi
ndo
w 
sign
s 
Not 
mo
re 
tha
n 
25
% 
of 
surf
ace 
of 
win
do
w 
n/a 
Not 
per
mit
ted, 
exc
ept 
for 
LED 
sign 
n/a 
Proj
ecti
ng 
sign
s 
(d) 
8 
squ
are 
feet 
per 
sid
e; 
16 
squ
are 
feet 
tot
al 
i) 
Mu
st 
not 
be 
hig
her 
tha
n 
wal
l 
upo
n 
whi
ch 
it is 
atta
che
d  
ii) 
Bot
to
m 
of 
sign 
mu
st 
be 
at 
leas
t 8 
feet 
abo
ve 
gro
und 
lev
el 
or 
sid
ew
alk 
Per
mit
ted 
i) 
Onl
y 
per
mit
ted 
in 
the 
B-1 
and 
B-2 
zon
ing 
dist
rict
s  
ii) 1 
per 
bus
ine
ss, 
pro
vid
ed 
not 
wit
hin 
20 
feet 
of 
ano
the
r 
pro
ject
ing 
sign 
Rea
r 
ent
ry 
sign
s 
Wal
l 
sign
: 6 
squ
are 
feet
; 
Proj
ecti
ng 
sign
: 6 
squ
are 
feet 
per 
sid
e; 
12 
squ
are 
feet 
tot
al 
Bot
to
m 
of 
sign 
mu
st 
be 
a 
min
imu
m 
of 8 
feet 
abo
ve 
the 
gro
und 
or 
sid
ew
alk 
Per
mit
ted 
1 
per 
bus
ine
ss 
Ma
rqu
ee 
sign
s 
(e) 
10 
per
cen
t of 
the 
wal
l, 
up 
to 
ma
xim
um 
of 
100 
squ
are 
feet 
i) 
Mu
st 
not 
exc
eed 
buil
din
g 
hei
ght 
in 
dist
rict  
ii) 
Mu
st 
not 
be 
hig
her 
tha
n 
buil
din
g  
iii) 
Bot
to
m 
of 
sign 
mu
st 
be 
at 
leas
t 8 
feet 
abo
ve 
gro
und 
lev
el 
or 
sid
ew
alk 
Per
mit
ted 
1 
per 
par
cel 
Bill
boa
rds 
(f) 
175 
squ
are 
feet 
per 
sid
e; 
350 
squ
are 
feet 
tot
al 

Per
mit
ted 
i) 
Onl
y 
allo
we
d in 
the 
I-2 
zon
ing 
dist
rict  
ii) 
Mu
st 
be 
on 
pro
per
ty 
fro
ntin
g 
an 
exp
ress
wa
y or 
Stat
e 
tru
nkli
ne 
hig
hw
ay. 
Ele
ctro
nic 
or 
ma
nua
l 
cha
nge
abl
e 
me
ssa
ge 
sign
s 
(g) 
24 
squ
are 
feet 
Per 
typ
e of 
sign 
as 
list
ed 
abo
ve 
Per
mit
ted 
1 
per 
par
cel 
 
(2) ?Wall signs. 
a. ?Materials required. All wall signs of a greater area than 50 square feet shall have a surface 
or facing of noncombustible material. 
b. ?Limitation on placement. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening. 
c. ?Supports and attachments. All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to structural 
members of the building by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws. In no case 
shall any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails. 
(3) ?Monument signs. 
a. ?Material required. Every monument sign over 50 square feet in total surface area shall 
have a surface or facing of noncombustible material. 
b. ?Letters, etc. to be secured. All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or 
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign 
shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
c. ?Anchorage and support. All monument signs shall be securely built, constructed and 
erected upon posts sunk at least 42 inches below the surface of the ground and embedded 
in concrete. A lightning grounding device shall be provided. 
d. ?Base. The base of the monument sign must be constructed of masonry material that 
matches or complements the material on the main building. 
(4) ?Projecting signs. 
a. ?Construction. Every part of a projecting sign, with a total surface area greater than ten 
square feet, shall be constructed of noncombustible material. 
b. ?Movable parts to be secured. Any movable part of a projecting sign, such as the cover of a 
service opening, shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges. 
c. ?Thickness limitation. The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting 
sign shall not exceed 18 inches. 
d. ?Projection over public property. No projecting sign may project beyond the property line 
unless approved by the city and at least 84 inches above the city right-of-way. 
e. ?Bracing, anchorage and supports. Projecting signs of a greater total surface area than ten 
square feet or 50 pounds in weight shall not be attached to nor supported by frame 
buildings nor the wooden framework of a building. All projecting signs shall be thoroughly 
secured to the building by iron or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods or braces. 
(5) ?Marquee signs. 
a. ?Material required. Every marquee sign, including the upright supports and braces thereof, 
shall be constructed entirely of noncombustible materials. 
b. ?Bracing, anchorage and supports. Every marquee sign shall be thoroughly secured to the 
building by iron or metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods or braces. 
(6) ?Billboards. 
a. ?Minimum lot size. Such signs shall be allowed on premises with a minimum total area of 
one acre and a minimum dimension of 175 feet on any one side (based on the deed or 
recorded legal description). 
b. ?Height. Such signs shall comply with the height limitations and with the front, rear, and side 
setback provisions of the I-2 zoning district. 
(7) ?Changeable message signs. 
a. ?Such sign shall be part of a monument sign only and shall be subject to the area, height, 
and placement requirements for a ground sign in such location as otherwise permitted 
under this section. 
b. ?Changeable message signs are not allowed on property in a residential zoning district. 
c. ?The changeable message portion of such sign shall not exceed one-third of the sign area, 
and the remainder of the sign shall be of a permanent character as otherwise required 
under this section. 
d. ?In addition to the general requirements for sign maintenance, all changeable copy signs 
shall bear a legible message, other suitable display or be left blank. Electronic devices 
when not in use are to be left blank and unlighted. Any lighted or electronic changeable 
message sign in which the electrical or lighting components are operating in an erratic, 
broken or damaged fashion shall be turned off or removed. 
The sign shall not include animation and the message on the sign may change a maximum 
of four times per minute. At all other times the sign message and background must remain 
constant. 
e. ?Exceptions: 
1. ?Reader boards owned by government entities, public agencies, and community 
organizations displaying community information are exempt from the area limitations 
set forth in subsection (1) above. Such signs must comply with all other applicable 
provisions in this section. 
2. ?Electronic signs of private and parochial schools (public schools are exempt by 
statute) shall be exempt from the above provisions. 
3. ?Time and temperature displays are exempt from subsection (1) above. 
(f) ?Signs in residential districts. 
(1) ?Signs in residential areas not requiring a permit. Ground and wall type signs are permitted in 
residential zoning districts as defined in this section without a permit and subject to the following 
conditions: 
a. ?Sign advertising the rental, sale or lease of the property upon which it is located subject to 
the following conditions: 
1. ?Not more than four feet in height nor more than five square feet in area, including 
attachments. 
2. ?No sign may be erected within a public right-of-way, nor in such manner on private 
property as to create a sight restriction for automotive traffic. 
3. ?No such sign shall be lighted or otherwise artificially illuminated. 
4. ?All such signs shall be removed within two weeks after the consummation of a lease 
or sales contract covering that property. 
5. ?There shall not be more than one such sign per lot. 
b. ?Dwelling nameplate. For each dwelling unit, one nameplate not exceeding two square feet 
in area indicating name of occupant. Such sign shall not contain advertising of any nature. 
(2) ?Signs in residential areas requiring a permit. Ground and wall type signs are permitted in 
residential zone districts as defined in this section with a permit and shall satisfy the following 
conditions: 
a. ?Sign advertising the lots and/or buildings erected in any subdivision or multiple-family 
development. It shall be permissible for a real estate broker or builder to erect one sign not 
to exceed a total surface area of 64 square feet nor an overall height of ten feet, the lower 
edge of which shall not be less than 18 inches above the surrounding ground level, to 
advertise the lots and/or building erected in any one subdivision, provided that said real 
estate broker or builder owns, has listed for sale or has the owner's permission to sell a 
minimum of ten lots in said subdivision. No such sign or billboard shall be erected or 
maintained within 100 feet of any occupied residence unless the written consent of the 
owner and occupant of such residence is first obtained. 
b. ?Multiple-family residential developments. Any person owning or operating any multiple-
family residential developments may erect a sign bearing the name of the development, 
such sign not to exceed 24 square feet in area and not to exceed an overall height of six 
feet above the ground level, which sign shall be made of noncombustible material and may 
be lighted during the hours of darkness, and which shall contain no advertising or 
information other than the name of the residential development and status of occupancy. 
No more than one sign may be erected for each development entrance. 
c. ?Signs accessory to churches, schools or nonprofit institutions. Churches, colleges, schools, 
buildings housing governmental functions and utilities of the city, county or state or any 
subdivision thereof, are permitted to erect a sign. Such signs, when of a permanent nature, 
shall be constructed of noncombustible material and shall meet all the requirements of this 
section, except as provided hereafter: 
1. ?There shall be not more than one sign. 
2. ?Maximum height shall be six feet. 
In the case of such signs in non-residential zoning districts, the signs must comply with the 
requirements for the district in which they are located. 
(g) ?General requirements for all signs. 
(1) ?Illumination. All illumination shall be concentrated on the area of the sign or landscape feature 
so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. No sign shall be illuminated by other 
than electrical means or devices, and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the National 
Electrical Code. Any signs shall be of a wattage of not to exceed 60 watts per bulb. No lights 
shall be permitted in excess of 60 watts per bulb and in no instance shall such light be located 
as to be hazardous to traffic. 
(2) ?Obstructions to doors, windows and fire escapes. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as 
to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall 
be attached to a stand pipe or fire escape. 
(3) ?Signs not to construct a traffic hazard. No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any 
streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where, by reason 
of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with 
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or which makes use of the words "Stop," "Look," 
"Danger" or any word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead 
or confuse traffic. 
(4) ?Clear vision area. No sign above a height of 30 inches from the established street grades shall 
be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines 
by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet 
from their point of intersection 
(5) ?Face of sign shall be smooth. No nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude from the 
front of any sign. This shall not exclude, however, the use of block letters, electrical reflectors, 
or other devices which may extend over the top and in front of the advertising structure. 
(6) ?Measuring sign height. 
a. ?The permitted height of all signs supported by the ground shall be measured from the level 
of the ground, finished surface, adjacent to the sign. 
b. ?Sign height shall not be measured from an area of the ground that has been built-up or 
constructed in a manner that would have the effect of allowing a higher sign height than 
permitted by these regulations (e.g. the height of signs erected on a berm shall be 
measured from the finished grade adjacent to the berm.) 
 
(7) ?Measuring sign area. 
a. ?Sign area shall be measured as the square footage of the sign face and any frame or other 
material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate it from the 
background against which it is placed. 
b. ?When a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed, painted or mounted 
on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background, the 
calculation for sign area shall be measured by enclosing the most protruding edges of the 
sign elements within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
 
The area of a double-faced sign such as a pole/pylon or monument sign shall be computed using only 
one face of the sign provided that: 1) the outline and dimensions of both faces are identical, and 2) the 
faces are back to back so that only one face is visible at any given time. 
(h) ?Legal nonconforming signs. 
(1) ?Any sign existing at the time of adoption of these regulations which does not comply with all 
provisions shall be considered a legal non-conforming sign and may be permitted to continue if 
the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the 
community. 
(2) ?Nothing shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a sign 
declared unsafe by the city manager or their designee. Such signs may be improved only to the 
extent that such improvement does not exceed 50 percent of the current market value of the 
existing sign structure. 
(3) ?Subject to exceptions below, any legal non-conforming signs may be continued in operation 
and maintained after the effective date of these regulations provided that the signs shall not be: 
a. ?Structurally altered so as to extend their useful life; 
b. ?Expanded; 
c. ?Relocated; 
d. ?Re-established after damage of more than 50 percent of the value at the time of such 
damage or destruction; 
e. ?Modified in any way that would increase the degree of nonconformity of such sign. 
(4) ?Abandonment or obsolescence of a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to 
maintain such a sign. 
a. ?An obsolete sign and its supporting structure shall be removed by the property owner or 
lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business which it 
advertises is no longer conducted on the premises within ten days after written notice from 
the city manager or their designee. 
b. ?A sign which is in conformity with the other provisions of these regulations may remain in 
place if such sign is obscured by the use of a blank panel attached within the frame of the 
sign and shall be permitted to remain for a period not to exceed 120 days. 
c. ?Where a successor to an inactive business agrees, within 30 days of the date of written 
notice by the city manager or their designee, to maintain the sign as provided for by these 
regulations, this removal requirement shall not apply, provided that the existing sign and 
structure conforms to all current sign requirements. 
(5) ?All portable signs, except those specifically permitted by these regulations, that exist on the 
effective date of these regulations, shall be removed immediately upon the enactment of these 
regulations. 
(6) ?Any illegal non-conforming signs that exist on the effective date of these regulations shall be 
removed immediately upon the enactment of these regulations and shall be replaced by signs 
that conform to these regulations. 
(i) ?Administration. 
(1) ?No sign, permanent or temporary, shall be erected, structurally altered or relocated, except as 
otherwise provided in these regulations, without review and approval from the city zoning 
administrator. Signs within the DDA district shall also require review and approval by the DDA. 
(2) ?Application. The application, on a form provided by the city, shall contain the proposed location 
of the sign, the name and address of the sign owner and of the sign erected, the name and 
address of the owner of the business and of the property if different from that of the sign owner, 
drawings and/or sketches showing the design and location of the sign, the estimated cost of 
construction and any other information as the city may require to ensure compliance with these 
regulations and with other ordinances of the city. 
(3) ?Permit required. For all signs requiring a permit, a sign permit application shall be applied for 
with the city. The city will approve a sign permit application that clearly conforms to the 
requirements of these regulations. If the sign is situated in the public right-of-way, the applicant 
must obtain a license from the city and must possess adequate liability insurance. 
(4) ?Fees. All permit fees for signs shall be as established by the city. 
(5) ?Nullification. A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was 
issued has not been completed within 12 months after the date of the permit. 
(6) ?Exceptions. The following shall not require a sign permit: 
a. ?The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved painted or printed sign, 
on a theater marquee and on similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the 
use of replaceable copy. 
b. ?Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or a sign 
structure, unless a structural change is made. 
(j) ?Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the city manager or their designee in 
connection with any dimensional or location provision of these regulations may appeal to the board 
of zoning appeals within 30 days of the decision or order. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 2014-01, 2-3-14) 


Sec. 86-532. - Exterior lighting. 
    All lighting for parking areas or for the external illumination of buildings and uses shall be directed 
from and shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts and shall also be so arranged as to not 
adversely affect driver visibility on adjacent thoroughfares. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-533. - Corner clearance. 
    In all districts except the B-1 district, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision 
above a height of 30 inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular 
area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-
of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-534. - Walls, greenbelt and landscaping. 
(a) ?For those use districts where an obscuring wall, greenbelt or landscaping is required, there shall be 
provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring 
wall, fence, greenbelt or landscaped area as required in this subsection: 
(1) ?Off-street parking area; O-S, B-1 and B-2 districts: Four-foot high wall, fence or 
greenbelt/landscaped area pursuant to specifications of this section. 
(2) ?I-1 and I-2 districts: Five-foot high wall, fence or greenbelt/landscaped area pursuant to 
specifications of this section. 
(b) ?Required walls and fences shall be located on lot lines except where underground utilities interfere 
or where this chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential 
districts. 
(c) ?Wall and fence requirements may be substituted with greenbelt/landscaping strips consisting of 
shrubbery, trees and other plant items designed to obscure the use from the abutting residential 
district. The zoning administrator shall determine the sufficiency of such greenbelt/landscaping 
screening matter pursuant to the guidelines of this chapter. 
(d) ?Such walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, 
except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except such openings as may be approved by the 
zoning administrator. All walls required in this section shall be constructed of materials approved by 
the zoning administrator to be durable, weather-resistant, rustproof and easily maintained; and wood 
or wood products shall be specifically excluded. Masonry walls shall be erected on a concrete 
foundation which shall have a minimum depth of 42 inches below a grade approved by the building 
inspector, and shall be not less than four inches wider than the wall to be erected. Masonry walls 
may be constructed with openings above 32 inches above the grade, provided such openings are 
not larger than 64 square inches, and provided that the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain 
the obscuring character required. 
(e) ?The board of appeals may waive or modify the requirements of this section where cause can be 
shown that no good purpose would be served, and provided that in no instance shall a required wall 
or greenbelt strip be permitted to be less than four feet in height. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-535. - Use restriction. 
    No portion of a lot or parcel once used in complying with the provisions of this chapter for yards, lot 
area per family, density (as for a development in the multiple-family district), or percentage of lot 
occupancy (in connection with an existing or proposed building or structure) shall again be used as part of 
the lot or parcel required in connection with any other building or structure existing or intended to exist at 
the same time. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-536. - Site plan review (all districts). 
(a) ?A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission and zoning administrator prior to the 
issuance of a building permit for approval of: 
(1) ?Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of 
this chapter. 
(2) ?New construction and/or additions to current structures of any nonresidential or multiple-family 
development, including any improvements, such as but is not limited to, walls, fences, lighting, 
landscaping, and off-street parking. 
(3) ?Any change in use, whether or not there is any physical change to the structure would require 
site plan approval if the property is zoned in an O-S, B-1, B-2, I-1 or I-2 district lying contiguous 
to, or across a street from, a single-family residential district. 
(4) ?Site condominium developments and planned unit developments (PUDs) in accordance with 
article XI, PUD planned unit development district. 
(5) ?All non-residential uses permitted in residential districts and any use permitted as a special 
land use is required to submit a site plan. 
(6) ?Erection of a tower, antenna, or other communication facility; essential public service buildings 
and storage yards. 
(7) ?An exception to the site plan approval process is provided for small additions or accessory 
buildings 1,000 square feet or less. 
(b) ?Every site plan submitted to the zoning administrator and planning commission shall be in 
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c) ?Site plans shall by submitted 14 days prior to a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(d) ?The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
(1) ?Proof of ownership. Current proof of ownership of the land to be utilized or evidence of a 
contractual ability to acquire such land, such as an option or purchase agreement. 
(2) ?Project schedule. A narrative indicating the period of time within which the project will be 
completed. 
(3) ?Sheet size. 
a. ?Three copies of submitted drawings shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches, with graphics 
at an engineer's scale of one inch equals 20 feet. 
b. ?Nine copies of submitted drawings shall be at least 11 inches by 17 inches for planning 
commission members at an engineer's scale of one inch equals 40 feet. 
c. ?A greater engineer scale may be used for parcels over three acres. 
(4) ?Cover sheet. Cover sheet providing: 
a. ?Applicant's name. 
b. ?Name of the development. 
c. ?Preparer's name and professional seal of architect, engineer, or surveyor indicating license 
in the state. 
d. ?Date of preparation and revision dates. 
e. ?North arrow. 
f. ?Property lines and dimensions. 
g. ?Complete and current legal description and size of property in acres. 
h. ?Small location sketch of sufficient size and scale to determine the site's location within the 
city. 
(5) ?Note on each plan sheet stating "Not to Be Used as Construction Drawings." 
(6) ?All public and private utilities on and adjacent to the site shall be shown on the plans. This 
requirement shall include service leads to the subject property. 
(7) ?The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing 
structures within 100 feet of the subject property. 
(8) ?The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas. 
a. ?Dimensions of existing and proposed right-of-way lines, including those abutting the site, 
and names of abutting public streets. 
b. ?Indication of pavement widths and pavement type including internal service and access 
drives. 
c. ?Written verification of access easements or agreements, if applicable. 
(9) ?The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 
a. ?Street horizontal and vertical dimensions, including curve radii. 
b. ?Locations and dimensions of access points, including deceleration or passing lanes, 
distance from adjacent driveways or intersection streets, including those across a street. 
c. ?Location of existing sidewalks and location and dimensions for proposed sidewalks. 
(10) ?Landscape and lighting plan. A landscape and lighting plan in accordance with article XV. The 
landscape plan shall indicate proposed plant locations with common plant name, number, and 
size in caliper at installation. Berms, retaining walls or fences shall be shown with elevations 
from the surrounding average grade. The lighting plan shall indicate the placement of all exterior 
light fixtures and their photometric plan (direction and intensity of their illumination). 
(11) ?Grading plan. A site grading plan for all developments where grading will occur, with existing 
and proposed topography at a minimum of two-foot contour levels and with topography 
extending a minimum of 50 feet beyond the site in all directions and a general description of 
grades within 100 feet, and further where required to indicate stormwater runoff into an 
approved drain or detention/retention pond. 
(12) ?Stormwater management plan. A general description and location of stormwater management 
system shall be shown on the grading plan, including pre- and post-site development runoff 
calculations used for determination of stormwater management, and location and design (slope) 
of any retention/detention ponds. Stormwater outfall structures or basins constructed in a 
MDEQ-regulated wetland may require an MDEQ wetland permit; and, if constructed below the 
ordinary high water mark of an inland lake or stream, will require a permit under the Inland 
Lakes and Streams Act, PA 346 of 1972, as amended. Status of all such MDEQ permit 
applications or copies of permits with attached conditions shall be provided as applicable. Plans 
must either delineate wetlands and floodplain limits or contain a statement that wetlands and or 
floodplain are not present on the site. 
a. ?Flood hazard zones. The following information shall be submitted as a part of an 
application for permission to commence any type of development within a flood hazard 
area zone: 
1. ?The elevation of the ground floor and any basement floors of all structures. 
2. ?Proof of development permission from appropriate city, state, and federal agencies as 
required, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of authority from the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality under authority of Act 245 of the 
Public Acts of 1929, as amended by Act 167 of the Public Acts of 1968, the Flood 
Plain Regulatory Authority. 
3. ?Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to Act 288 of 
the Public Acts of 1967, the Subdivision Control Act, or greater than five acres in size. 
4. ?Labeled watercourses and water bodies, including county and city drains and man-
made surface drainage ways. 
(13) ?Additional items. Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the planning 
commission to assist in determining the compliance with the zoning ordinance, including site 
plan standards, such as signage, aerial photography, photographs, traffic impacts using trip 
generation rates recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) for an average 
day and peak hour of the affected roadways, and impact on significant natural features and 
drainage. 
(14) ?The planning commission reserves the authority to waive informational requirements when 
they are not necessary to demonstrate compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
(e) ?In the process of reviewing the site plan, the zoning administrator and planning commission shall 
consider: 
(1) ?Single-family development on the basis of a subdivision. 
(2) ?The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in 
relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
(3) ?The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking areas; and may 
make such requirements with respect to any matters as will ensure: 
a. ?Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
b. ?Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the 
existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12) 


Sec. 86-537. - Residential entryway. 
    In R districts, so-called entryway structures including, but not limited to, walls, columns and gates 
marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may 
be located in a required yard, except as provided by section 86-533, pertaining to corner clearance, 
provided that such entryway structures shall comply with all codes and ordinances of the city and be 
approved by the zoning administrator, and a permit issued. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-538. - Solar panel/wind turbine. 
(a) ?Roof mounted solar electric systems. Roof mounted solar panels are permitted on buildings and 
structures in all zoning districts and may include integrated solar panels as the surface layer of the 
roof structure with no additional apparent change in relief or projection or separate flush mounted 
solar panels attached to the roof. 
(1) ?Separate, non-integrated flush mounted solar panels shall be located on a rear or side facing 
roof, which do not front any street, unless such installation is proven to be ineffective or 
impractical. If installation is not practical on a rear or side facing roof, any other placement in all 
zoning districts shall be subject to planning commission approval. 
(2) ?Separate flush mounted solar panels installed on a building or structure with a sloped roof 
surface shall not project vertically above the peak of the roof to which it is attached, or project 
vertically more than five feet above a flat roof installation. 
(3) ?No solar panels shall ever project higher than the permitted building height in any zoning 
district. 
(b) ?Wind energy systems. Wind energy systems and wind turbines are subject to planning commission 
approval in any zoning district located within the boundaries of the city following section 86-536, site 
plan review. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12) 


Secs. 86-539—86-570. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XVI. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS AS TO AREA, HEIGHT AND USE 


Sec. 86-571. - Essential services. 
    Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the 
city. It is the intention of this article to exempt such essential services from the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-572. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any 
property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-573. - Height limit. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply for farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, 
flagpoles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers; provided, however, that the board of 
appeals may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a 
special exception use. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-574. - Lot area. 
    Any lot existing and of record at the time the ordinance from which this chapter was derived became 
effective may be used for any principal use permitted, other than special exception uses for which special 
lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, in the district in which such lot is located whether or 
not such lot complies with the lot area requirements of this chapter. Such use may be made, provided that 
all requirements other than lot area requirements prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and 
provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the 
provisions of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-575. - Lots adjoining alleys. 
    In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley or lane, for the purpose of applying lot area 
requirements of this chapter, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part 
of such lot. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-576. - Yard regulations. 
    When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, as in the case of a planned 
development in the multiple-family district, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of 
peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified 
or determined by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-577. - Multiple dwelling side yard. 
    For the purpose of sideyard regulations, a row house or a multiple dwelling shall be considered as 
one building occupying one lot. When more than one structure is involved on one zoning lot, such 
requirements shall not negate the formula contained in section 86-446, pertaining to the distance spacing 
for multiple dwellings. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-578. - Porches and decks. 
    An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch, deck or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a 
distance not exceeding ten feet. This does not include or permit fixed canopies. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2012-03, 9-4-12) 


Sec. 86-579. - Projection into yards. 
    Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side 
yard not more than two inches, for each one foot of width of such side yard; and may not extend or 
project into a required front yard or rear yard more than three feet. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-580. - Fences, walls, and hedges. 
    Fences are permitted or required, subject to the following: 
(1) ?Fences on all lots of record in all residential districts which enclose property, and/or are within a 
required side or rear yard, shall not exceed six feet in height, measured from the surface of the 
ground, and shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of the house or the 
required minimum front yard set back, whichever is greater. 
No wall or hedge planting shall exceed a height of three feet within any residential front yard. 
Clear vision fences are permitted in front yards, but shall not exceed four feet in height. On a 
corner lot or parcel, no fence, wall, or planting shall be allowed except as may be permitted by 
the zoning administrator who shall be reasonably assured that such fence, wall, or planting will 
not interfere with traffic visibility across a corner. 
(2) ?Fences in residential districts shall not contain barbed wire, razor wire, or be charged with 
electricity in any fashion. 
(3) ?Fences in commercial and industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in height measured 
from the surface of the ground. Provided, however, that upon application and good cause 
shown the planning commission may authorize suitable fencing of any height the commission 
determines to be reasonable under the facts and circumstances presented by the applicant. 
(4) ?Fences in which public or institutional parks, playgrounds or public landscaped areas, situated 
within an area developed with recorded lots shall not exceed eight feet in height, measured from 
the surface of the ground, and shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 25 percent of 
their total area. 
(5) ?A construction (fence) permit shall be secured prior to erection, construction, replacement or 
substantially repairing of any fence in any zoning district, other than on property used for 
agricultural purposes. 
(6) ?It shall be the obligation and sole responsibility of persons erecting fences in this city to 
determine the location of property lines. The zoning administrator may require proof that 
property lines have been established prior to issuance of a fence permit. The city shall not 
determine property or lot lines, and the issuance of a construction permit to erect a fence shall 
in no way be construed as a determination of the correct, valid or legal location for the fence, or 
prejudice, in any way, the rights of adjacent or abutting property owners. 
(7) ?Sight zones: Within the limits of sight zones, fences, and hedges shall not exceed two feet in 
height above grade, except that such restrictions shall not apply to clear vision fences. Such 
sight zones shall be determined as follows: 
a. ?Street/road corners: The triangle formed by legs measured 25 feet on each side of a 
street/road corner, measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
b. ?The right triangles formed on each side of driveways, measured ten feet along the property 
line or right-of-way line for one leg, and the outside edge(s) of the driveway for the other 
leg. 
(8) ?Fence material shall be painted or stained with a uniform color on both sides and the finished 
side of the fence shall face out. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-581. - Access through yards. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as 
to provide access to rear yards and/or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be 
considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement 
serving the like function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall for 
the purpose of this chapter not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required 
yards. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-582. - Front yard setbacks permitted exceptions. 
    In any residential zoning district the front yard requirements of a lot may be modified so as to equal 
the average front yard setback of existing principle structures along the same block front (or 100 feet 
either side of the lot in question, whichever is less) provided that the front yard setback shall not be less 
than 20 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-3-14) 


Secs. 86-583—86-610. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XVII. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 


Sec. 86-611. - Creation and membership. 
    There is hereby established a board of zoning appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise 
its powers as provided in section 5 of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et 
seq.), as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety 
secured and substantial justice done. The board shall consist of five members appointed by the city 
council, and two alternate members. Appointments shall be for a period of one, two and three years, 
respectively, so as nearly as possible to provide for appointment of an equal number each year. 
Thereafter, each member to hold office for the full three-year term. The board of zoning appeals shall 
annually elect its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. The compensation of the appointed 
members of the board of zoning appeals may be fixed by the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-612. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such time as 
such board may determine. All hearings conducted by such board shall be open to the public. The city 
clerk, or his representatives, shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member 
upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also keep records of its 
hearings and other official actions. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct 
of its business. The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, 
administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence 
pertinent to the matters before it. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-613. - Appeal. 
(a) ?An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals by any person, or by any officer, department, board 
or bureau affected by a decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within such 
time as shall be prescribed by the board of appeals by general rule, by filing with the zoning 
administrator and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds of such 
appeal. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting 
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in 
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board of 
appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate 
a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings 
shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record. 
(b) ?The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due 
notice thereof to the parties, and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. 
Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or 
attorney. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-614. - Fees. 
    The city council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of 
fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals. At the time the notice of 
appeal is filed, such fee shall be paid to the secretary of the board of appeals, which the secretary shall 
forthwith pay over to the city treasurer to the credit of the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-615. - Jurisdiction. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district 
classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of this chapter, but does have power 
to act on those matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception 
or conditional approval permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and the laws of the 
state. Such powers include: 
(1) ?Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that 
there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the zoning 
administrator or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of 
this chapter. 
(2) ?Variance. To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict applications of the provisions 
of this chapter where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a 
specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter, or by reason of exceptional 
topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions or other extraordinary or 
exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would 
result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the 
owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the 
public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In 
granting a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, 
character and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of 
the purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which 
it justifies the granting of a variance. 
(3) ?Special exception approval. To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this 
chapter, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on 
special exception situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the board to pass. Any 
special exception approval shall be subject to such conditions as the board may require to 
preserve and promote the character of the zone district in question and otherwise promote the 
purpose of this chapter, including the following: 
a. ?Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose 
of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, and made a part of this 
chapter, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout shown on 
such zoning map. 
b. ?Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes, 
upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
c. ?Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements 
where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose 
and intent of such requirements. 
d. ?Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to secure 
an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape, or so located with relation to 
surrounding development or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be 
appropriately improved without such modifications. 
e. ?Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped 
sections of the city and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. 
f. ?Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise 
permitted in any district, not to exceed 12 months with the granting of 12-month extensions 
being permissible: uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a 
structural nature. The board of appeals, in granting permits for such temporary uses, shall 
do so under the following conditions: 
1. ?The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic 
uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is 
permitted. 
2. ?The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions 
as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use 
at the termination of such temporary permit. 
3. ?All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be 
considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, 
convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city shall be made at the 
discretion of the board of appeals. 
4. ?In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the board of appeals shall 
determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of 
the land; recreation developments such as, but not limited to golf-driving ranges and 
outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating 
systems or sanitary connections. 
5. ?The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district. 
6. ?No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners to 
adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further 
provided for in this chapter. 
g. ?Permit modification of wall requirements, greenbelt, and landscape screening only when 
such modification will not adversely affect or be detrimental to surrounding or adjacent 
development. 
(4) ?Determinations by board. In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this 
chapter the board shall, before making any variations from the chapter in a specific case, first 
determine that the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to 
adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in the public streets, or increase the 
danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established 
property values within the surrounding areas, or in any other respect impair the public health, 
safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The concurring vote of three 
members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or 
determination of the zoning administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon 
which it is authorized by this chapter to render a decision. Nothing contained in this section shall 
be construed to give or grant to the board the power or authority to alter or change this chapter 
or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the mayor and the city council in 
the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-616. - Orders. 
    In exercising the powers described in section 86-615, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or 
partly, or may modify the orders, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make 
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the 
powers of the zoning administrator from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-617. - Notice. 
    The board shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a public hearing 
conducted by the board. It shall, by general rule or in specific cases, determine the interested parties 
who, in the opinion of the board, may be affected by any matter brought before it, which shall in all cases 
include all owners of record of property and the occupants of all single-family and multifamily dwellings 
within 300 feet of the premises in question. Such notices shall be delivered personally or by mail 
addressed to the respective owners at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name 
is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. The board may require any party applying to the board 
for relief to give such notice to other interested parties as it shall prescribe. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


Sec. 86-618. - Order period of validity. 
(a) ?No order of the board permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period of longer than 
one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and 
such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of 
such permit. 
(b) ?No order of the board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer 
than one year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such 
use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building such order shall continue in 
force and effect if a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and 
such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of 
such permit. 
(Ord. of 5-6-02) 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1983 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1983 Code, as updated 
through July 8, 1985, which are included herein. Sections of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, 
not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and 
permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table 
immediately following this table. 
198
3 
Cod
e  
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
1.3
1 
2-
156 
1.6
1—
1.6
4 
30-
1—
30-
4 
1.1
11
—
1.1
24 
62-
1—
62-
14 
1.1
26
—
1.1
36 
62-
16
—
62-
26 
1.1
62 
2-
191 
1.1
63
—
1.1
73 
2-
195
—
2-
205 
1.2
01
—
1.2
03 
2-
31
—
2-
33 
1.2
08
—
1.2
19 
2-
56
—
2-
67 
1.2
25
—
1.2
31 
2-
91
—
2-
97 
1.2
41
—
1.2
44 
2-
121
—
2-
124 
1.2
50 
26-
31, 
26-
32 
1.2
62
—
1.2
68 
26-
66
—
26-
72 
2.2 
58-
31 
2.4 
58-
33 
2.6 
58-
35 
2.8
—
2.1
4 
58-
37
—
58-
43 
2.4
1—
2.4
3 
78-
31
—
78-
33 
2.4
4—
2.5
0 
78-
61
—
78-
67 
2.5
1—
2.5
4 
78-
34
—
78-
37 
2.1
21 
78-
276 
2.1
22
—
2.1
28 
78-
301
—
78-
307 
2.1
29 
78-
331
, 
78-
332 
2.1
30
—
2.1
33 
78-
333
—
78-
336 
2.1
51
—
2.1
55 
74-
116
—
74-
120 
3.1
—
3.7 
54-
1—
54-
7 
3.2
1—
3.2
8 
54-
41
—
54-
48 
3.5
1—
3.5
9 
18-
1—
18-
9 
3.6
1 
18-
10 
4.1
—
4.4 
66-
66
—
66-
69 
4.5
—
4.1
3 
66-
31
—
66-
39 
4.1
4 
66-
70 
4.1
5—
4.1
9 
66-
40
—
66-
44 
4.4
1—
4.5
3 
66-
101
—
66-
113 
4.6
0—
4.6
3 
66-
114
—
66-
117 
5.1 
86-
1 
5.4 
86-
2 
5.5
—
5.1
2 
86-
3 
5.1
5—
5.2
0 
86-
86
—
86-
91 
5.2
5—
5.2
7 
86-
126
—
86-
128 
5.2
8 
86-
130 
5.3
3—
5.3
6 
86-
161
—
86-
164 
5.4
1—
5.4
3 
86-
196
—
86-
198 
5.4
8—
5.5
0 
86-
231
—
86-
233 
5.5
5—
5.5
8 
86-
266
—
86-
269 
5.6
3—
5.6
5 
86-
301
—
86-
303 
5.7
0—
5.7
2 
86-
336
—
86-
338 
5.7
7—
5.8
3 
86-
371
—
86-
377 
5.8
8—
5.9
2 
86-
411
—
86-
415 
5.9
7, 
5.9
8 
86-
446
, 
86-
447 
5.1
03
—
5.1
19 
86-
521
—
86-
537 
5.1
31
—
5.1
41 
86-
571
—
86-
581 
5.1
51
—
5.1
65 
86-
36
—
86-
50 
5.1
66, 
5.1
67 
86-
50, 
86-
51 
5.1
81
—
5.1
88 
86-
611
—
86-
618 
5.1
91
—
5.1
93 
86-
5—
86-
7 
5.2
21 
70-
1 
5.2
22 
70-
56 
5.2
22(
1)
—
5.2
22(
6) 
70-
57
—
70-
62 
5.2
23 
70-
121 
5.2
23(
1), 
5.2
23(
2) 
70-
86, 
70-
87 
5.2
24
—
5.2
28 
70-
122
—
70-
126 
5.2
29 
70-
161 
5.2
29(
1) 
70-
162 
5.2
30, 
5.2
31 
70-
163
, 
70-
164 
5.2
32, 
5.2
33 
70-
2, 
70-
3 
6.1 
10-
66 
6.2 
10-
67, 
10-
68 
6.2
1—
6.2
6 
74-
141
—
74-
146 
7.1 
14-
1 
7.2
—
7.1
8 
14-
31
—
14-
47 
7.2
0—
7.2
6 
14-
49
—
14-
55 
7.3
1 
14-
86 
7.5
1 
14-
121 
7.7
1 
14-
152 
7.7
2 
14-
151 
7.7
3—
7.7
6 
14-
153
—
14-
156 
7.9
1—
7.9
7 
14-
191
—
14-
197 
7.1
21, 
7.1
22 
46-
31, 
46-
32 
7.1
23
—
7.1
31 
46-
56
—
46-
64 
7.1
32 
46-
33 
7.1
51 
14-
231 
7.1
52, 
7.1
53 
14-
256
, 
14-
257 
7.1
54 
14-
232 
7.1
55
—
7.1
59 
14-
258
—
14-
262 
7.1
60 
14-
233 
7.1
61, 
7.1
62 
14-
263
, 
14-
264 
7.1
63 
14-
234 
8.1 
10-
31, 
10-
32 
8.2, 
8.3 
10-
32, 
10-
33 
8.5
1—
8.5
4 
38-
76
—
38-
79 
9.1 
38-
111
, 
38-
112 
9.2
—
9.5 
38-
146
—
38-
149 
9.7 
38-
113 
9.2
1, 
9.2
2 
38-
181
, 
38-
182 
9.3
1 
38-
1 
9.4
1—
9.4
3 
38-
2—
38-
4 
9.5
1—
9.5
5 
82-
31
—
82-
35 
9.7
1 
38-
36 
9.7
3—
9.8
1 
38-
37
—
38-
45 
9.9
1 
50-
1 
9.9
2(1) 
50-
71 
9.9
2(2) 
50-
141 
9.9
2(4) 
50-
216 
9.9
2(5) 
50-
181 
9.9
2(6) 
50-
222 
9.9
2(7) 
50-
147 
9.9
2(8) 
50-
142 
9.9
2(9) 
50-
223 
9.9
2(1
0) 
50-
217 
9.9
2(1
1) 
50-
106 
9.9
2(1
2) 
50-
72, 
50-
73 
9.9
2(1
3), 
9.9
2(1
4) 
50-
143
, 
50-
144 
9.9
2(1
5) 
50-
74 
9.9
2(1
6), 
9.9
2(1
7) 
50-
144 
9.9
2(1
8) 
50-
218 
9.9
2(1
9) 
50-
220 
9.9
2(2
0) 
50-
219 
9.9
2(2
2) 
50-
221 
9.9
2(2
3) 
50-
143 
9.9
2(2
4) 
50-
145 
9.9
2(2
5) 
50-
36 
9.9
2(2
7) 
50-
146 
9.9
2(3
1), 
9.9
2(3
2) 
50-
185 
9.9
2(3
3) 
50-
75 
9.9
2(3
4) 
50-
37 
9.9
2(3
5) 
50-
143 
9.9
4, 
9.9
5 
50-
108
, 
50-
109 
9.9
6, 
9.9
7 
50-
109
, 
50-
110 
9.9
8 
50-
110 
9.1
31
—
9.1
33 
50-
182
—
50-
184 
9.1
51
—
9.1
53 
50-
256
—
50-
258 
9.1
71
—
9.1
74 
6-
1—
6-4 
9.1
81 
6-
62 
9.1
82 
6-
36 
9.1
83 
6-
61 
9.1
84
—
9.1
86 
6-
37
—
6-
39 
9.1
87
—
9.1
91 
6-
86
—
6-
90 
10.
1—
10.
3 
74-
31
—
74-
33 
10.
4 
74-
34(
10.
101
) 
10.
61
—
10.
67 
74-
86
—
74-
92 
46.
42 
50-
107 
 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1983 Code, 
as updated through July 8, 1985, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such 
date were incorporated into the 1983 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some 
ordinances which precede July 8, 1985, but which were never included in the 1983 Code, as 
supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since July 8, 1985, and not listed herein, 
have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ord
ina
nce  
Nu
mb
er 
?
Dat
e 
Sec
tion 
?
Sec
tion  
this 
Cod
e 
44a 
?8-
26-
63 
      
Add
ed 
18-
5.5 
79h 
?1-?
9-
84 

86-
197 
79j 
?1-?
9-
84 

86-
128 
79n 
?2-
27-
84 
1 
86-
615 
29a 
?3-
12-
84 

2-
56 
79q 
?5-
14-
84 

86-
128 
79p 
?6-
25-
84 
2 
86-
446 
79t 
?7-?
9-
84 
2 
86-
523 
93A 
?5-
12-
86 
1(1)
—
1(3) 
2-
192
—
2-
194 
14D 
?6-
23-
86 
1 
58-
32 


2 
58-
34 


3 
58-
36 
94 
?6-
23-
86 
1(9.
211
)—
1(9.
213
) 
50-
306
—
50-
308 
79x 
12-
12-
88 

86-
611 
79
w 
12-
12-
88 

86-
128 
Min
. of 
?6-
12-
89 
IX   
    
Add
ed 
2-
34 
58
O 
?8-
28-
89 
art. 
I 
42-
31 


art. 
III 
42-
32 


art. 
IV 
42-
33 


art. 
V, § 
1, 
42-
56, 
42-
57 


art. 
V, § 
2 



art. 
V, § 
3 
42-
59 


art. 
V, § 
4 
42-
58 


art. 
V, § 
5— 
42-
60
—
42-
64 


art. 
V, § 
9 



art. 
VI, 
§ 1, 
42-
86, 
42-
87 


art. 
VI, 
§ 2 



art. 
VII 
42-
34 


art. 
X 
42-
35 

10-?
9-
89(
Res
.) 

86-
232 



86-
531 
31A 
?3-
26-
90(
Res
.) 

62-
15 
22K 
?8-
27-
90 
2.8
1 
78-
101 


2.8
2(1)
—
2.8
2(1
3) 
78-
156
—
78-
168 


2.8
2(1
4)(
A), 
2.8
2(1
4)(
B) 
78-
169
, 
78-
170 


2.8
3(1)
—
2.8
3(5) 
78-
191
—
78-
195 


2.8
4 
78-
241 


2.8
5—
2.8
7 
78-
216
—
78-
218 


2.8
8—
2.9
0 
78-
242
—
78-
244 


2.9
1 
78-
105 


2.9
2—
2.9
8 
78-
126
—
78-
132 


2.9
9 
78-
102 


3.0
0 
78-
103 


3.0
2 
78-
104 

?1-
28-
91(
Ord
.) 
7.1
4—
7.1
7 
14-
43
—
14-
46 


7.1
9 
14-
48 
98 
?4-
13-
92 
rule 
1—
rule 
4 
54-
81
—
54-
84 


rule 
5 
54-
85 


rule 
6, 
rule 
7 
54-
86, 
54-
87 
95B 
12-
14-
92 
1 
78-
301 
79y 
?6-
13-
94 
pt. I 
86-
501 


pt. 
I(1)
— 
86-
502
—
86-
505 


pt. 
I(4) 

99 
?6-
13-
94 
pt. I 
34-
31 


pt. 
I(1)
— 
34-
32
—
34-
38 


pt. 
I(7) 

100 
?6-
13-
94 
1—
3 
50-
282
—
50-
284 


art. 
6 
50-
281 
79z 
?9-
16-
95 
1, 2 
86-
481
, 
86-
482 


2(8) 
86-
483 


2(8)
(a)
—
2(8)
(d) 
86-
484
—
86-
487 
101 
11-
13-
95 
1 
86-
48 
102 
11-
13-
95 
2(A
) 
1-
17 
103 
11-
13-
95 
1(1
30.
1)
—
1(1
30.
6) 
2-
231
—
2-
236 
14F 
?8-
26-
96 
1 
58-
44, 
58-
45 
79c
c 
?8-
26-
96 

86-
3 



86-
128
, 
86-
129 
58R 
?9-
23-
96 
1 
42-
87 
45C 
10-
28-
96 
1(a)
, 
1(b
) 
82-
34, 
82-
35 


2 
2-
236 
79D
D 
?9-?
9-
96 

86-
231 


      
Add
ed 
86-
234 
79E
E 
?2-
10-
97 
1     
  
Add
ed 
86-
232
(15)
, 
86-
267
(14) 
Ord
. of 
?4-
28-
97 

18-
7 
97F
F 
10-
27-
97 
1 
86-
580 
97-
104 
11-
24-
97 
1     
  
Add
ed 
74-
35 
97-
105 
11-
24-
97 
1—
7 
Ado
ptin
g 
Ord
., p. 
xi 
97-
106 
12-?
8-
97 
1     
  
Add
ed 
10-
81
—
10-
85 
Am
d. 
of 
?2-
26-
98 
1—
4     
  
Add
ed 
54-
8 
Ord
. of 
?5-
18-
98 

78-
31, 
78-
61, 



78-
62, 
78-
301
, 



78-
302 



78-
304
—
78-
306
, 



78-
332
, 
78-
334 



78-
335 


      
Add
ed 
78-
68, 
78-
69, 



78-
308
—
78-
310 
Am
d. 
of 
?7-
20-
98 

54-
81(
7) 
98-
02 
?8-?
3-
98 
1—
9 
58-
43 
Ord
. of 
?7-
19-
99 

42-
32, 
42-
58, 



42-
59, 
42-
63, 



42-
86, 
42-
87 
99-
01 
?7-
19-
99 
1—
9     
  
Add
ed 
72-
21
—
72-
29 
Ord
. of 
?5-?
6-
02 
      
Rpl
d 
86-
1—
86-
7 



86-
36
—
86-
51 



86-
86
—
86-
91 



86-
126
—
86-
130 



86-
161
—
86-
164 



86-
196
—
86-
198 



86-
231
—
86-
234 



86-
266
—
86-
269 



86-
301
—
86-
303 



86-
336
—
86-
338 



86-
371
—
86-
377 



86-
411
—
86-
415 



86-
446
, 
86-
447 



86-
481
—
86-
487 



86-
501
—
86-
505 



86-
521
—
86-
537 



86-
571
—
86-
581 



86-
611
—
86-
618 


      
Add
ed 
86-
1—
86-
7 



86-
36
—
86-
51 



86-
86
—
86-
91 



86-
126
—
86-
130 



86-
161
—
86-
164 



86-
196
—
86-
198 



86-
231
—
86-
234 



86-
266
—
86-
269 



86-
301
—
86-
303 



86-
336
—
86-
339 



86-
371
—
86-
376 



86-
446
, 
86-
447 



86-
481
—
86-
487 



86-
501
—
86-
505 



86-
521
—
86-
537 



86-
571
—
86-
581 



86-
611
—
86-
618 
Am
d. 
of 
?6-?
3-
02 

78-
304
, 
78-
334 
Am
d. 
of 
?7-?
8-
02 
      
Add
ed 
86-
39(
3) 
Ord
. of 
10-?
7-
02 
      
Add
ed 
10-
101
, 
78-
90 
Ord
. of 
11-?
4-
02 
      
Add
ed 
74-
1 
Ord
. of 
12-?
2-
02 
1—
4     
  
Rpl
d 
74-
31
—
74-
34 


      
Add
ed 
74-
31
—
74-
34 
Ord
. of 
?4-?
7-
03 
1—
18   
    
Add
ed 
73-
1—
73-
18 


20, 
21   
    
Add
ed 
73-
19, 
73-
20 
Am
d. 
of 
?8-?
4-
03 

6-1, 
6-4 



6-
37, 
6-
39 



6-
89 


      
Add
ed 
6-
40
—
6-
45 



6-
91 
Am
d. 
of 
?8-?
4-
03 
      
Add
ed 
54-
49
—
54-
51 
Am
d. 
of 
?8-?
4-
03 

82-
31
—
82-
35 


      
Add
ed 
82-
36 
Ord
. of 
10-
13-
03 

78-
61(
2) 
Ord
. of 
11-?
3-
03(
1) 

10-
82
—
10-
85 
Ord
. of 
11-?
3-
03(
2) 

54-
1—
54-
8 


      
Add
ed 
54-
9 



54-
41
—
54-
48 


      
Rpl
d 
54-
49
—
54-
51 


      
Add
ed 
54-
49 



54-
81
—
54-
87 
Ord
. of 
11-?
3-
03(
3) 
      
Add
ed 
74-
147
—
74-
171 
200
4-
01 
?3-?
8-
04 
      
Add
ed 
72-
51
—
72-
59 
Am
d. 
of 
?4-?
5-
04 

42-
31
—
42-
35 



42-
56
—
42-
64 



42-
86 
Ord
. of 
?5-?
3-
04 

26-
72 
Am
d. 
of 
?7-?
1-
04 

78-
301
, 
78-
302 



78-
306
, 
78-
332 
200
4-
02 
?9-
13-
04 
      
Add
ed 
38-
201
—
38-
212 
200
4-
03 
?9-
13-
04 
      
Add
ed 
48-
1—
48-
4 



48-
31
—
48-
36 
Ord
. of 
?9-
13-
04 
      
Rpl
d 
2-
195
—
2-
197 
Ord
. of 
12-?
6-
04 

86-
502
, 
86-
503 
Am
d. 
of 
?2-?
7-
05 

30-
1, 
30-
3(n
ote
), 
30-
4 
Am
d. 
of 
?8-?
1-
05 

54-
8(b
) 
Am
d. 
of 
?8-?
1-
05 

58-
43 
Am
d. 
of 
?8-?
1-
05 

72-
55, 
72-
59 
Ord
. of 
?7-
10-
06 
      
Add
ed 
46-
65
—
46-
69 
Ord
. of 
?3-
12-
07 

2-
57 
Ord
. of 
?4-
30-
07 
      
Add
ed 
86-
52 
Ord
. of 
?6-?
4-
07 
      
Add
ed 
78-
251
—
78-
261 
Ord
. of 
?7-?
9-
07 
      
Rpl
d 
10-
66
—
10-
68 
Ord
. of 
?8-?
6-
07 
I—
VIII 
      
Add
ed 
78-
265
—
78-
272 
Ord
. of 
10-?
1-
07 

30-
2 
Min
. of 
12-?
3-
07 

2-
34 
200
8-
02 
?9-?
8-
08 
      
Add
ed 
Ch. 
2, 
Art. 
VI, 
§§ 
2-
251
—
2-
261 
Ord
. of 
11-
10-
08 

Ch. 
78, 
Art. 
III, 
Div
s. 
1—
6 
Am
end
. of 
?5-
11-
09 

18-
10(
17), 
(26) 
Am
end
. of 
?6-?
7-
10 

82-
33(
a) 
Ord
. of 
?1-?
3-
11 

74-
117 
201
1-
02 
?4-
11-
11 

54-
41 
Ord
. of 
?7-
11-
11 

78-
301
(2)a
. 



78-
304 



78-
305
(a) 



78-
306 



78-
334 



78-
335
(a) 
42 
?3-?
5-
12 
1—
3     
  
Add
ed 
42-
1—
42-
3 
201
2-
01 
?5-?
7-
12 
1—
8     
  
Add
ed 
50-
2 
201
2-
02 
?9-?
4-
12 
1, 
3—
7 
50-
181 
201
2-
86 
?9-?
4-
12 
1, 
3—
7 
50-
181 
201
2-
03 
?9-?
4-
12 

86-
3 



86-
128
(6) 



86-
526
(a) 



86-
531
(c)(
1) 



86-
536 


      
Add
ed 
86-
302
(2)
h 



86-
538
, 
86-
578 
201
2-
18 
10-?
1-
12 

18-
7, 
18-
10 
201
3-
01 
?5-?
6-
13 

18-
7 
201
3-
04 
?9-?
3-
13 

50-
181
(d) 
201
3-
05 
?9-?
3-
13 

78-
302
, 
78-
306 
Ord
. of 
11-?
4-
13 
      
Rpl
d 
78-
251
—
78-
261 
201
3-
06 
11-
13-
13 
1 
78-
101
, 
78-
156 



78-
159
, 
78-
160 



78-
162
—
78-
164 



78-
192
, 
78-
195 
201
3-
07 
12-?
2-
13 
      
Add
ed 
74-
172 
201
3-
08 
12-?
2-
13 
      
Rpl
d 
50-
147 
201
4-
01 
?2-?
3-
14 

86-
3, 
86-
531 
201
4-
02 
?2-?
3-
14 
      
Add
ed 
86-
582 
201
4-
03a 
?3-?
3-
14 

78-
331
, 
78-
332 
201
4-
04a 
?3-?
3-
14 

78-
301 
201
4-
05 
?5-?
5-
14 
      
Add
ed 
78-
38 
201
4-
06 
?6-?
2-
14 

66-
117 
201
4-
07 
?6-?
2-
14 

6-4 
201
4-
08 
?8-?
4-
14 

86-
523 
201
4-
09 
12-?
1-
14 
1 
86-
127 
201
6-
01 
?7-?
5-
16 

73-
4 
201
6-
02 
?7-?
5-
16 

82-
36 
201
6-
03 
?9-?
6-
16 

70-
163
(d) 
201
6-
04 
?9-?
6-
16 

66-
43 
201
7-
04 
10-?
2-
17 

86-
302 


      
Add
ed 
86-
268
(7) 
201
7-
05 
12-?
4-
17 

30-
1, 
30-
2 
201
8-
01 
?5-?
7-
18 
1 
10-
83 
201
8-
02 
?6-?
4-
18 

50-
2(e) 
 


STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of 
references to Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MC
L 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
8.3 
et 
seq
. 
1-2 
10.
31 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
22 
15.
231 
et 
seq
. 
2-
252 
15.
231
—
15.
246 
73-
4 

73-
17 
15.
261 
et 
seq
. 
48-
31 
24.
201 
et 
seq
. 
74-
156 
30.
401 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
22 

22-
1 

22-
4 

Ch. 
34 
30.
402 
22-
1 
30.
409 
22-
7 
30.
411
(1)(
b) 
22-
10 
30.
411
(2), 
(3), 
(6) 
22-
11 
30.
412
(2) 
22-
12 
30.
414 
22-
6 
117
.3(k
) 
10-
31 
117
.4i 
1-
17 
117
.5b 
1-1 
117
.5c 
Ch. 
2, 
Art. 
II, 
Div. 
4 
117
.5c(
a)
—
117
.5c(
c) 
2-
122
—
2-
124 
123
.24
1 
Ch. 
58 
123
.36
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
125
.31 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
2, 
Art. 
II, 
Div. 
2 
125
.32 
et 
seq
. 
86-
44 

86-
46 
125
.33
—
125
.41 
2-
56
—
2-
64 
125
.43
—
125
.45 
2-
65
—
2-
67 
125
.71 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 
125
.58
1 et 
seq
. 
86-
7 

86-
611 
125
.60
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 
125
.65
1 
Ch. 
2, 
Art. 
II, 
Div. 
3 
125
.65
1 et 
seq
. 
2-
94 

2-
97 

Ch. 
26 
125
.90
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 
125
.14
01 
et 
seq
. 
72-
22 

72-
52 
125
.15
01 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
10 

10-
31
—
10-
33 
125
.16
01 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 

26-
31, 
26-
32 
125
.16
51 
et 
seq
. 
26-
66 
125
.34
05 
86-
52 
141
.42
1a 
2-
204 
168
.1 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
30 
168
.64
4a 
30-
1 
207
.21
1 et 
seq
. 
74-
155 
211
.1 
et 
seq
. 
78-
130 

86-
502 
211
.2 
et 
seq
. 
2-
205 
247
.65
1 et 
seq
. 
74-
159 
257
.1 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
74 
257
.1
—
257
.92
3 
74-
1 
257
.68
4 
74-
159 
257
.95
1—
257
.95
5 
74-
31 
282
.10
1 et 
seq
. 
38-
76 
287
.26
1 et 
seq
. 
6-
61, 
6-
62 
287
.29
0 
Ch. 
6 
299
.37
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
299
.40
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
299
.50
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
299
.60
1 et 
seq
. 
34-
32 
299
.60
3 
34-
32 
299
.73
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
299
.75
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
324
.10
1 et 
seq
. 
42-
59 

42-
87 

58-
39 
325
.28
1 et 
seq
. 
46-
63 
333
.11
01 
et 
seq
. 
46-
33 

46-
63 

86-
128 
333
.71
01 
et 
seq
. 
50-
1 
333
.12
541 
et 
seq
. 
46-
63 
333
.26
421 
50-
2 
399
.20
1 et 
seq
. 
48-
3, 
48-
36 
400
.70
1 et 
seq
. 
86-
128 
408
.10
01 
et 
seq
. 
14-
37 

50-
2 
445
.40
1 et 
seq
. 
14-
151
, 
14-
152 
445
.47
1 et 
seq
. 
14-
151 
445
.90
1 et 
seq
. 
14-
54 
480
.11 
74-
147 
480
.11 
et 
seq
. 
74-
139 

74-
172 
484
.21
02 
73-
3 
484
.22
51 
73-
4 
560
.10
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
70 

70-
1 
560
.25
9 
Ch. 
70 
600
.10
1 et 
seq
. 
1-2 

1-
17 

2-
231 
600
.83
95 
74-
86 
600
.83
96 
2-
231  
2-
235 
600
.87
01 
10-
85 
600
.87
05 
2-
233  
2-
235 
600
.87
07(
6) 
2-
231 
600
.87
09 
2-
235 
722
.11
1 et 
seq
. 
86-
3 
750
.24
3a 
et 
seq
. 
50-
181 
752
.21 
et 
seq
. 
6-1 
 


STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of 
references to Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MS
A 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
2.2
12 
et 
seq
. 
1-2 
3.4(
1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
22 
3.5
60(
101
) et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
5.1
5a) 

74-
34(
5.8
2) 

74-
34(
6.2
3) 
3.5
60(
186
) 
74-
34(
5.1
5f) 

74-
34(
10.
90), 
74-
34(
10.
92) 
3.6
91 
74-
34(
5.1
5h) 
4.4
50(
1) 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
4.8
24(
11) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
22 

22-
1 

22-
4 

Ch. 
34 
4.8
24(
12) 
22-
1 
4.8
24(
19) 
22-
7 
4.8
24(
21), 
(1)(
b) 
22-
10 
4.8
24(
21), 
(2), 
(3), 
(6) 
22-
11 
4.8
24(
22), 
(2) 
22-
12 
4.8
24(
24) 
22-
6 
5.2
073
, (k) 
10-
31 
5.2
082 
1-
17 
5.2
084
(2) 
1-1 
5.2
084
(3) 
Ch. 
2, 
Art. 
II, 
Div. 
4 
5.2
084
(3), 
(a)
—
5.2
084
(3), 
(c) 
2-
122
—
2-
124 
5.2
661 
Ch. 
58 
5.2
726
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
5.2
931 
et 
seq
. 
86-
7 

86-
611 
5.2
949
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
10 

10-
31
—
10-
33 
5.2
991 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
2, 
Art. 
II, 
Div. 
2 
5.2
992 
et 
seq
. 
86-
44 

86-
46 
5.2
993
—
5.3
001 
2-
56
—
2-
64 
5.3
003
—
5.3
005 
2-
65
—
2-
67 
5.3
010
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
26-
66 
5.3
011 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
2, 
Art. 
II, 
Div. 
3 

2-
94 

2-
97 

Ch. 
26 
5.3
057
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 
5.3
058
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 
5.3
228
(21
a) 
2-
204 
5.3
501 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 
5.3
520
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26 

26-
31, 
26-
32 
6.1
001 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
30 
6.1
644
(1) 
30-
1 
7.1 
et 
seq
. 
86-
502 
7.2 
et 
seq
. 
2-
205 
9.1
666
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
5.9
9) 
9.1
801 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
74 

74-
34(
1.0
17) 

74-
34(
1.0
24) 

74-
34(
10.
90) 

74-
34(
10.
007
) 
9.1
915 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.1
955 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
019
(4) 
74-
34(
5.1
5a) 
9.2
022 
74-
34(
10.
92) 
9.2
325
(2) 
74-
34(
5.1
5) 
9.2
325
(8) 
74-
34(
10.
99) 
9.2
325
, 
(1), 
(2) 
74-
34(
5.1
5) 
9.2
325
, 
(1), 
(3) 
74-
34(
5.1
5) 
9.2
331 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
417 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
419 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
419
(1) 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
420 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
422 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
424
—
9.2
426 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
426
(3) 
74-
34(
1.0
24) 
9.2
651 
et 
seq
. 
74-
31 
9.3
200 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
5.1
5h) 
9.3
200
(15) 
74-
34(
5.1
5h) 

74-
34(
10.
34a
) 

74-
34(
10.
34c
) 

74-
34(
10.
78)
—
74-
34(
10.
86) 

74-
34(
10.
91)
—
74-
34(
10.
93) 
12.
511 
et 
seq
. 
6-
61, 
6-
62 
12.
541 
Ch. 
6 
13.
29(
1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
13.
30(
1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
13.
30(
131
) et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
13.
32(
1) 
et 
seq
. 
34-
32 
13.
32(
3) 
34-
32 
13.
33(
1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
13.
182
0(1) 
et 
seq
. 
38-
76 
13A
.10
1 et 
seq
. 
42-
59 

42-
87 

58-
39 
13A
.82
101 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
10.
1) 

74-
34(
10.
11) 
13A
.82
127
, (1) 
74-
34(
10.
34a
) 
13A
.82
127
, 
(1), 
(3) 
74-
34(
10.
34c
) 
13A
.82
127
, 
(1), 
(4), 
(5) 
74-
34(
10.
34a
) 
13A
.82
127
, (2) 
74-
34(
10.
34a
) 
13A
.82
127
, (3) 
74-
34(
10.
34b
) 
13A
.82
127
, 
(4), 
(5) 
74-
34(
10.
34a
) 
13A
.82
128
, 
13A
.82
129 
74-
34(
10.
34c
) 
13A
.82
134 
74-
34(
10.
101
) 
13A
.82
142 
74-
34(
10.
34b
) 
14.
15(
110
1) 
et 
seq
. 
46-
33 

46-
63 

86-
128 
14.
15(
710
1) 
et 
seq
. 
50-
1 
14.
15(
710
4) 
74-
34(
1.0
07b
) 
14.
15(
125
41) 
et 
seq
. 
46-
63 
14.
15(
160
61) 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
5.8
1) 
14.
15(
161
01) 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
5.8
1) 
14.
15(
162
15) 
74-
34(
5.1
5a) 
14.
15(
209
01) 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
1.0
01a
) 
14.
434
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
46-
63 
14.
528
(32
1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 
16.
610
(51) 
et 
seq
. 
86-
128 
17.
50(
1) 
et 
seq
. 
14-
37 
18.
185
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
5.7
6) 
18.
128
7(1
71) 
74-
34(
5.1
5h) 
19.
418
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
14-
54 
19.
711 
et 
seq
. 
14-
151
, 
14-
152 
19.
740
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
14-
151 
25.
358
(11) 
et 
seq
. 
86-
3 
26.
430
(10
1) 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
70 

70-
1 
26.
430
(25
9) 
Ch. 
70 
27A
.10
1 et 
seq
. 
1-2 

1-
17 

2-
231 
27A
.83
12 
74-
34(
2.7
b) 
27A
.83
95 
74-
86 
27A
.83
96 
2-
231  
2-
235 
27A
.87
05 
2-
233  
2-
235 
27A
.87
07(
6) 
2-
231 
27A
.87
09 
2-
235 
tit. 
28 
Ch. 
50 
28.
161 
et 
seq
. 
6-1 
28.
440
(1) 
et 
seq
. 
50-
181 
28.
566 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
10.
91) 
28.
661 
74-
34(
10.
91) 
28.
841 
et 
seq
. 
74-
34(
5.1
5) 

74-
34(
10.
34a
) 

74-
34(
10.
34b
) 

74-
34(
10.
78) 
116
.11
4(1) 
72-
22 
 
