WIXOM MUNICIPAL CODE 1992 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Wixom, Michigan 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 11, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    The Wixom, Michigan Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1992, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of June Buck, city clerk. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 11, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date Ord. No. 2018-01 , adopted on January 9, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 11 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 11 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 11, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. __, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2011-01  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-02  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-03  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-04  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-05  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-06  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-07  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-08  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-09  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-10  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-11  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-12  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-13  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-14  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-15  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-16  3- 8-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-17  3-22-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-18  3-22-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-19  4-26-11 Included Supp. No. 13 2011-20  6-28-11 Included Supp. No. 14 2011-21  6-28-11 Included Supp. No. 14 2012-01  6-12-12 Included Supp. No. 15 2012-02  7-24-12 Included Supp. No. 15 2012-03  7-24-12 Included Supp. No. 15 2013-01  2-26-13 Included Supp. No. 15 2013-02  2-26-13 Included Supp. No. 15 2013-03  5-14-13 Omitted Supp. No. 16 2013-04  7-23-13 Omitted Supp. No. 16 2014-01  1-28-14 Included Supp. No. 16 2014-02  5-27-14 Included Supp. No. 16 Ord. of   6-24-14 Included Supp. No. 16 2015-01  1-13-15 Omitted Supp. No. 16 2015-02  1-27-15 Included Supp. No. 16 2015-03  3-10-15 Included Supp. No. 16 2013-05  8-27-13 Included Supp. No. 17 2013-06 10- 8-13 Included Supp. No. 17 2015-04 10-27-15 Included Supp. No. 17 2016-01  1-26-16 Omitted Supp. No. 17 2016-02  6-28-16 Included Supp. No. 17 2016-03  6-28-16 Included Supp. No. 17 2016-04  2- 9-16 Included Supp. No. 17 2016-05  9-13-16 Included Supp. No. 17 2017-01  1-24-17 Included Supp. No. 17 2017-02  5- 9-17 Included Supp. No. 17 2017-03  6-13-17 Included Supp. No. 17 2017-04  6-13-17 Included Supp. No. 17 2017-06 10-10-17 Included Supp. No. 17 2017-51(Res.) 10-24-17 Included Supp. No. 17 2017-07 12-12-17 Included Supp. No. 17 2018-01  1- 9-18 Omitted Supp. No. 17  
THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF WIXOM 
INTRODUCTION 
    Wixom is "A Community with Character," settled in 1832 and chartered in 1958, with over a century of historical progress. Wixom has continued with its excellent planning, incorporating industry, business and its people. This revised charter continues on with that Wixom tradition. 
    We, the people of Wixom, in our endeavor to perpetuate safe, healthful and pleasant surroundings for our posterity, endorse and encourage, with this charter, a rededication of our citizenry and representative officials to the principles of responsible government, a well-planned community, respect for our heritage, and protection of the natural environment characteristic of our City. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
    RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION .....C-47 
    CHARTER INDEX .....C-49 
CHAPTER 1 - NAMES AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.1. - Names and boundaries. 
    The name of this organized city is "City of Wixom." It is a body corporate and embraces the following described territory in the County of Oakland, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached, and less such territory as may from time to time be detached, in accordance with law: 
    Commencing at the Northwest corner of Section 30, Commerce Township; thence East along North line of Sections 30 and 29 to the South quarter corner of Section 20; thence North along the North/South quarter line to the Northwest corner of the Southwest quarter of the Southeast quarter of Section 20; thence North 00 degrees, 27 minutes, 40 seconds East 288.70 feet along the North/South quarter line to the Northwest corner of Gilbert C. Willis Park; thence South 79 degrees, 54 minutes, 35 seconds East 129.29 feet; thence along a curve to the left, radius 851.51 feet, chord bears South 71 degrees, 58 minutes, 45 seconds East 549.41 feet; thence North 89 degrees, 12 minutes, 00 seconds East 675 feet to the Northeast corner of Gilbert C. Willis Park; thence South 00 degrees, 28 minutes, 30 seconds East 87.02 feet to the Northwest corner of the Southeast quarter of the Southeast quarter of Section 20; thence East along the North line of the Southeast quarter of the Southeast quarter of Section 20 to the Northeast corner of the Southeast quarter of the Southeast quarter of Section 20; thence South along the East Line of Section 20 to the Southeast corner of Section 20; thence East along the North line of Section 28 to the Northeast corner of the Northwest quarter of the Northwest quarter of Section 28; thence South along the East line of the West half of the Northwest quarter of Section 28; to the Southeast corner of the Southwest quarter of the Northwest quarter of Section 28; thence East to the center of Section 28; thence South along the North/South quarter line of Section 28 to the South quarter corner of Section 28; thence North 89 degrees, 58 minutes, 20 seconds West 1324.74 feet along South line of Section 28; thence South 00 degrees, 47 minutes, 32 seconds West 212.18 feet; thence South 89 degrees, 35 minutes, 38 seconds West 1315.23 feet to the East line of Section 32; thence South along the East line of Section 32 to the Southeast corner of Section 32;thence Westerly to the Northwest corner of Section 4, Novi Township; thence Southerly along the West line of Section 4 to the Northwest corner of the Southwest quarter of the Northwest quarter of Section 4; thence East along the North line of the Southwest quarter of the Northwest quarter to the East line of the Southwest quarter of the Northwest quarter Section 4; thence Southerly along the East line of the West half of the West half of Sections 4 and 9 to the Southeast corner of the West half of the Southwest quarter of Section 9; thence Westerly along the South line of Sections 9, 8 and 7 to the Southwest corner of Section 7; thence Northerly along the West line of Sections 7 and 6 to the Northwest corner of Section 6, the same being the Northwest corner of Novi Township; thence Northerly along Sections 31 and 30, Commerce Township, to beginning. 
    5777.67 acres /9.0276 square miles 
CHAPTER 2 - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Sec. 2.1. - General powers. 
    Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the City and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including all powers, privileges and immunities which cities are, or may be, permitted to provide in their charters by Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 of the State of Michigan, as amended, as fully and completely as though these powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities herein be held to be exclusive. 
    The City and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated herein or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the City, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the Constitution and general laws of this state, and provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 2.2. - Further definition of powers. 
    In addition to the powers possessed by the City under the Constitution and statutes, and those set forth throughout this charter, the City shall have power with respect to, and may, by ordinance and other lawful acts of its officers, provide for the following, subject to any specific limitations placed thereon by this charter: 
A.  The acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or in any manner permitted by statute, of private property of every type and nature for public use, which property may be located within or without the County of Oakland, and which may be required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of the purposes, powers and duties of the City, either proprietary or otherwise; 
B.  The maintenance, development, operation, leasing and disposal of City property subject to any restrictions placed thereon by Statute or this charter; 
C.  The refunding of money advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions; 
D.  The installation and connection of conduits for the service of municipally owned and operated electric lighting plants; 
E.  The purchase or condemnation of the franchises and of the property used in the operation of companies or individuals engaged in the cemetery, hospital, almshouse, electric light, gas, heat, water and power business; 
F.  The use, regulation, improvement and control of the surface of such streets, alleys and public ways, and of the space above and beneath them; 
G.  The use, by other than the owner, of property located in streets, alleys and public places, in the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation to the owners thereof; 
H.  A plan of streets and alleys within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the municipal limits; 
I.  The use, control and regulation of streams, waters and watercourses within its boundaries, subject to any limitations imposed by statute; 
J.  The installation of parking meters on streets within the corporation limits, provided same is done by referendum only; 
K.  The acquiring, establishment, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits including also the fixing and collection of charges for services and use thereof on a public utility basis, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
L.  Regulating, restricting location of oil and gasoline stations; 
M.  The control over all trees, shrubs and plants in the public streets, highways, parks or other public places in the City, all dead and diseased trees on private property, and trees on private property overhanging the street, sidewalk or public places, and the removal thereof, and the assessing cost thereof against the property in accordance with Chapter 11, Section 9; 
N.  For regulating shipping, dockage, storage, warehousing and all other commercial and/or other industrial waterfront uses, and the regulating, restricting and limiting the number and location of boat liveries; 
O.  The establishing of districts or zones within which the use of land and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the density of population may be regulated by ordinance in accordance with statutory provisions governing zoning; 
P.  The regulating of trades, occupations and amusements within the City, not inconsistent with state and federal laws, and for the prohibiting of such trades, occupations, and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals or welfare of its inhabitants; 
Q.  Licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards within the City; 
R.  The preventing of injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the City from anything which is dangerous, offensive or unhealthful, and for preventing and abating nuisances and punishing those occasioning them or neglecting or refusing to abate, discontinue or remove the same; 
S.  The prescribing of the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended or revoked; requiring payment of reasonable sums for licenses, and requiring the furnishing of a bond to the City for the faithful observance of the conditions under which licenses are granted, and otherwise conditioning such licenses as the Council may prescribe; 
T.  The regulating of all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the purpose of promoting and preserving the public peace, safety and welfare, controlling and regulating the use of air above the City by aircraft of all types; 
U.  The prohibiting or regulating of the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers within the City, and the right of the City to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever; 
V.  The requiring of an owner of real property within the City to maintain sidewalks abutting upon such property, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, or if the owner is unknown, to construct and maintain such sidewalks and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in accordance with Chapter 11, Section 9; 
W.  The requiring of an owner of real property within the City to abate public hazards and nuisances which are dangerous to the health or safety of inhabitants of the City within a reasonable time after the Council notifies him that such hazard or nuisance exists, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, or if the owner is unknown, to abate such hazard or nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such property in accordance with Chapter 11, Section 9; 
X.  The compelling of owners of real property within the City to keep sidewalks abutting upon their property clear from snow, ice or other obstructions, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, to remove such snow, ice or other obstructions and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in accordance with Chapter 11, Section 9; 
Y.  Requiring the platting of all land or premises within the City hereafter subdivided, in accordance with the terms and conditions as may be provided by ordinance, subject to any limitations imposed by statute. 
Sec. 2.3. - Intergovernmental contracts. 
    The City shall have power to join with any governmental unit or agency, or with any number or combination thereof by contract or otherwise as may be permitted by law to have performed (a) jointly, or (b) by one or more of them for or on behalf of the other or others, or (c) by any other person, firm or corporation, any power or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or which is possessed by, or imposed upon, each such governmental unit or agency. Any such contract or contracts shall not unduly bind the City. 
CHAPTER 3 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Qualifications of electors. 
    The residents of the City having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan shall be electors of the City. 
A.  No person shall hold any elective office of the City unless he has been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the last day for filing original petitions for such office or prior to the time of his appointment to fill a vacancy. No person shall hold any elective office unless he is a qualified and registered elector of the City such last day for filing or at such time of appointment and throughout his tenure of office. 
Sec. 3.2. - Election procedure. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a nonpartisan basis. The general statutes shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections, except as such statutes relate to political parties or partisan procedure, and except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
    The Clerk shall give public notice of the time and place of holding each City election and of the officers to be elected and the questions to be voted upon, in the same manner as is required by statute for the giving of public notice of general elections in the state. 
    The polls at all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections, subject to the statutory right of the Council to adjust these hours to local time. 
Sec. 3.3. - Wards and precincts. 
    The City of Wixom shall consist of one ward. The precincts into which the City is divided on the effective date of this Charter shall remain the precincts of the City until changed, pursuant to this charter. The Election Commission, as created in Section 3.12, shall from time to time establish convenient election precincts. 
Sec. 3.4. - Regular city elections. 
    The Regular City Election, to be known as the "Odd-Year General Election," shall be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year. All odd-year Primary and General Elections shall be conducted in the manner elections for State and County offices are conducted. 
Sec. 3.5. - Special elections. 
    Special City Elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least sixty (60) days in advance of such election, or when required by this charter or by statute. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more special elections shall be called in any one year than permitted by statute. 
Sec. 3.6. - Elective officers and terms of office. 
    The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor and six Councilpersons, all of whom shall be nominated and elected from the City at large. At each regular City election, there shall be elected a Mayor for a term of office of two years, three Councilpersons for a term of office of four years, and such additional number of Councilpersons as may be required to fill vacancies, pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.11 of this Charter. All of such terms of office shall commence at 12:00 Noon on January 1st following the Election. Vacancies in the office of Mayor shall be filled in accordance with Section 4.11 of this Charter. 
Sec. 3.7. - Primary elections. 
    A nonpartisan primary election to be known as the "odd year primary election" shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in August of each odd-numbered year except that a City Council may provide by ordinance adopted not less than seven months preceding the date of any regularly scheduled City odd year general election that all regularly scheduled City odd year primary elections shall be held on the Tuesday following the second Monday in September. 
    If, upon the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for any elective City office, valid petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for the respective offices to be elected at the following regular City elections, then no primary shall be held with respect to such offices. If no primary is to be held for one or more offices, the Clerk shall publish notice of the fact and the reason therefor as part of, or at the time provided for, the publication of notices for such primary election. 
    Candidates, equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected to each City office at the next subsequent regular City election, who receive the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the respective offices for which they are candidates. The nomination petitions for any office for which no primary election was held, shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission as nominees for the next subsequent regular City election. 
Sec. 3.8. - Nominations. 
    The method of nomination of all candidates for the City elections shall be by petition. Such petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less than forty (40) nor more than sixty (60) registered electors of the City. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to said office at the following regular City election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than he is permitted to sign, such signatures shall be counted only to the extent he is permitted to sign in the order of the respective dates and hour of filing the petitions containing such signatures. 
    Nomination petitions shall be filed with the Clerk up to 4:00 P.M. on the seventh Tuesday prior to the odd-year primary election or any special election for the filling of vacancies in office.* 
    The Clerk shall, prior to every City election, publish notice of the last day permitted for filing nomination petitions and of the number of persons to be nominated or elected to each office at least one week and not more than three weeks, before such day. 
*Note- The charter language pertaining to filing nominating petitions for regular city elections is superseded by Michigan Election Law MCL 168.644e as amended under PA 276 of 2012. The candidate nomination petition filing deadline is 4:00 p.m. the fifteenth Tuesday prior to the odd year primary election. ( Res. No. 2017-51, 10-24-2017 ) 
Sec. 3.9. - Form of petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Secretary of State for the nomination of nonpartisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk. 
A.  Each candidate for elective office shall file with his petition, his affidavit that he possesses the qualifications for such office provided in this charter. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate his petition. 
Sec. 3.10. - Approval of petition. 
    The Clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform substantially with the forms provided by statute and which contain the required number of signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for the respective elective city offices as set forth in this charter. The Clerk shall forthwith, following the last date for filing of the petitions, notify in writing any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements. 
    Withdrawal of a candidate's name from consideration on the ballot must be made by a signed writing and in conformance with the time allowed by statute. 
Sec. 3.11. - Public inspection of petitions. 
    All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
Sec. 3.12. - Election commission. 
    The Election Commission is hereby created consisting of the Clerk, Attorney and the Assessor. The members shall serve without compensation. The Clerk shall be the Chairperson. The Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct, and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by state law and this charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to follow. 
Sec. 3.13. - Form of ballot. 
    The ballots for all elections under this charter shall conform to the printing and numbering of ballots as required by statute, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear on any City ballot. 
Sec. 3.14. - Canvass of votes. 
    The Board of Canvassers designated by statute as being permitted to cities for canvass of votes on candidates and issues shall canvass the votes of all City elections in accordance with statute. The Clerk shall notify in writing the successful candidates of their election and do so upon receipt of the results from the Board of Canvassers. 
Sec. 3.15. - Tie vote. 
    If at any City Election there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two (2) or more candidates having received an equal number of votes, then the procedure for determination of the election of such candidate shall be as prescribed by state statute. 
Sec. 3.16. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any City Election for any office, or upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
Sec. 3.17. - Recall. 
    Any elective official may be removed from office by the registered electors of the City in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by the recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by state law. Recall shall be based upon either the commission of a wrongful act or the failure to perform the duties of office. 
CHAPTER 4 - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec 4.1. - Composition. 
    There shall be a Mayor and six (6) Councilmembers elected by the qualified voters of the City at large. 
Sec. 4.2. - Qualifications. 
    No person shall hold any elective office of the City unless he has been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the last day for filing original petitions for such office or prior to the time of his appointment to fill a vacancy. No person shall hold any elective office unless he is a qualified and registered elector of the City on such last day for filing or at such time of appointment and throughout his tenure of office. 
    All officers of the City shall be United States citizens. 
Sec. 4.3. - Judge of qualifications. 
    The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office and, for that purpose, shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. Failure to comply with a subpoena or request for evidence, without just cause, will constitute a violation of this Charter. Any person found guilty of such a violation, by a competent tribunal, may be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
Sec. 4.4. - Forfeiture of office; right to 
    hearing. 
    A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his office shall be enTitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City at least one week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the Council under this Section shall be subject to review by the Courts. 
Sec. 4.5. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer, elective or appointive, before entering upon the duties of his office shall take the Oath of Office prescribed for public officers by the State Constitution for an Officer of the State, which shall be filed and kept in the Office of the Clerk. 
Sec. 4.6. - Compensation. 
    The Council may determine the annual salary of Councilmembers and Mayor by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing or decreasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of Councilmembers elected at the next Regular Election, provided that such election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least six months. Councilmembers shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 4.7. - Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall be a member of the Council. In addition, he shall preside at meetings of the Council and vote at such meetings as any other member of the Council. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of the City government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no administrative duties unless expressly authorized by this Charter or statute. The Council shall elect from among its members a Deputy Mayor who shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor and, if a vacancy occurs, shall become Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 4.8. - General powers and duties. 
    The Council shall constitute the Legislative Body of the City and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this charter, state constitution, or by statute, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the City, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper. 
Sec. 4.9. - City clerk. 
    The Council shall appoint the City Clerk, to serve at the pleasure of the Council, who shall: 
A.  Be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend its meetings and keep its journal. 
B.  Keep a public record of all proceedings of the Council and shall authenticate the same by signature. 
C.  Certify by signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or adopted by the Council. 
D.  Be custodian of all papers, documents, bonds, and records pertaining to the City, unless the custody thereof is otherwise provided by law or this charter. 
E.  Be custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to documents and attest the same. 
F.  Give notice to the proper officials of the expiration or termination of each franchise and contract to which the City is a party and to City officers, personally, of the expiration of the terms of their respective offices and of any official bonds required of them. 
G.  Under authority of the Council, sign or countersign all contracts, deeds, licenses, or other public documents, on behalf of the City, and keep a record. 
H.  Publish and post all notices, proceedings, and other matters required to be published or posted by law, this charter, or ordinance. 
I.  Be the chief elections officer of the City. 
J.  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or the ordinances and resolutions of the Council. 
Sec. 4.10. - Prohibitions. 
A.  No elective officer may be appointed to any other City office or be employed by the City during the time he holds office unless an elective officer is required by law to fill a specified position. 
B.  Neither the Council nor any of its members shall be authorized to dictate the appointment or removal of any City administrative officers or employees whom the Manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Council may openly express its views and fully and freely discuss with the Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
C.  Except for the purpose of information, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor any member shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the Manager except by ordinance or resolution. 
Sec. 4.11. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; removal; filing of vacancies. 
A.  The office of Councilperson or other elected official shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of his office. 
B.  An elected official shall forfeit his office within sixty (60) days of verification that he or she: 
1.  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law, 
2.  Violated any express prohibition of this charter, 
3.  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or 
4.  Failed to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council without providing prior notification. 
C.  An elected official shall be removed by Council for any act declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office. Such removals by the Council shall be made only after hearing of which such officer has been given notice by the Clerk at least ten (10) days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at his last known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross-examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal. A majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal may be being considered, shall be required for any such removal. 
D.  Vacancies occurring in the office of Mayor shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term of the Mayor by the Deputy Mayor, and vacancies occurring in the office of Deputy Mayor shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term of the Deputy Mayor by appointment of a member of the Council. Such appointment shall create a vacancy in the office of Councilperson for the unexpired term of the office of Mayor. 
E.  Vacancies occurring in the office of Council for more than one hundred twenty (120) days before the next regular City election shall be filled within sixty (60) days by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council, said appointee to hold office until the Monday following such election, at which election such vacancies shall be filled as provided in Chapter 3, Section 6, for any balance of original unexpired term. 
    Any vacancies which occur for one hundred twenty (120) days or less before the next regular City election, shall not be filled. 
    If any vacancy in the office of Council which the Council is authorized to fill is not so filled within sixty (60) days after such vacancy occurs, or if three or more vacancies exist simultaneously in the office of Council, such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election. In connection with any special election to fill a vacancy or vacancies in any elective office, no primary election shall be held; candidates shall nominated by petitions in a manner identical to that provided in chapter 3, Sections 8 to 11 inclusive; the names of all qualified candidates who file sufficient valid nomination petitions thirty (30) days before each special election shall be certified to the Election Commission and placed on the ballot; and all other provisions of this charter, not inconsistent with this Section shall govern. 
F.  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the filling of vacancies resulting from recall. 
Sec. 4.12. - Independent boards and commissions. 
A.  The Council may not create any board or commission, other than those provided for in this charter, statute and constitution, to administer any activity, department or agency of the City government. 
B.  The Council is authorized to create a board or commission to administer: 
1.  A municipal hospital, 
2.  A municipal cemetery, 
3.  Recreation, or 
4.  Any activity which by statute is required to be so administered. 
C.  The Council may also establish: 
1.  Quasi judicial appeal boards, and 
2.  Boards or commissions to serve solely in an advisory capacity. 
D.  Unless otherwise provided by law or this charter, all members of the city's Boards and Commissions shall be appointed by the Mayor as each respective term expires, but such appointment shall not be effective until it is confirmed by majority vote of the City Council. If the appointment is not made, however, within 30 days from date of expiration of the said term, then the Council shall have the right to so appoint. 
E.  Each member of a City Board or Commission shall have been a resident of the City for at least one year prior to the date of his appointment, and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City on such day and through his tenure of office. Exception to this residency requirement may be granted if the reason for appointment of a particular individual conflicts with this paragraph. 
Sec. 4.13. - Quorum of boards or commissions. 
    Except as provided otherwise in this charter, a quorum of any board or commission created by or pursuant to this charter shall be a majority of the members of such board or commission in office at the time, but not less than two members. 
Sec. 4.14. - Vacancies in boards and commissions. 
    The office of any member of any board or commission, created by or pursuant to this charter, shall be declared vacant by the Council before the expiration of the term of such office: 
A.  For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
B.  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter; 
C.  If such officer shall miss all consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission for a period of two months, or twenty-five percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absences shall be excused by such board or commission, and the reason entered in the proceedings of such board or commission at the time of each absence; 
D.  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
E.  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, if a vacancy occurs in the membership of any appointive board or commission, the authority responsible for the appointment of the person whose position has become vacant shall fill such vacancy by appointment of a qualified person for the unexpired term of such person. 
Sec. 4.15. - Council procedure and miscellaneous powers and duties. 
A.  Regular Meetings. The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two such meetings each month. 
B.  Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk's Office on the written request of the Mayor or any three members of the Council on at least twenty-four hours written notice to each member of the Council, served personally or left at his usual place of residence, but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. A meeting may be called on shorter notice, with approval of Council. 
C.  Business of Special Meetings. No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, other than the enactment of an ordinance, any business which may lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at a special meeting if all the members of the Council present consent and all of the members absent file their written consent. 
D.  Meeting To Be Public. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in accordance with rules adopted by the Council. All business of the Council shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976 as amended. 
E.  Quorum: Adjournment of Meeting. A majority of the members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all Council meetings, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members, the Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one week. 
F.  Compulsory Attendance. Any three or more members of the Council may by vote either request or compel the attendance of officers of the City at any meeting. Any member of the Council or other officer who when notified of such request for his attendance fails to attend such meeting for reason other than confining illness or absence from Oakland County, shall be guilty of misconduct in office, unless excused by the Council. 
G.  Conduct at Meeting. The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings. Any police officer designated by the presiding officer of the meeting shall serve as the Sergeant-at-arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
H.  Organization and Rules of the Council. The Council shall determine its own organization and shall adopt a set of rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Minutes of the procedure of each meeting in the English language shall be kept by the Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting within sixty (60) days of the time of approval. 
2.  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" and "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state. 
3.  No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he or his immediate family has a direct financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called, unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote, when required by this paragraph, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
4.  In all roll call votes the names of the members of the Council shall be called in alphabetical order, and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call. 
I.  Investigations. The Council or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Council for such purposes, may summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence. There shall be given reasonable notice and reasonable time and place. 
    Failure on the part of any officer to obey such summons or to produce books, papers and other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section, shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey such summons or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section, shall constitute a violation of this charter, which may be enforceable in court. 
    It is provided further that, in case of failure on the part of any persons to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence as so ordered, the Council may invoke the aid of the Circuit Court of Oakland County in requiring obeyance of such summons or production of such books, papers and other evidence. The Circuit Court in Oakland County, in case of contumacy or refusal to obey such summons, or to produce such books, papers and other evidence may issue an order requiring such person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence to also give evidence touching the matter in question. 
J.  Public Health and Safety. The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Council may create by ordinance a Board of Health, and until such adoption, the Mayor shall appoint a Health Officer, who shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to a Board of Health by statute, and who shall perform such duties as may be provided by statute, the charter and the Mayor and/or the Council. Compensation of the Board of Health and the Health Officer shall be fixed by the Council. 
Sec. 4.16. - Special procedure on vote on certain council actions. 
A.  Action to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place, or part thereof, shall be by resolution. After the introduction of such resolution and before its final adoption, the Council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date. 
B.  Passage of the following actions shall require the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the Council. 
1.  Vacating, discontinuing or abolishing any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place, or part thereof. 
2.  Leasing, selling or disposing or any City owned real estate or interest therein. 
3.  Authorizing the condemnation of private property for public use. 
4.  Creating or abolishing any office not required by the Charter. 
5.  Adoption of budget or modifications of budget. 
6.  Imposing any tax or assessment. 
7.  Reconsidering or rescinding any vote of the Council. 
C.  The Council shall not have power to engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of the amount permitted to be so invested by statute unless approved by a three-fifths vote of the electors voting at any general or special election. 
CHAPTER 5 - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 5.1. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    The Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term and fix the compensation. The Manager shall be appointed on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and experience. The Manager need not be a resident of the City or State at the time of his appointment but may reside outside the City while in office only with the approval of the Council. 
Sec. 5.2. - Authority and duties of the city manager. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all City affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter. The City Manager shall have the authority and duty to: 
A.  Appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the City, suspend or remove all City employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by and under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
B.  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
C.  Attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
D.  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, ordinances and resolutions of the Council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
E.  Prepare and submit an annual budget and capital program to the Council. 
F.  Submit to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year. 
G.  Make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of the City departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
H.  Keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as he deems desirable. 
I.  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the Council. 
J.  Perform all actions in accordance with all applicable law and the constitution. 
Sec. 5.3. - Acting city manager. 
    By letter filed with the City Clerk, the Manager shall designate, subject to approval of the Council, a qualified City administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of Manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the City to serve until the Manager shall return or his disability shall cease. 
Sec. 5.4. - Removal. 
A.  The City Manager shall not be removed from office during a period of ninety (90) days following any regular City election except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council. 
B.  The Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the Manager. 
C.  Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the Manager, he may file with the Clerk a written request for a hearing. This hearing shall be held at a Council meeting not earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the request is filed. The Manager may file with the Council a written reply not later than five (5) days before the hearing. A record of the hearing shall be kept. 
D.  The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five (5) days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the Manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested one. The final resolution shall state the reason for the action. 
E.  The Manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
CHAPTER 6 - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 

Sec. 6.1. - General provisions. 
A.  The Council may establish City departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this charter specifically provides, assigned to any other. 
B.  All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and supervision of the Manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager. With the consent of Council, the Manager may either serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices or agencies or appoint one person as the head of two or more of them. 
C.  The Manager shall appoint, with approval of Council, the City Attorney, City Assessor, City Treasurer, who shall be designated and referred to as the Finance Director, Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Director of Public Works and such additional appointive administrative officers or departments as may be created by ordinance, all of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the Manager. 
Sec. 6.2. - City attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall be legal officer of the City and shall serve as chief legal adviser to the Council, the Manager and all City departments, offices and agencies; shall represent the City in legal proceedings; and shall perform any other duties prescribed by this charter or by ordinance. With the consent of Council, the City Attorney may delegate other attorneys to serve as representative in specific matters. 
Sec. 6.3. - Finance director (city treasurer). 
A.  The Finance Director shall have custody of all moneys, funds and securities of the City, keep accounts thereof, deposit the same in the manner and in the places designated by the Manager, subject to applicable laws, and report the same forthwith in detail to the Manager. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by ordinance, he shall collect all moneys of the City. He shall receive from other officers and employees all moneys belonging to and receivable by the City that may be collected by them, and shall give receipt. 
C.  For the collection of taxes he shall have and shall exercise all of the powers and immunities which are granted and reserved to him by this charter and by law. 
D.  He shall disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of law and this charter, and shall sign or countersign all checks or warrants accordingly. 
E.  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by law, this charter, or ordinances or resolutions of the Council. 
Sec. 6.4. - Assessor. 
    The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in him and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by statute, and he shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this charter, or ordinance or by statute. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him in this charter, by ordinance and/or by the Manager. 
Sec. 6.5. - Chief of police. 
    The Chief of Police shall be the administrative head of the Police Department, and he shall be accountable and responsible to the Manager for the performance of his duties. He shall perform all duties as may be prescribed for him by law, this charter, the Manager and/or ordinance or resolutions of the Council. 
Sec. 6.6. - Fire chief. 
    The Fire Chief shall be the administrative head of the Fire Department and he shall be accountable and responsible to the Manager for the performance of his duties. He shall perform all duties as may be prescribed for him by law, this charter, the Manager, and/or ordinances or resolutions of the Council. 
Sec. 6.7. - Director of public works. 
    The Director of Public Works shall be the administrative head of the Department of Public Works, and he shall be accountable and responsible to the Manager for the performance of his duties. 
    He shall be responsible for the maintenance, alteration, improvement and repair of streets, highways, sewers, sewage disposal facilities, water mains and water facilities, and all other public grounds, buildings, facilities and equipment which are not placed under the charge of some other department or this Charter, the Manager, and/or Council, in accordance with the authority granted by this charter. 
    He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, this charter, or as may be required of him by the Manager, and/or ordinances or resolutions of the Council. 
Sec. 6.8. - Personnel. 
A.  The personnel of the City, other than elected and appointive officers, shall be deemed City employees. The Council may establish a merit system for the selection, tenure, promotion, demotion, discharge and discipline of City employees. 
B.  In the selection, discharge and fixing of terms and conditions of employment of City employees, the City shall not discriminate in violation of any applicable provision of the constitution or law. 
C.  The head of each department shall have the power to hire, suspend, discharge or otherwise take other appropriate disciplinary action with respect to the employees of his department, with confirmation of the Manager and in accordance with established merit system policy. 
Sec. 6.9. - Filling vacancies in 
    appointive offices. 
    Vacancies in appointive administrative offices and boards and commissions shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. 
Sec. 6.10. - Residence requirements for appointive officers. 
    Any appointed administrative officer of the City, as outlined in Sections 6-1 through 6-9 of this charter, shall not be required to be a resident of the City at the time of appointment but may reside outside the City while in office only with the approval of the Council. 
Sec. 6.11. - Compensation. 
A.  The compensation of all employees and officers of the City not provided for in this charter shall be fixed by the Council within the limits of budget appropriations, and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Council. 
B.  No officers shall be paid on a fee basis. The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees as fixed pursuant to this charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. This provision shall not apply to statutory fees. 
C.  Any such fees, commissions and other compensation shall belong to the City and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid to the Finance Director. 
D.  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the City. 
Sec. 6.12. - Employee welfare benefits. 
    The Council shall have the power to adopt and make available to the administrative officers and employees of the City and its departments and boards, any recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health or accident insurance, either independently of, or as a supplement to, any retirement plan provided for such employees and officers. 
Sec. 6.13. - Employee retirement system. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for a retirement system for the City employees. The objective of the retirement system, if created, shall be for a sound and efficient means of providing retirement allowances for the employees of the City to the end that economy and efficiency in public service may be effected and an ordinary method of retirement be provided without hardship and prejudice to employees who have become superannuated or incapacitated. The terms and conditions of the ordinance, if enacted, shall be determined by the Council. 
CHAPTER 7 - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 7.1. - Prior legislation. 
    All valid by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and/or regulations of the City in force at time of adoption of this Charter, which are not inconsistent with this charter, shall continue in full force until such time as they may be repealed or amended. All previous charter provisions are repealed. 
Sec. 7.2. - Ordinances. 
    Any and all proposed ordinances shall be introduced through the City Council headed "The City of Wixom Ordains." 
    All ordinances, including revisions, amendments or alterations shall be identified by a short title, a number and code section number. 
    All ordinances and ordinance amendments shall, when enacted, be recorded by the City Clerk; and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to properly record in the "Ordinance Book" an accurate record of such action, including proper certification and time and place of publications and postings of such documents. The City Clerk shall have all such recorded entries witnessed by the Mayor or other elected official of the City. 
Sec. 7.3. - Enactment, amendment, repeal and effective date of ordinances. 
    The following provisions shall apply to ordinances: 
A.  Ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of the majority members of the Council, which shall be not less than four (4) affirmative votes. 
B.  No ordinance shall be amended or repealed except by a subsequently adopted ordinance. 
C.  No ordinance shall be enacted at a meeting at which it is introduced nor until the summary of the proposed ordinance has been published in the official newspaper of the City. Copies of the proposed ordinance shall be available at the Office of the City Clerk. 
D.  The effective date of all ordinances shall be the date of publication, unless a different date is specified therein; however, the effective date shall not be earlier than ten (10) days after the enactment nor before publication. 
E.  The following provision shall apply and take precedence over (a) thru (d) above: 
1.  An emergency ordinance which is immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety, may be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced, and may be given earlier effect than ten (10) days after its enactment and before publication. Emergency reasons shall be stated. 
2.  No ordinance granting any public utility franchise shall be enacted except in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.2. 
3.  No ordinance shall be amended by reference to the title only. The section or sections of the ordinance to be amended shall be re-enacted and published. However, an ordinance or section may be repealed by reference to its title, or to its ordinance or code number only. 
Sec. 7.4. - Publication of ordinances. 
A.  Each ordinance shall be published within fifteen (15) days after its enactment in one of the following two methods: 
1.  The full text may be published in a newspaper as defined in Section 16.2, or 
2.  In cases of ordinances over five hundred words in length, a digest, summary or statement of purpose of the ordinance approved by the Council, may be published in a newspaper as defined in Section 16.2, either separately or as part of the published Council proceedings, including with such newspaper publication, a notice that printed copies of the full text of the ordinance are available for inspection by and distribution to the public, upon request, at the office of the Clerk; shall promptly be made available as stated in such notice. 
B.  In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than ten (10) days after its enactment, the requirements for publication before such ordinance becomes operative may be met by posting copies in conspicuous locations in three (3) public places in the City, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, and the Clerk shall, immediately after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance, a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting, which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of such publication by posting of the ordinance, but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. Such ordinance shall also be published in accordance with Section 7.4, but not as a requirement for the effectiveness. 
Sec. 7.5. - Penalties-Ordinance violation. 
    Penalties for violation of a specific ordinance must be stipulated in the ordinance. 
Sec. 7.6. - Technical codes adopted by reference. 
    The Council may adopt as an Ordinance, by reference in the adopting ordinance, in whole or in part, provisions of (a) any Michigan Statute which the City is authorized to enforce, or (b) any detailed technical regulation promulgated or enacted by (1) any state or federal agency, or (2) any organization or association which has developed a nationally recognized standard code or set of such technical regulations. Such adopting ordinance shall clearly identify and state the purpose of the provisions or regulations so adopted. Where any ordinance or code, or amendment, adopting provisions by reference is enacted, all requirements for its publication may be met, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, by (a) publishing the ordinance citing such provisions in a manner provided by this charter for the publication of other ordinances and including as part of such publication a notice that printed copies of the provisions so cited are available for inspection and distribution to the public at the office of the Clerk, and (b) making copies available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge. 
Sec. 7.7. - Severability of ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application of the ordinance to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application. 
Sec 7.8. - ompilation or codification of ordinances. 
    With the completion and approval of this revised charter by the electors, a compilation or current codification of ordinances shall be printed in proper form to be available two (2) years after the effective date of this charter. The codification shall be reviewed at least once in every ten (10) years, including all deletions and/or additions, revisions of ordinances of this City. 
Sec. 7.9. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, as provided below. 
Sec. 7.10. - Initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the registered electors of the city, as of the date of the last regular City election. All signatures on said petitions shall be obtained within thirty (30) days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council, and may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to contents and simultaneously filed by one person. An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance or part it proposes to have repealed. 
    Each signer of a petition shall sign his name and indicate the date of signing and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator, stating the number of signers, and that each signature is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the circulator. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen (15) days, canvass the signatures. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the City, the Clerk shall immediately notify the person filing such petition and fifteen (15) days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting, accompanied by a certification that the petition complies with the requirements of this charter. 
Sec. 7.11. - Council procedure on initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    Upon receiving a duly certified initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall, within sixty (60) days, unless otherwise provided by statute, either: 
A.  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by initiatory petition; 
B.  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendary petition; or 
C.  Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
Sec. 7.12. - Submission of initiatory and referendary ordinances to electors. 
A.  Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the City for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election called for that specific purpose. 
B.  In the case of an initiatory petition, if no election is to be held in the City for any other purpose within one hundred and fifty (150) days from the time the petition is presented to the Council and the Council does not adopt the ordinance, then the Council shall set a date for a special election within sixty (60) days from the time that the petition is presented to the Council. The date of the election shall be within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the time the petition is presented to the Council. 
C.  The result of the election shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting, except in cases where otherwise required by statute or the Constitution. 
Sec. 7.13. - Ordinance suspended: miscellaneous provisions on initiatory and referendary ordinance. 
    The presentation to the Council by the Clerk of a valid and sufficient referendary petition containing a number of signatures equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the registered electors of the City as of the date of the last regular election shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending a vote by the Council or final determination by the electors. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed for a period of one year after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of one year after the date of the election at which it was repealed. It is provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the provisions of this charter or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. 
    If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
CHAPTER 8 - GENERAL FINANCE 

Sec. 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City and of all its agencies shall begin on the first day of July of each year, and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
Sec. 8.2. - Budget procedure. 
    The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City Council on or before the first regular meeting of April of each year, a recommended budget covering the forthcoming fiscal year and shall include all of the items required by Section 15 of Act 621 of the Public Acts of 1978, as the same may be amended or superseded, and shall include the following: 
A.  Detailed estimates, with supporting explanations, of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the City, together with the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full and for the current fiscal year to March 1, and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
B.  Statements for the bonded and other indebtedness of the City, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued and the condition of sinking funds, if any. 
C.  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the City from sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full and for the current fiscal year to March 1, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
D.  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year. 
E.  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bonds issued, which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
F.  Such other supporting information as the Council may request. 
Sec. 8.3. - Budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place within the City as the Council shall direct. Notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing, which shall also include notice that the proposed budget and the three preceding fiscal budgets are on file in the office of the Clerk. The complete proposed budget and the three preceding fiscal budgets shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period of not less than one week prior to such hearing. 
Sec. 8.4. - Adoption of activity budget. 
    Not later than the second regular monthly meeting in May the Council shall by resolution, adopt an activity budget for the next fiscal year and shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes during such year, and shall in such resolution provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes, subject to the limitations contained in Section 9.2. 
Sec. 8.5. - Budget control. 
    After the budget has been adopted and effective, no money 
shall be drawn from the treasury of the City nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The Council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion from one department fund or agency to another. The balance in any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the fund balance and be reappropriated during the next fiscal year. 
    The City Manager shall submit to the Council, at the beginning of each quarterly period of the fiscal year, and more often if requested, financial reports showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within income. If the revenues exceed the amounts estimated in the budget, the Council may make supplemental appropriations. 
    The Council may make additional appropriations during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year exceed the revenues as estimated in the budget unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
Sec. 8.6. - Depository. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for the City funds. The Council shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Sec. 8.7. - Independent audit: annual report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all City accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant experienced in municipal accounting selected by the Council. 
    The City Manager shall submit an annual report of the affairs of the City, including a financial report. Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the Clerk within thirty (30) days after receipt of the audit. 
Sec. 8.8. - System of accounts. 
    The City Manager shall be responsible to establish and maintain a uniform system of accounts as required by law. 
CHAPTER 9 - TAXATION 

Sec. 9.1. - Subjects of taxation. 
    The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for State, County and school purposes under the general law of the State. 
Sec. 9.2. - Taxation procedure; tax limit. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, City taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by State law. The annual general ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed eight (8) mills of the assessed value of all real and personal property, subject to taxation in the City. 
    There shall be allowed for the levy and collection each year, commencing July 1, 1996 and effective through and including July 1, 2010, of an additional one and fifteen hundredths (1.15) mills of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City for the sole and exclusive purpose of providing additional revenues for routine and ongoing maintenance of local roads and streets under the City's jurisdiction in the City. 
    There shall be allowed for the levy and collection each year, commencing July 1, 2011 and effective through and including July 1, 2025, of an additional one and fifteen hundredths (1.15) mills of the taxable value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City for the sole and exclusive purpose of providing additional revenues for routine and ongoing maintenance of local roads and streets under the City's jurisdiction in the City. 
    There shall be allowed for the levy and collection each year, commencing July 1, 2009 and effective through and including July 1, 2023, of an additional three tenths (.30) mill of the taxable value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City for the purpose of the construction, maintenance, repair and rehabilitation of safety paths and sidewalks under the jurisdiction of the City. 
    There shall be allowed for the levy and collection each year, commencing July 1, 1996 and effective through and including July 1, 2001, of an additional three tenths (.30) mill of the taxable value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City for the sole and exclusive purpose of providing additional revenues for bike path construction, including property acquisition and planning therefor, in the City. (Amended by voters on Nov. 7, 1995; Nov. 4, 2008) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2008-60, adopted July 22, 2008, and Res. No. 2008-64, adopted Aug. 12, 2008, place two separate charter amendments to Section 9.2 before the voters. Both amendments were approved at the election held on Nov. 4, 2008. 
Sec. 9.3. - Assessment roll. 
    The Assessor shall, in accordance with State law, make and certify an assessment roll of all persons and property in the City liable to taxation. 
Sec. 9.4. - Board of review. 
    The Board of Review shall be composed of three (3) qualified electors of the City, but not officers or employees of the City nor candidates for office. The terms of the Board of Review members appointed under the previous charter shall continue for the balance of their respective terms. One (1) member of the board shall be appointed by the Council annually in January for a term of three (3) years. The board shall constitute a Board of Review for all tax assessments. The Assessor shall be the clerk of the board, shall keep a record of its proceedings and may be heard at its meetings, but shall have no vote. The Council shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board of Review each year previous to the first meeting of the board. The board shall annually in February select its own chairperson for the ensuing year and determine its rules of procedure. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
Sec. 9.5. - Meeting of board of review. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in accordance with statute to review and correct the assessment roll and shall remain in session for a minimum of two (2) days. Taxpayers shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
Sec. 9.6. - Notice of meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of Review shall be published by the Assessor at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting. 
Sec. 9.7. - Endorsement of assessment roll. 
    The Board of Review shall endorse the assessment roll as provided by general law. Such roll shall be the assessment roll of the City for all tax purposes. 
Sec. 9.8. - Certify tax levy to assessor. 
    Within three (3) days after the adoption by the Council of the budget for the next fiscal year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the amount of the tax levy fixed by the Council which the Assessor shall proceed to assess to each person and piece of property on the assessment roll, together with all special assessments as well as any other amounts which the Council may require, under authority of State law or this charter or determine to be assessed or reassessed against any property or person. 
Sec. 9.9. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
    After spreading the taxes the Assessor shall certify the tax roll and attach his warrant directing the Finance Director to collect prior to the date required by statute, from the several persons named in the roll the several sums mentioned opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment. The tax roll shall be delivered to the Finance Director for collection on or before the fifth day of June. 
Sec. 9.10. - Tax lien. 
    On July first, the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall, on such due date, become a lien upon such real property for such amounts and for all interest and charges, and all personal property taxes shall become a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens to the extent provided by law and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges are paid. 
Sec. 9.11. - Taxes due: notification. 
    City taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of July of each year. The Finance Director shall not be required to call upon the person named in the tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall publish notice of the time when taxes will be due for collection and of the penalties and fees for the late payment and mail a tax bill to the last known owner of record. In cases of multiple ownership of property, only one bill need be mailed. Failure on the part of the Finance Director to publish notice or mail such bills shall not invalidate the taxes on the tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this charter in case of late payment or nonpayment. 
Sec. 9.12. - Collection charges on 
    late payment of taxes. 
    No penalty shall be charged for City taxes paid on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of August. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, the tax payment schedule for City taxes paid after the thirty-first (31st) day of August, and the amount of penalty, collection fee, or interest charges, if any, to be added thereafter in an amount not to exceed the limit allowed by State statute. Such charges shall belong to the City and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. 
Sec. 9.13. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
    All City taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the Finance Director on the first day of March, or date established by statute, following the date when said roll was received by him, shall be returned to the county treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the Finance Director and shall include all the additional charges and assessments hereinbefore provided, which charges shall, in such return, be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under provisions of the general laws of the State and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed, until paid. 
Sec. 9.14. - Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax. 
    If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal property tax assessed to him or them by October first, the Finance Director or the designated agent shall collect same by seizing the personal property of such person, firm or corporation to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with the statutory provisions. The Finance Director may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue, in accordance with statute, the person, firm or corporation to whom it is assessed. 
Sec. 9.15. - State, county and school taxes. 
    The levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes shall be in conformity with the general laws of the State and Constitution. 
CHAPTER 10 - BORROWING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 10.1. - General borrowing. 
    Subject to applicable provisions of law and Constitution and of this charter, the Council may by ordinance or resolution authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of powers vested in the City and permitted by law and may authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness for such purpose. Bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include but not be limited to the following types: 
A.  General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City for payment of such obligations. 
B.  Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, but the proceeds of such notes may be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided in Section 8.5 (Budget Control). 
C.  In case of fire, flood, wind storm, or other calamity, emergency loans due in not more than five (5) years for the relief of inhabitants of the City and for the preservation of municipal property. 
D.  Special assessment bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessment made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of payment of any combination of such special assessments; such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts alone, or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the City. 
E.  Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility which the City is authorized by this charter or by law to acquire or operate. 
F.  Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the City. 
G.  Revenue bonds as authorized by law which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement or public utility and do not constitute a general obligation of the City. 
H.  Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the Motor Vehicle Highway Fund or any other fund of the State or Federal Government which the City may be permitted by law to pledge for the payment of principal and interest thereof. 
I.  Budget bonds, which pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City, in an amount which, in any year together with the taxes levied for the same year, will not exceed the limit of taxation authorized by this charter. 
J.  Bonds which the City is, by any general law of the State, authorized to issue, now or hereafter, which shall pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City or be otherwise secured or payable as provided by law. 
Sec. 10.2. - Limits of borrowing authority. 
A.  The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed the maximum amount permitted by law, provided that in computing such bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded money borrowed on notes issued in the anticipation of the collection of taxes, special assessment bonds even though they are a general obligation of the City, mortgage bonds, revenue bonds, bonds in anticipation of State returned revenues to the extent permitted by law, and any other bonds or indebtedness excluded by law from such limitation. The amount of funds accumulated for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of bonded indebtedness. 
B.  The amount of emergency loans which may be made under the provisions of this charter may not exceed the maximum amount permitted by law. Such loans may be made even if it causes the indebtedness of the City to exceed the limit of the net bonded indebtedness fixed in this charter. 
C.  No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if such bonds are not sold within the time limited by law, such authorization shall be null and void. 
D.  The issuance of any bonds not requiring the approval of the electorate shall be subject to applicable requirements of law with reference to public notice in advance of authorization of such issues, filing of petitions for a referendum on such issuance, holding such referendum, and other applicable procedural requirements. 
Sec. 10.3. - Preparation and record of bonds. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds of the bond for any other purpose. Any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter, except that, whenever all or a part of the proceeds of any bond issue shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the Council may authorize the use of said funds for the retirement of bonds of such issue or for any other purpose permitted by law. All bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the Finance Director. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be cancelled. 
Sec. 10.4. - Deferred payment contracts. 
    The City may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment, subject to the limitations specified in Chapter 12. The total amounts of outstanding indebtedness under all such contracts shall not exceed a sum permitted by law. All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
CHAPTER 11 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec 11.1. - General power relative to special assessments. 
    The Council shall have the power to determine that the whole or any part of the cost of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon property in a special district and shall so declare by resolution. The resolution shall describe the improvement, state the estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost shall be paid by special assessment, and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the City, and the number of installments in which assessments shall be levied. The Council shall also have the power of reassessment with respect to any such public improvement. 
Sec. 11.2. - Detailed procedure to be fixed otherwise by ordinance. 
    The Council shall prescribe by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, notices and hearings, preparation and confirmation of assessment rolls, correction of errors in the rolls, set the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, collection of interest at a rate not to exceed Prime Interest Rate per year on assessments payable in installments, collection of assessments, refunds, and any other matters concerning improvements by the special assessment method. 
    Such ordinance shall be subject to the following specific provisions, as well as to other provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  No public improvement to be financed in whole or part by special assessment shall be undertaken, or any contract let, before adoption by the Council of a resolution finally determining to proceed with such improvements and establishing a special assessment district; 
B.  No resolution, finally determining to proceed with an improvement and establishing any special assessment district, shall be adopted until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding, which hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the City. 
C.  No resolution, finally determining to proceed with an improvement and establishing any special assessment district shall be adopted, except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council, if prior to such adoption, written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district which, according to estimates, will be required to bear more than fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of such special assessment. 
    For the purposes of this Section: 
1.  In the case of tenancies by the entirety or joint tenancies, any one tenant shall be considered an owner entitled to file objections; 
2.  In the case of tenancies in common, objections shall be valid only if signed by all the common tenants; and (3) in the case of property being sold under land contract, the party in whose name the property is assessed for taxation on the City's records shall be deemed to be the owner. 
D.  No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed by the Council, until after a meeting of the Council has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the City. 
Sec. 11.3. - Disposition of excessive special assessments. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and incidental expenses may be placed in the general fund of the City if such excess is five per cent (5%) or less of the assessment. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five per cent (5%), the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro-rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessments. 
Sec. 11.4. - Additional assessments: correction of invalid special assessments. 
    Additional pro-rata assessments may be made when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the incidental expenses, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll. However, the additional pro-rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five per cent (25%) of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the Council is held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by reason of irregularity in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such re-assessment and for the collection shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for an original assessment, and, whenever any sum or part, levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment, or if the payments exceed the amount of the re-assessment, refunds shall be made. 
    No action of the Council vacating a special assessment, nor any judgement which does not expressly so provide, shall destroy or impair the lien of the City upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or which by regular mode of proceeding, might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
Sec. 11.5. - Limitation on suits and actions. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment: 
A.  Unless, within thirty (30) days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal. 
B.  Unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty (60) days after confirmation of the roll. 
Sec. 11.6. - Lien and collection of special assessments. 
    Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessment shall become an obligation with respect to several properties assessed, and shall, until paid, be a lien upon each prospective property assessed for the amount of the assessment and all interest and charges apportioned to such property. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this charter for City taxes. 
    Special assessment installments, which become due on July first of any year, shall be collected in all respects as are City taxes due on July first of the same year, and if uncollected on the following first day of March, shall be returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 9.13. 
    The special assessment installments which become due other than on July first shall, if unpaid for ninety (90) days or more on May first of any year, be certified as delinquent to the Council by the Finance Director, and the Council shall place such delinquent assessments on the tax roll for that year together with accrued interest to July first of such year. The total amount of such assessment and interests shall thereafter be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July first of that year, shall be subject to the same fees and penalties as are City taxes due on that date, and if uncollected on the following March first shall be returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 9.13. 
Sec. 11.7. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a separate special assessment account, and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and of incidental expenses, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed, and to refund excessive assessments. 
Sec. 11.8. - Assessments for side walks, hazards, etc. 
    The assessment for the cost of construction or maintenance of any sidewalk or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance to be made pursuant to subsections (v), (w), and (y) of Section 2.2 or for the abatement of any hazard or nuisance, shall be made by resolution of the Council. Notice of the time at which the Council will act thereon shall be given by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed as shown by the current tax roll of the City. For the purposes of collection of such assessments, the adoption of such resolution shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment roll. The amount of any such assessment shall become a debt to the City, upon adoption of such resolution, and shall be subject to the collection fees and become a lien as provided in Section 11.6. 
Sec. 11.9. - Assessments on single lots. 
    Based upon the standards and procedures provided by Ordinance, whenever any expenditure is made on account of any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or lands, or premises, which, by the provisions of this charter or by law, the City is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same, and which assessment is not of that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, a statement of the labor or services for which such expenditure was incurred, verified by the Finance Director, with a description of the lot and the name of the owner chargeable, if known, shall be reported to the Council in the manner prescribed by it. The Council shall determine the part of such expenditure that shall be charged, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied, as a special assessment. As often as the Council deems expedient the Clerk shall give notice of the several amounts so determined and reported to the owners of the property chargeable. Such notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last known addresses of such owners as shown on the assessment roll of the City, or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, and the amount, and shall give a reasonable time, not less than thirty (30) days, within which payment shall be made to the Finance Director. In all cases where payment is not made within the time set, the fact shall be reported by the Finance Director to the Assessor, who shall charge such amounts, together with a penalty of ten per cent (10%) per month of such amounts, against the real property chargeable on the next tax roll. 
Sec. 11.10. - Failure to mail notice. 
    The requirement for mailing any notice required to be so sent by this charter or by ordinance, respecting any step in the special assessment procedure, shall not be a jurisdictional requirement and shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll unless it is demonstrated that such failure was intentional or part of a pattern of failing to notify. 
CHAPTER 12 - PURCHASES-CONTRACTS-LEASES 

Sec. 12.1. - Purchase and sale of property. 
    The City Manager shall designate an administrative officer of the City in charge of purchasing who shall be known as the purchasing officer, who shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all City property, and shall also be responsible for the procurement, storage and distribution of all City supplies and equipment. 
    Comparative prices shall be obtained for the purchase of all materials, supplies and capital improvements, except (a) in the employment of professional services; (b) when the City Manager shall determine that no advantage to the City would result; or (c) when the solicitation of bids is required. Further, comparative prices shall not be required in cases where the City Manager confirms the existence of an emergency. 
    City owned materials, supplies and capital improvements shall be sold in a manner as prescribed by the Council. 
    In all purchases in excess of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000), (a) the purchase shall be approved by the Council, and (b) sealed bids shall be obtained unless the Council by formal unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting determine that no advantage to the City would result from competitive bidding. Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications, unless the Council shall determine, (a) the public interest would be better served by accepting a higher bid, or (b) rejection of all submitted bids. The Council may authorize the making of public improvements for the performance of any other City work by any City agency without competitive bidding. 
    No purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
    All purchases and sales shall be evidenced by written contract or purchase order. The City may not purchase, sell or lease any real estate or any interest therein, except by the affirmative vote of five or more members of the Council. 
    The purchase and sale of all City property shall be subject to the provisions of Section 12.2. 
Sec. 12.2. - Contracts. 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the City is vested in the Council, and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of statute and of this charter, provided that purchases and sales be made by the purchasing officer subject to the provisions of 12.1. 
    Any contract or agreement in an amount of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000) or more made with form or terms other than the standard City purchase order form, as approved by the Finance Director, shall before execution be submitted to the attorney and his opinion obtained with respect to its form and legality. A copy of all contracts or agreements requiring such opinion shall be filed in the office of the Clerk together with a copy of the opinion. 
    Before any contract, agreement or purchase order obligating the City to pay an amount of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000) or more is executed, the Finance Director of the City shall first have certified that an appropriation has been made for the payment, or that sufficient funds will be available if it is for a purpose being financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for some other purpose not chargeable to a budget appropriation. In the case of a contract or agreement obligating the City for periodic payments in future fiscal years for the furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing of property, such certification need not cover those payments which will be due in future fiscal years, but this exception shall not apply to a contract for the purchase or construction of a public improvement, unless such purchase or construction is being financed by an installment contract under authority of Section 10.4. Certification by the purchasing officer of the City shall be endorsed on each contract, agreement or purchase order requiring same or shall be filed as an attachment. 
    No contract or purchase order shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitations contained in this Section. 
    No contract shall be amended after the same has been made except upon the authority of the Council, provided that the purchasing officer may amend contracts for those purchases and sales made by him under the authority of Section 12.1. 
    No compensation shall be paid to any contractor or vendor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
    No contract shall be made with any person, firm or corporation in default to the City. 
    An individual agreement of employment shall not be deemed a contract requiring opinion by the attorney or certification by the Finance Director of the City. 
Sec. 12.3. - Restriction on powers to let or sell property. 
    Any agreement or contract for the renting or letting of public property for a period longer than three (3) years shall be subject to the same referendum procedure as provided in the case of ordinances passed by the Council. However, a summary of the terms of any such agreement or contract shall be published within ten (10) days after its approval by the Council and any petition for such referendum must be filed within thirty (30) days after such publication to be effective. 
    The transfer or assignment of any agreement or contract for the renting or letting of public property may be made only upon approval of the Council but approval of such transfer shall not be subject to referendum. 
    Rentals and leases and renewals shall be for a fair consideration as determined by the Council. 
    The City shall not sell all or a part of any park, or cemetery, unless approved by a majority of the electors voting at any general or special election. 
Sec. 12.4. - Debts. 
    The City shall not repudiate any debt by any change in its charter or by consolidation with any other municipality. 
Sec. 12.5. - Contracting authority of council. 
    The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the City is vested in the Council, and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the law. All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this charter, shall be authorized by the Council, and shall be signed on behalf of the City by the Mayor and the Clerk. 
Sec. 12.6. - Limitations on contractual power. 
A.  Council shall only have power to enter into contracts which, by the terms, will be fully executed within a period of ten (10) years, unless such contract shall first receive the approval of the majority of the qualified electors voting at a regular or special election. This qualification shall not apply to any contract for services with a public utility, or one or more other governmental units, nor to contracts for debt secured by bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the City by law. 
B.  Except as provided by ordinance authorized in this charter, each contract for construction of public improvements shall be let after opportunity for competition. 
C.  All bids shall be opened and read aloud in public by the City Manager or his authorized representative at the time designated in the notice of letting, and shall be reported by him to the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reject any or all bids which, based upon legitimate grounds, should be rejected in the public interest. If, after ample opportunity for competitive bidding, no bids are received, or such bids as are received are not satisfactory to the Council, the Council may either endeavor to obtain new competitive bids or authorize the City Manager, or other proper officials of the City, to negotiate or contract on the open market. 
Sec. 12.7. - Official interest in contracts. 
    No person holding any elective or appointive office of the City shall take any official action on any City contract in violation of Act 317 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended, MCL 15.321, and following Sections. 
CHAPTER 13 - MUNICIPAL OWNED UTILITIES 

Sec. 13.1. - General powers respecting utilities. 
    Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and statute, the City shall have the power to acquire, own, establish, construct, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, a public utility for supplying water to the municipality and its inhabitants for domestic, commercial and municipal purposes, and may sell and deliver water without its corporate limits in an amount not exceed the limitations set by the Constitution and statutes. Subject to statutory provisions, the City shall also have the power to acquire, own, establish, construct, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatments and garbage facilities, cable television, storm sewer and drain ditches, refuse disposal facilities, and facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits. 
Sec. 13.2. - Acquisition of private property. 
    Private property may be taken and appropriated, for any public use in connection with any acquisition, enlargement or extension of public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, and sewage and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them; for the purpose of opening, widening, altering, and extending streets, alleys and avenues; for the construction of bridges, for public buildings and for other public structures; for public grounds, parking spaces, parks, market places and spaces; for the improvement of waters and water courses within the City; for sewers, drains and ditches; for public hospitals, and public cemeteries; for transport of solid waste and for collection and reclaiming of waste materials; and for other lawful and necessary public uses, and may hold the same. The ownership of such property shall be acquired by the City by negotiation and purchase, or in any other manner permitted by the general laws of the State for the taking of private property for public use. 
Sec. 13.3. - Management of municipally 
    owned utilities. 
    As determined by the Council, municipally owned or operated utilities may be administered as a regular department of the City government under the management and supervision of the City Manager or may be operated by public or private organizations approved by Council. 
Sec. 13.4. - Rates. 
    The Council shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and reasonable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the City and others with such public utility services as the City may provide. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users, nor shall free service be permitted. Higher rates may be charged outside the corporate limits of the City. 
Sec. 13.5. - Utility rates-Charges-Collection. 
    The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of all public utility charges made by the City and for such purpose, shall have all the power granted to cities by statute. When any person or persons, or any firm or corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay to the City any sums due on utility bills, which are not covered by deposits, the utility service or services upon which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued and suit may be instituted by the City for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. Prior to discontinuance of service, the user of the service shall be given notice at the address on the City's records, and afforded an opportunity to be heard by the City Manager, or the Manager's designate, as to why service should not be discontinued. 
Sec. 13.6. - Disposal of utility plants and property. 
    Unless approved by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors voting at a regular or special election, the City shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way dispose of any property, easements, equipment privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned public utility which is needed to continue operating such utility. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the City. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of machinery or equipment of any City owned public utility which are worn out or useless or which have been, or could with advantage to the service be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment, to the leasing of property not necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property or easements for other needed property or easements. It is provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not extend to vacation or abandonment of streets, as provided by statute. 
Sec. 13.7. - Utility finances. 
    Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, distinct from other City accounts, and in such manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such City ownership or operation, or both, including all assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. These accounts shall show the actual cost to the City of each such public utility, the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements, all expenses of maintenance, the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes, and all operating expenses. They shall show as nearly as possible, the value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or to any other City department. They shall also show a proper allowance for depreciation and insurance. The Council shall annually cause to be made a report showing the financial results of such city ownership or operation, or both, which report shall give for each utility, the information specified in this section, and such further information as the Council shall deem expedient; which report shall be available for inspection at the Office of the Clerk. 
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

Sec. 14.1. - Franchises remain in effect. 
    All franchises to which the City of Wixom is a party when this charter becomes effective, shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Sec. 14.2. - Granting of public utility franchises. 
    Public utility franchises and all renewals and extensions and amendments shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty (30) years. 
    No franchise ordinance which is not revocable at the will of the Council shall be granted or become operative until the same have been referred to the people at a regular or special election and has received the approval of three-fifths (3/5) of the electors voting at such election as required by law. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty (30) days after application has been filed with the Council or until a public hearing has been held, nor until the grantee named has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purposes shall be ordered unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council shall have first been paid to the Finance Director by the grantee. 
    A franchise ordinance or renewal or extension or amendment which is subject to revocation at the will of the Council may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted and shall have been so on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection for at least four (4) weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
Sec. 14.3. - Conditions of public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the City, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the powers of the City to impose or require: 
A.  To repeal the same for misuse, nonuse or material failure to comply with the provisions; 
B.  To require proper and adequate extensions of plant and service and maintenance at the highest practicable standard of efficiency, which in any event shall be at least in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission, or its successor (or other applicable regulatory body having jurisdiction); 
C.  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
D.  To make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and to require reports annually; 
E.  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period; 
F.  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the Public; 
G.  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them. 
Sec. 14.4. - Regulation of rates. 
    The rates charged by public utilities under the supervision of State regulatory agencies shall be fixed by such agencies. The rates not pre-empted by the State for public utilities shall be set, after public hearing, by the City Council. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Sec. 14.5. - Use of public places by utilities. 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places as shall arise from its use and shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the City by the City and by other utilities in so far as such joint use may be reasonably practicable, and upon payment of reasonable terms. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
Sec. 14.6. - Revocable permits. 
    Temporary permits for public utilities revocable at any time at the will of the Council, may be granted by the Council by resolution on such terms and conditions as it shall determine, provided that such permits shall in no event be construed to be franchises or amendments to franchises. 
Sec. 14.7. - Purchase-Condemnation. 
    The City shall have the right to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the property of any public utility in accordance with the general laws of the State, provided that the price to be paid shall in no event include any value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill, or prospective profits. 
CHAPTER 15 - PLANNING AND ZONING 

Sec. 15.1. - Planning commission. 
    The Council shall establish a Planning Commission as provided by law. Members of the Commission shall hold no other City office. The Commission may make recommendations to the City Manager and the City Council on all matters affecting the physical development of the City, shall be consulted on the Master Plan and its implementation as provided in Sections 15.2 and 15.3, and shall exercise all other responsibilities as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 15.2. - Master plan. 
A.  The Planning Commission, after review and comment by Council, shall adopt and may, from time to time, modify a master plan, setting forth, in graphic and textual form, policies to govern the future physical development of the City. Such plan may cover the entire City and all of its functions and services or may consist of a combination of plans governing specific functions and services or specific geographic areas which together cover the entire City and all of its functions and services. 
B.  The master plan shall serve as a guide to all future Council action concerning land use and development regulations, urban renewal programs and expenditures for capital improvements. 
Sec. 15.3. - Implementation of the master plan. 
A.  The Council may, by ordinance, adopt land use and development regulations, including but not limited to an official map and zoning and subdivision regulations. 
B.  The Council may, by ordinance, provide for redevelopment, rehabilitation, and conservation programs to attain: 
1.  Aesthetically appropriate development; 
2.  The most appropriate use of land. 
Sec. 15.4. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The Council shall establish a Zoning Board of Appeals and shall provide standards and procedures for such Board to hear and determine appeals from administrative decisions, petitions for variances, and such other matters as may be required by the Council or by law. 
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 16.1. - Definitions and interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context: 
A.  All words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
B.  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
C.  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate, and to partnerships as well as to individuals. 
D.  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include reproductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing or any similar method. 
E.  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and typewriting. 
F.  The word "City" shall mean the municipal corporation of Wixom as it existed prior to the effective date of this charter, including the period from and after its incorporation as a City and until such effective date. 
G.  The word "officer" shall include the Mayor and members of the Council, the appointive administrative officers, and the City Attorney. 
H.  The word "statute" shall denote the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in effect at the time the provision of charter containing the word "statute" is to be applied. 
I.  All references to specific Public Acts of the State of Michigan shall be to such acts as are in effect at the time the reference to such act is to be applied. 
J.  The words "law" or "general laws of the state" shall denote the Constitution and the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in effect at the time the provision of the charter containing the words "law" or "general laws of the state" is to be applied, and applicable common law. 
K.  The word "freeholder" shall include persons purchasing property on land contract. 
L.  All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this charter. 
M.  The words "Appointive administrative officer" refer specifically to those officers outlined in Chapter 6 of this Charter. 
N.  The words "Budget appropriation" shall mean the authority granted by the Council to expend money or to incur obligations for the purpose specified to operate a department, agency or function of the City. 
Sec. 16.2. - Definition of publication-Mailing of notices. 
    The requirement contained in this charter for the publishing or publication of notices or ordinances shall be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character which newspaper shall have a general circulation at regular intervals in the City for at least two years immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes. The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, or of his foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance or proceeding taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times of publication shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
    In any case in which this charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such notice was mailed, shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
Sec. 16.3. - City liability. 
    The City shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person either to his person or property by reason of the negligence of the City, its officers or employees, nor by reason of any defective condition or of obstruction in any public place, unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the injury resulting in such damages shall have occurred a notice in writing, which notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred, the extent of such damages as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant and a statement that the person sustaining such damages intends to hold the City liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. 
    The City shall not be liable for any damages to person or property arising out of any such injury unless there shall have been first presented to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath setting forth particularly the time, place, nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason. No person shall bring any action against the City for any damages until such claim shall have been filed with the Clerk and until the Council shall have been given opportunity to act thereon either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the City under this section that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim as in this section required were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
    It is not the intent of this Section to create or extend liability of the City. 
Sec. 16.4. - No estoppel. 
    No estoppel may be created against the City. 
Sec. 16.5. - Records to be public. 
    All records of the City shall be public, shall be kept in City offices except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to be elsewhere, and shall be available to the general public in compliance of Act 442 of the Public Acts of 1976 as amended. All public records will be maintained in the English language. 
Sec. 16.6. - Vested rights continued. 
    After the effective date of this charter, the City shall be vested with all the property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books and papers belonging to the City. No right or liability, either in favor of or against the City, existing at the time this charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by any change, resulting from the adoption of this charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be the debts and liabilities of the City, and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected. 
Sec. 16.7. - Trusts. 
    All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the cy-pres doctrine. The Council may in its discretion receive and hold any property in trust for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust fund for no other purposes, except in cases where the cy-pres doctrine shall apply. 
Sec. 16.8. - Severability of charter provisions. 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this charter or the application to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this charter is declared to be severable. 
Sec. 16.9. - Amendments. 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by statute. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Sec. 16.10. - Default or felony conviction. 
    No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive office who shall have been found guilty by a competent tribunal of the commission of a felony. 
Sec. 16.11. - Financial interest prohibited. 
    No person serving the City (except members of the legislature and state officers who are within the provisions of Section 10 of Article 4 of the State Constitution) shall act in any manner which violates the provisions of Act 317 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended, MCL 15.321, and following sections. 
Sec. 16.12. - Anti-nepotism. 
    Unless the Council shall by majority vote, which vote shall be recorded as part of its official proceedings, determine that the best interests of the City shall be served, the following relatives of any elective or appointive administrative officer are disqualified from holding any appointive office or employment in the same department, or in a direct chain of command, during the term for which said elective or appointive administrative officer was elected or appointed; spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister or the spouses or any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees for the City at the time of election or appointment of said official. 
Sec. 16.13. - Delivery of office. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five (5) days or sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under statute. Any employee found guilty of violating this provision by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Sec. 16.14. - Sundays and holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by this charter for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Sec. 16.15. - Chapter and section headings. 
    The chapter, section and subsection headings used in this charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered part of the charter. 
CHAPTER 17 - SCHEDULE 

Sec. 17.1. - Status of schedule chapter. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to amend the government of the City of Wixom. 
Sec. 17.2. - Election of adoption of charter. 
    This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the City of Wixom at a general election to be held on Tuesday, November 3, 1987. 
Sec. 17.3. - Effective date of charter. 
    This charter shall take effect on January 1, 1988. 
Sec. 17.4. - Continuation of appointed officers and employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the City shall continue in that City office or employment which corresponds to the City office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this charter. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a regular meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Wixom held on the 10th day of June, 1987, the following resolution was offered by Commissioner James H. Ash: 
    RESOLVED, that the Charter Commission of the City of Wixom does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed charter for the City of Wixom; and the Secretary of this Commission is directed to transmit two copies of this charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval in accordance with statute, and to cause this proposed charter to be published in the Spinal Column on Wednesday, October 21, 1987. 
    The resolution was seconded by Commissioner Harold C. Christiansen, and adopted by the following vote: 
YES:  Commissioners James H. Ash, Lawrence N. Beamish, Harold C. Christiansen Jr., Ernest S. Kalist, Terry W. Pihalja, Sr., Eino W. Piilo, Paul E. Salo, and William B. Wakefield 
NO:  None 
ABSENT:   Carl E. Sheiko 
    The Chairman declared the foregoing resolution carried unanimously and requested the members of the Charter Commission to authenticate said resolution and also the two copies of the charter to be presented to the Governor. The members thereupon authenticated said resolution and the copy of the charter to be presented to the governor by subscribing their names as follows: 
James H. Ash 
Lawrence N. Beamish 
Harold C. Christiansen, Jr. 
Ernest S. Kalist 
Terry W. Pihalja, Sr. 
Eino W. Piilo 
Paul E. Salo 
Carl E. Sheiko 
William B. Wakefield 
All of the Commissioners having attested as to said resolution and also having attested the copy to be signed by the Governor, the meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman. 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted the "Wixom Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 164 § 1, 1992) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This code shall be known as the "Wixom Municipal Code," and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Wixom Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Wixom Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Wixom Municipal Code," and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 164 § 2, 1992) 
1.01.030 - Codification authority. 
    This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Wixom, Michigan, codified pursuant to the provisions of Section 117.56 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and Section 7.8 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. 164 § 3, 1992) 
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
    The last ordinance included in the initial code is Ordinance No. 113-A-1, passed June 11, 1991. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 113-A-1, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: 
Ordinance No. 34-A-167 (July, 1991) Ordinance No. 34-A-168 (August, 1991) Ordinance No. 39-A-13 (August, 1991) Ordinance No. 162 (October, 1991) Ordinance No. 163 (November, 1991) Ordinance No. 127-A-1 (December, 1991) Ordinance No. 137-A-2 (December, 1991) Ordinance No. 102-5A (January, 1992) Ordinance No. 129-A-1 (March, 1992) Ordinance No. 129-A-2 (March, 1992) Ordinance No. 34-A-171 (May, 1992) Ordinance No. 161-A-1 (June, 1992) Ordinance No. 134-A-1 (June, 1992)  
(Ord. 164 § 4, 1992) 
1.01.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Wixom Municipal Code," or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinances of the city of Wixom, Michigan, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 164 §5, 1992) 
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 164 § 6, 1992) 
1.01.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 164 § 7, 1992) 
1.01.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city of Wixom shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penalty provision applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder pertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 164 § 8, 1992) 
1.01.090 - Effective date of code. 
    This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the "Wixom Municipal Code" shall become effective. 
(Ord. 164 § 9, 1992) 
1.01.100 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the code. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional; and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 164 § 10, 1992) 
1.01.110 - Effective date of ordinance; Publication. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after adoption and publication. Notice of adoption shall include a brief statement as to the subject matter of the Wixom Municipal Code and shall indicate that copies of the Code are available for public use and inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 164 § 11, 1992) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the code of the city of Wixom, Michigan, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    "City" and "town" each mean the city of Wixom, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Wixom, and such territory over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city of Wixom. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilpersons holding office. 
    "County" means the county of Oakland. 
    "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Michigan, the ordinances of the city of Wixom, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    "May" is permissive. 
    "Month" means a calendar month. 
    "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
    "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    "Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
    "Property" includes real and personal property. 
    "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    "State" means the state of Michigan. 
    "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, square, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
    "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
    "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Wixom. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Wixom, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
    Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
    Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
    Whenever in the ordinances of the city of Wixom any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
    Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.080 - Construction. 
    The provisions of the ordinances of the city of Wixom, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 159 § 1 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 1.08 - VOTING PRECINCTS 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Precincts established. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in Section 3.3 of the charter, the precincts of the city shall be as set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 89 § 1 (part), 1973) 
1.08.020 - Precinct 1. 
    Precinct 1 includes the following area: 
    T2N, R8E, Section 29, plus parts of Section 20, 28, 33, located in the city of Wixom, Oakland County, Michigan; also described as all the property lying within the city of Wixom which is north of Potter Road and east of Wixom Road, plus the city of Wixom property located east of Beck Road and north of Oakland Technical Center Property. 
Place of voting: Wixom Community Center 49015 Pontiac Trail  
(§ 1 of Ord. Ch. 1.08 dated 11-28-95: § 1 of Ord. dated 6-30-93; Ord. 89-A2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 89 § 1 (part), 1973) 
1.08.030 - Precinct 2. 
    Precinct 2 includes the following area: 
    T2N, R8E, Sections 30 and 31, city of Wixom, Oakland County, Michigan; also described as all of the property lying within the city of Wixom which is north of Pontiac Trail and west of Wixom Road. 
Place of voting: Wixom City Hall 49045 Pontiac Trail  
(§ 2 of Ord. Ch. 1.08 dated 11-28-95: Ord. 89-A3 § 1, 1994; Ord. 89-A2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 89 § 1 (part), 1973) 
1.08.040 - Precinct 3. 
    Precinct 3 includes the following area: 
    T1N, R8E, Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8, plus parts of Sections 4 and 9, located in the city of Wixom, Oakland County, Michigan; also described as all of the property lying within the city of Wixom which is located south of Pontiac Trail. 
Place of voting: Wixom Community Center 49015 Pontiac Trail  
(Ord. 03-15 § 2, 2003: Ord. 99-37 § 1, 1999: § 3 of Ord. Ch. 1.08 dated 11-28-95: Ord. 89-A3 § 2, 1994; Ord. 89-A2 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 89 § 1 (part), 1973) 
1.08.050 - Precinct 4. 
    Precinct 5 includes the following area: 
    T2N, R8E, Section 32, city of Wixom, Oakland County, Michigan; also described as all the property lying within the city of Wixom which is south of Potter Road and north of Pontiac Trail and east of Wixom Road and west of Beck Road. 
Place of Voting: Wixom City Hall 49045 Pontiac Trail  
(§ 4 of Ord. Ch. 1.08 dated 11-28-95) 
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Established. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of any ordinance of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the city ordinances is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he is punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 158 § 1, 1991) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Compensation-Mayor. 
    As of January 1, 1990, the mayor of the city shall receive a salary of one thousand eight hundred dollars per year, payable quarterly. 
(Ord. 140 § 2, 1988) 
2.04.020 - Compensation-Councilmembers. 
    As of January 1, 1990, each councilmember for the city shall receive a salary of one thousand five hundred dollars per year, payable quarterly. 
(Ord. 139 § 2, 1988) 
Chapter 2.08 - BUILDING OFFICIAL AND CODE OFFICIAL 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Positions established. 
    The positions of building official and code official are established within the city. 
(Ord. 148 § 1.01, 1989) 
2.08.020 - Duties. 
    The building official, code official, or his or her designee, are authorized to enforce the zoning ordinance (Title 18), the sidewalk ordinance (Chapter 12.04), the subdivision ordinance (Title 16), the noxious weeds ordinance (Chapter 8.32), the wetlands and watercourses ordinance (Chapter 17.08), the woodlands ordinance (Chapter 17.12), and any other chapter or title within this code which expressly authorizes the building official, code official, or his or her designee, with such enforcement duties. The city manager may act as the building official in the absence of the building official, or his or her designee, in order to perform the above-noted duties. Where a particular enforcement officer other than the building official, code official, or his or her designee, is designated with expressly enumerated powers, the authority of the building official, code official, or his or her designee, to enforce the same shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other officer. The ordinance enforcing authority of the city manager, and other officers specifically designated in any city ordinance, shall continue in full force and effect and shall in no way be diminished or impaired by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 01-01 § 1, 2001: Ord. 148 § 2.01, 1989) 
2.08.030 - Scope of responsibility. 
    The ordinance-enforcement duties authorized in this chapter shall include, among others, the following: investigation of ordinance violations; serving notices of violations; serving appearance tickets as authorized under Chapter IV of Public Act 175 of 1927, as amended, and Public Act 366 of 1984; appearance in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators; and such other ordinance-enforcement duties as may be designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. 148 § 3.01, 1989) 
Chapter 2.12 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Created. 
    There is created for the city an advisory board to be known as the parks and recreation commission, to be operated through the community services department. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.020 - Power of acquisition. 
    The city shall have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, bequest or otherwise, and to improve, protect and equip for the benefit of the people of the city real property, improved or unimproved, and to employ personnel to maintain, improve, and supervise such real properties and to organize park and recreation activities using such properties and/or other public or private properties by the consent of the owners and directors. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.030 - Parks and recreation commission, officers. 
A.  The advisory board known as the parks and recreation commission shall consist of ten members, one of whom shall be the director of community services as a nonvoting permanent member (subject to the appointment provisions found in Section 2.12.090 of this chapter and Section 6.1 of the City Charter), serving as a liaison between the commission and the city administrative staff, and nine electors of the city who shall be qualified by experience and shall have evidence of interest in the development of parks and recreation services for public use. The members other than the director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, for a term of three years or until the person's successor has been appointed and has qualified. Members of the board, with the exception of the director, shall serve without compensation and shall meet once every month or as called upon by the chairperson. At the first meeting after July 1st of each year, the parks and recreation commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve a one-year term. 
B.  The officers of the parks and recreation commission shall be: 
1.  A chairperson who shall preside at all meetings, including adjourned and special meetings. The chairperson also has the authority to preside over public hearings and committee meetings of the commission. 
2.  A vice-chairperson who shall, in the absence of the chairperson or their inability to act, preside over all regular, adjourned or special meetings, public hearings and committee meetings of the commission and shall have the power to function in the same capacity as the chairperson in case of the chairperson's inability to act. 
3.  The parks and recreation commission shall elect its chairperson and vice-chairperson from amongst its appointed members and create and fill other offices as it may determine. The terms of these offices shall be one year with the eligibility for reelection. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.040 - Parks and recreation commission rules. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall adopt its own rules of order and procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.050 - Meeting minutes. 
    A copy of the minutes of all parks and recreation commission meetings shall be filed with the city clerk for transmittal to the mayor and city council. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.060 - Duties, Activities. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall act solely in a fact-finding, recommendatory and advisory capacity to the city council and mayor and it shall be its duty to consider and study the reasonable needs of recreational facilities and activities in which the city might properly participate, to formulate and to report to the city council and mayor estimates of public requirements for recreational facilities and for the costs thereof and to the amounts which might properly be appropriated by the city council to provide and maintain such recreational facilities. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.070 - Expenditure of funds. 
    Neither the parks and recreation commission nor any member thereof may incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. In the event of any expenditure of city funds as may be required in connection with the functioning of the parks and recreation commission, before such funds shall be expended, approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained by the mayor. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.080 - Quorum. 
    Five voting members of the parks and recreation commission shall constitute a quorum and a lesser number may adjourn any meeting at which a quorum is not present. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
2.12.090 - Director of community services. 
    A director of community services, who shall be appointed by the city manager subject to the approval of the city council, shall be the executive officer assigned to the community services department and be responsible for the implementation of recreation programs and operation, maintenance and improvement of the city's municipal park facilities and properties or other public and/or private institutions that may be used by the city through rental, lease or by gift for recreational purpose and other assignments as may be provided by the city manager. (§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 8-13-96) 
Chapter 2.16 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the planning commission ordinance for the city and will be referred to in this chapter as "the plan." 
(Ord. 28 § 100, 1957) 
2.16.020 - Members. 
A.  The commission shall, except as provided in this section, consist of nine members who shall represent insofar as is possible different professions or occupations, who shall be appointed by the mayor, if the mayor is an elective officer, otherwise by such officer as council may designate as the appointing power, but such appointment shall always be subject to the approval by a majority vote of the councilmembers. 
B.  All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation and shall hold no other city office except that one of the members may be a member of the zoning board of adjustment or appeals. 
C.  The term of each member shall be three years, except that three members of the first commission to be so appointed shall serve for the term of one year, three for a term of two years and three for a term of three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
D.  Members may, after a public hearing, be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation and in this case also the appointed members shall hold no other city office except that one of such appointed members may be a member of the zoning board of adjustment or appeals. 
E.  The terms of ex officio members shall correspond to their respective official tenures, except that the term of the administrative official selected by the mayor shall terminate with the term of the mayor selecting him. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.2, 1957) 
2.16.030 - Officers. 
    The commission shall elect its chairman from amongst the appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.3, 1957) 
2.16.040 - Appointment of employees. 
    The commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the city. The commission may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the commission's work. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.4, 1957) 
2.16.050 - Master plan. 
A.  It is the function and duty of the commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. The plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive material, shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of the territory, including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces, the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the aforesaid of other functional matters to be included in the plan. The commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan. 
B.  In the preparation of such plan the commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard to its relation to the neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Ord. 28 §§ 101.5, 101.6, 1957) 
2.16.060 - Adoption of plan. 
    The commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution or may by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, said parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the city or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given, not less than fifteen days prior to such hearing, by one publication in a news-paper of general circulation in the city and in the official gazette, if any, of the city, and by registered United States mail to each public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the geographical sections or divisions of the city affected. The adoption of the plan or of any such part or amendment or extension or addition shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six members of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman and/or secretary of the commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to council and to the county register of deeds. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.7, 1957) 
2.16.070 - Effect of plan on construction, filing of plat. 
A.  Whenever the commission has adopted the master plan of the city or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground, or open space, or public building or structure, shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof has been submitted to and approved by the commission; provided, that in case of disapproval the commission shall communicate its reasons to council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership; provided, however, that if the public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility be one the authorization or financing of which does not under the law or charter provisions governing same, fall within the province of the city council, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by said board, commission or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the commission to act within sixty days from and after the date of official submission to the commission shall be deemed approval. 
B.  Whenever the city council has ordered the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the city council has ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such resolution shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the commission for a report and until after a public hearing has been held. The council shall have power to overrule the recommendation of the commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
C.  Whenever the planning commission has adopted that sort of a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision, jurisdiction or part thereof, and has filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds, then no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it has been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. 28 §§ 101.8 (part), 101.9, 101.11, 1957) 
2.16.080 - Six-year program. 
    For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the city under the master plan, the city planning commission, after the commission has adopted a master plan, shall prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and improvements. The commission shall annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six years, which program shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of their priority, which in the commission's judgment will be needed or desirable and can be undertaken within the six-year period. The above comprehensive coordinated programs shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements and, to that end, each agency or department of such city concerned with such improvements shall upon request furnish the commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public structures and improvements within the purview of such department. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.8 (part), 1957) 
2.16.090 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The commission shall have the power to promote public interest and understanding of the plan and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
B.  Members of the commission, when duly authorized by the commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning institutes or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. 
C.  The commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. 
D.  It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. 
E.  The commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions. 
F.  All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
G.  The commission, its members, officers and employees in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
H.  In general, the commission shall have powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its function, promote village planning or carry out the purposes of this act. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.10, 1957) 
2.16.100 - Regulations. 
A.  Before exercising the powers referred to in Section 2.16.110, the planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of fire-fighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. 
B.  Such regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to such installation; but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the commission. The municipality is granted the power to enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
C.  All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and before adoption a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the commission to the recorders of the county. 
2.16.110 - Approval of plats-Notice. 
    The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within sixty days after the submission thereof to it; otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the commission. Any plat submitted to the commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent; and no plat shall be acted on by the commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to the said address by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notices shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office and their addresses appear in the directory of the city or on the tax records of the city or county. Every plat approved by the commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the city plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to council amendments of the zoning ordinance or map or additions thereto to conform to the commissions' recommendations for the zoning regulations of the city. The commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the city zoning ordinance. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the zoning ordinance or map of the city. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.13, 1957) 
2.16.120 - Certified plats-Notice. 
    The city council may by ordinance adopt any such precise plat certified to it by the planning commission as provided in Section 2.16.130, provided that notice of time and place when and where it shall be considered for final passage shall be sent by mail to the record owners of land located within or abutting on the new lines of such proposed streets, ways, places, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds or extensions thereof, designated on the plat. Any modifications of such certified plat before passage of the adopting ordinance, and any amending ordinance originating in the city council shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval; provided, that in case of disapproval the commission shall communicate its reasons therefor to the city council, which shall thereafter have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. Failure of the commission to report on any such modification or amendment within thirty days shall be deemed to constitute an approval thereof. The adoption of any such certified plat by ordinance, or by amending ordinance, shall not in itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for any of the aforesaid purposes. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.14 (part), 1957) 
2.16.130 - Certified plats-Amendments. 
    Amendments or modifications to such certified plats, in conformity with lawfully adopted changes or additions to the adopted master plan may be made and certified by the commission to the city council, and ordinances embodying amendments to or changes in such certified plats may be adopted by the city council, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law for the enactment of city ordinances; provided, that notice of the time and place when and where it shall be considered by final passage shall be sent by mail to the record owners of land located within or abutting on the lines of proposed streets, ways, places, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds. Any such proposed amendment or change shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission; provided, that in case of disapproval the commission shall communicate its reasons to the city council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. Any plat of a street, park, playground or public ground certified by the planning commission to the village council under this act shall be deemed approved by the commission without further submission thereof to said commission. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.14 (part), 1957) 
2.16.140 - Granting of building permits. 
    For the purpose of accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision of light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements, the city council may provide by ordinance that no permit shall be issued for, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected on any land located within the proposed future outside lines of any new, extended or widened street, avenue, place or other public way, or of any park, playground or other public grounds or extension thereof shown on any such certified and adopted plat. Any such ordinance shall provide that the zoning board of appeals, if the city has such a board or if not, that a board of appeals created for the purpose in such ordinance shall have the power on appeal filed with it by the owner of such land to authorize the granting of a permit for and the erection of a building or structure, or part thereof, within the lines of any such mapped street, park, playground or other public ground in any case in which such board finds, upon the evidence and arguments presented to it on such appeal, (a) that the entire property of the appellant located in whole or in part within the lines of such mapped street, park, playground or other public ground cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such permit is granted, and (b) that, balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the adopted map, and the interest of the owner of the property in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. Before taking any such action, the board of appeals shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least ten days' notice of the time and place of which shall be given to the appellant by mail at the address specified by the appellant in his appeal petition. In the event that the board of appeals decides to authorize a building permit and erection, it shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height and other details and conditions of size, character and construction and also the duration of the building, structure or part thereof to be permitted. 
    The proposed future outside lines of streets, parks, playgrounds and other public grounds shown on any plat certified and adopted as hereinbefore provided, may for convenience be shown, wholly or in part, by appropriate symbols on any official map or other map of the village; provided, that showing such lines on any map shall not in itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for any of the aforesaid purposes. 
(Ord. 28 § 101.14 (part), 1957) 
Chapter 2.20 - HOUSING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Created. 
    Pursuant to Public Act No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended, a commission is created in and for the city, to be known as the Wixom Housing Commission. 
(Ord. 106 § 1, 1978) 
2.20.020 - Members. 
    The mayor of the city is directed to appoint the members of the housing commission as soon as possible after the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect. 
(Ord. 106 § 2, 1978) 
Chapter 2.24 - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Wixom Downtown Development Authority Ordinance. 
(Ord. 128 § 1, 1983) 
2.24.020 - Purpose. 
    The city council, having determined that it is necessary and in the best interest of the public to halt property value deterioration and to increase property tax valuation where possible in the city business district, to eliminate the causes of said deterioration and to promote economic growth, a downtown development authority is established pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975 for the State of Michigan to be known as the "City of Wixom Downtown Development Authority." 
(Ord. 128 § 2, 1983) 
2.24.030 - Definitions. 
    References in Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975 for the State of Michigan to the following terms shall have the following meanings in this chapter: 
    "Chief executive officer" means the mayor of the city. 
    "Governing body of the municipality" means the city council. 
    "Municipality" means the city. 
    "The agency which is chiefly responsible for planning in the municipality" means the city planning commission. 
    "The authority" means the city downtown development authority. 
(Ord. 128 § 3, 1983) 
2.24.040 - Powers and duties. 
    The city downtown development authority shall have all the powers and duties as set forth in Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975 as presently enacted or as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 128 § 4, 1983) 
2.24.050 - Boundaries. 
    The city downtown development authority shall exercise its powers and duties within the downtown development district. The boundaries of the district consist of the described territory in the city as set forth in Ordinance 2003-10 and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 03-10 § 1, 2003; Ord. 128-A-1 § 1, 1989: Ord. 128 § 5, 1983) 
2.24.060 - Director's bond. 
    The city downtown development authority, should it desire, may employ a director who, before entering upon the duties of said office, shall take and subscribe to the constitutional oath and furnish bond by posting bond in the penal sum of twenty thousand dollars payable to the authority for the use and benefit of the authority, approved by the council and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 128 § 6, 1983) 
Chapter 2.28 - CITIZEN'S DISTRICT COUNCIL 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Established. 
    There is established a citizen's district council for the central business district area, pursuant to Act 189 of the Public Acts of the state for 1968, and the citizen's district council and its membership shall have all of the rights, duties and responsibilities set forth in Act 189, as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. 71 (part), 1968) 
2.28.020 - Members. 
    The citizen's district council shall be composed of fifteen members with a majority of such members to be residents of the urban renewal development area and the balance of other persons who have a demonstrable and substantial interest in the area. Each member shall serve a term of two years. 
(Ord. 71 (part), 1968) 
2.28.030 - Appointment. 
    Members of the citizen's district council shall be appointed by the mayor of the city and such appointments shall be made by the mayor following consultations with local community groups and residents of the urban renewal development area. 
(Ord. 71 (part), 1968) 
2.28.040 - Activity. 
    The activity of the citizen's district council and the appointment of its membership shall be in accordance with the provision of Act 189 of the Public Acts of 1968. 
(Ord. 71 (part), 1968) 
Chapter 2.32 - LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - Minimum standards adopted. 
    The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as established and adopted by the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council in accordance with Act No. 203, Public Acts of 1965, are adopted as follows: 
A.  Be a citizen of the United States; 
B.  Minimum age of twenty-one years; 
C.  Graduation from high school or equivalent. "Equivalent" defined as having attained a passing score on the General Education Development test indicating high school graduation level; 
D.  Fingerprinting of applicants, with a search of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record; 
E.  The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony offense; 
F.  Good moral character as determined by a favorable report following a comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment records, home environment, personal traits and integrity. Consideration will be given to any and all law violations, including traffic and conservation law convictions as indicating a lack of good character; 
G.  Acceptable physical, emotional and mental fitness as established by a licensed physician following examination to determine the applicant is free from any physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect his performance of duty as a police officer; 
H.  The trainee shall possess normal hearing and normal color vision. He shall be free from any impediments of the senses. He must possess normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye correctable to 20/20. The trainee must be physically sound; well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards and in possession of his extremities. He shall be free from any physical defects, chronic diseases, organic diseases, organic or functional conditions, or mental instabilities which may tend to impair efficient performance of duty or which might endanger the lives of others of himself if he lacks these qualifications; 
I.  A declaration of the applicant's medical history shall become a part of the background investigation. The information shall be available to the examining physician. 
(Ord. 62 § 1 (part), 1966) 
2.32.020 - Oral interview. 
    An oral interview shall be held by the hiring authority or his representative, to determine the applicant's acceptability for a police officer position and to assess appearance, background and ability to communicate. 
(Ord. 62 § 1 (part), 1966) 
2.32.030 - Recruitment practices. 
    Recruitment and employment practices and standards shall be in compliance with existing Michigan statutes governing this activity. 
(Ord. 62 § 1 (part), 1966) 
Chapter 2.36 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND DISASTER CONTROL1 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Disaster" means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or manmade cause, including fire, flood, snow, ice, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion or hostile military or paramilitary action. Riots and other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this term unless they directly result from and are an aggravating element of the disaster. 
    "Disaster relief forces" means all agencies of state, county and municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this chapter or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 160 § 1, 1991) 
1.  Ordinance 160 supersedes Ordinance 77-A2, the previous Emergency Management and Disaster Control Ordinance. 
2.36.020 - Organizational structure. 
    A function of emergency management shall be maintained utilizing to the fullest extent personnel and facilities of existing city departments and agencies. The city manager shall be responsible for its organization, administration and operation. This function shall consist of the following: 
A.  The city manager shall be the executive officer of the emergency management function, who shall be known as the emergency management coordinator for the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  Deputy coordinators who shall be designated by the city manager, consistent with the organizational chart. It is the intent of this chapter that emergency management and disaster assignments shall be as consistent with normal duty assignment as possible. 
C.  The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments and agencies suitable for or adaptable to emergency management and designated by the city manager to participate in the emergency preparedness activity. 
D.  Emergency management volunteers, including persons and private agencies or governmental units offering services to the organization. 
(Ord. 160 § 2, 1991) 
2.36.030 - Powers and duties of mayor. 
A.  In the event of a disaster, the mayor, or in the mayor's absence or inability to serve, the deputy mayor, as conservator of the peace, shall: 
1.  Declare a state of emergency within the city, thereby placing in effect the emergency preparedness plan required by this chapter; 
2.  As soon as possible thereafter, convene the council to perform its legislative and administrative functions as the situation may demand. The council shall have the power to determine the state of emergency; 
3.  If a disaster or emergency occurs that has not yet been declared to be a state of disaster or a state of emergency by the governor, and the mayor determines that the situation is beyond the control of the municipality, the mayor may request the governor to declare that a state of disaster or state of emergency exists in the municipality. This shall be done by immediately contacting the county emergency management coordinator. The county emergency management coordinator shall immediately contact the district coordinator. The district coordinator, in conjunction with county and municipal emergency management coordinators, shall assess the nature and scope of the disaster or emergency, and they shall recommend the state personnel, services and equipment that will be required for its prevention, mitigation or relief; 
4.  Have the power to command services and the use of equipment and facilities for such work and duties as the city may require to aid the regular and volunteer city forces in time of emergency; 
5.  Promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed necessary to protect life and property and conserve critical resources; such regulations may be invoked when necessary for tests of emergency preparedness plans. All such regulations shall be subject to approval of the council as soon as practicable subsequent to promulgation. 
B.  The mayor, or in the mayor's absence or inability to serve, the deputy mayor, shall have the power to order disaster relief forces to the aid of the state or political subdivisions thereof subject to council review as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. 160 § 3, 1991) 
2.36.040 - Powers and duties of emergency management coordinator. 
A.  The powers and duties of the city manager pursuant to this chapter shall consist of the following: 
1.  The city manager, as the emergency management coordinator, shall maintain general supervision over the planning and administration for the emergency management organization and the execution of the emergency preparedness plans. The city manager shall coordinate the emergency management activities and make emergency assignment of emergency preparedness duties and disaster relief forces in order to meet situations not covered in the normal duties of such forces. 
2.  The city manager may take all necessary action to conduct tests of the emergency preparedness plans. 
3.  When a state of emergency has been declared, the city manager shall assemble and utilize the disaster relief forces and prescribe the manner and condition of their uses. 
4.  The city manager shall designate a line of succession among the department heads to carry out the powers and duties of this section in the event of the city manager's absence or inability to serve, consistent with the city charter's provisions. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to exercise the powers granted to the mayor in Section 2.36.030, either in the absence or inability to serve of the mayor and deputy mayor or where delay in the exercise of such powers would be contrary to the public interest. 
C.  The emergency management coordinator shall be the executive officer of the emergency management function, and shall have responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management organization. 
D.  The emergency management coordinator shall be responsible for public relations, information and education regarding all phases of emergency preparedness. 
E.  The emergency management coordinator shall be responsible for the development of an emergency preparedness plan and, upon adoption, shall be responsible for such implementation and revision of the plan as to maintain it in a current state of readiness at all times. 
F.  The emergency management coordinator shall coordinate activities for emergency preparedness and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with all other interested and affected agencies, public and private. 
G.  The emergency management coordinator, through a designated volunteer representative, shall coordinate the recruitment and training of the emergency volunteer team to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency preparedness purposes. 
H.  The emergency management coordinator may issue proper insignia and papers to disaster relief forces and other people directly concerned with emergency preparedness. 
(Ord. 160 § 4, 1991) 
2.36.050 - Emergency preparedness plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency preparedness plan shall be adopted by resolution of the council upon the recommendations of the city manager. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and other sources and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible. When approved it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. 
(Ord. 160 § 5, 1991) 
2.36.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter or any regulations issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days, or both such fine or imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 160 § 7, 1991) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following terms and definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
    "Act 197" means Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, the Downtown Development Authority Act. 
    "Authority" means the Wixom downtown development authority, as established by Ordinance 128. 
(Ord. 132 § 1, 1983) 
3.04.020 - Council determination. 
    Based on a public hearing held in the city on November 22, 1983, in compliance with Act 197, the city council determines that: 
A.  The development plan constitutes a public purpose. 
B.  The tax increment financing plan constitutes a public purpose. 
C.  The development and tax increment financing plans meet the requirements as set forth in Section 17(2) of Act 197. 
D.  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing, upon the approval of the city council. 
E.  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197. 
F.  The development plan is in accord with the city's master plan and is a reasonable representation of the future actions in intent of the development area, should private initiatives indicate the need to implement various segments of the plan. 
G.  Public services are adequate to service the project area. 
H.  The land included within the development area to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and Act 197 in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
I.  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
(Ord. 132 § 2, 1983) 
3.04.030 - Approval of plan. 
    The development and tax increment financing plans for the Wixom downtown development district, as recommended by the authority and presented at the public hearing on November 22, 1983, are both approved and adopted, subject to modifications hereafter set forth in Section 3.04.040 of this chapter, if any. Each step in the implementation of the development and tax increment financing plans as adopted shall be submitted to and approved by the city council prior to implementation. 
(Ord. 132 § 3, 1983) 
3.04.040 - Amendments to plan. 
A.  Review and Determination of Public Purpose. Following a duly noticed public hearing on the amended downtown development and tax increment financing plans, which were recommended to the city council of the city of Wixom by the city of Wixom downtown development authority ("DDA") on the 22nd day of July, 2003, city council reviewed the plans and found the plans to meet the following standards and criteria, as set forth in Public Act 197 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1975, as amended (the "Act"): 
1.  A development area citizens council is not required by the Act for the city of Wixom DDA district. 
2.  The downtown development plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of the Act, and the tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set forth in Sections 14 and 15 of the Act. 
3.  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the DDA has the ability to arrange financing. 
4.  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
5.  Any land included within the development area to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plans and of the Act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
6.  The downtown development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
7.  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to serve the project area. 
8.  Potential changes to zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city. 
    In deliberations toward the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, the city council of the city has determined that the adoption and implementation of amended downtown development and tax increment financing plans constitutes a public purpose. 
B.  Approval of Plan. Premised upon the determination made in subsection A of this section and upon further finding that the execution of the downtown development plan and the tax increment financing plan appear to be in the best interest of the city, the amended plans are approved and adopted by reference. 
    No additional amendments to the plans shall be effective unless and until submitted to and approved by the city of Wixom city council in accordance with the procedures established by the Act. 
(Ord. 03-13 § 1, 2003; Ord. 132 § 4, 1983) 
Chapter 3.08 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Definitions. 
    In this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    "Cost" includes the expense of the survey, the preparation of the tax roll, notices, advertising, printing, financing, legal engineering, construction and condemnation and all other cost incidental to the making of the improvement. 
    "Improvement" means any public betterment, the cost of which may be defrayed by special assessments as authorized by the charter. 
    "Owner" means (1) in the case of tenancies by the entirety of joint tenancies, any one tenant shall be considered an owner entitled to file objections; (2) in the case of tenancies in common, objections shall be valid only if signed by all the common tenants; and (3) in the case of property being sold under land contract, the party in whose name the property is assessed for taxation shall be deemed to be the owner. 
(Ord. 75 § 1, 1969) 
3.08.020 - Advisory petition. 
    The council, to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive such a petition voluntarily presented; but in either event, such petition shall be advisory only. 
(Ord. 75 § 2, 1969) 
3.08.030 - Contents of petition. 
    Each advisory petition shall be addressed to the council and contain a brief description of the improvements sought to be made or the nuisance or hazard sought to be abated and shall be signed only by property owners. Each signature shall be followed by a brief description of the property owned by the signatory. The signatures on such petitions shall be verified by the oath of one or more of the circulators of such petition, before filing. 
(Ord. 75 § 3, 1969) 
3.08.040 - Filing of petition. 
    Advisory petitions shall be filed with the clerk, who shall refer them to the city manager or the mayor. The petition shall be presented to the council at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting called for that purpose, together with the recommendation of the city manager or the mayor. 
(Ord. 75 § 4, 1969) 
3.08.050 - Plans, specifications and cost estimates. 
    Upon receipt of advisory petitions, or upon its own initiative, the city council shall consider the adoption of an initiatory resolution. In such case, it may direct the city manager or the mayor to prepare (or cause to be prepared) plans and specifications of the improvement to be made, an estimate of the life of the improvement and of the cost thereof, a description of the assessment district or lands affected, and such other pertinent information as the council may request. 
(Ord. 75 § 5, 1969) 
3.08.060 - Resolution for improvement, preparation of report. 
    Whenever the council has the power to make public improvement by special assessment, it shall by resolution set forth the improvement intended to be made and direct the city manager or the mayor to prepare a report containing any information it may require relative to such improvement. 
(Ord. 75 § 6, 1969) 
3.08.070 - Report of city manager or mayor. 
    The city manager or the mayor shall prepare his report and set forth therein a schedule of all property affected by the proposed improvement and the owners thereof; an estimate of the cost thereof; the assessed valuation of each parcel of land and any tax delinquencies thereon and whether such land is improved or unimproved; and such other information as the council may have required. The city manager or the mayor shall present this report and the plans and specifications to the council, together with his recommendation as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city; the number of installments in which the assessment should be spread; and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district; and as to whether the property affected is to be assessed according to frontage, area, valuation, benefit, or other basis. 
(Ord. 75 § 7, 1969) 
3.08.080 - Notice of hearing. 
    After the presentation of the report and the plans and specifications, the council shall, by resolution, order the same filed with the clerk and provide for a public hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(Ord. 75 § 8, 1969) 
3.08.090 - Public hearing, objections and changes. 
    At the time and place specified in such notice for the public hearing, the council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the council, and council may make any changes in the proposed improvement or assessments which it deems reasonable or proper and in the best interests of the city. In the event any proposed improvement is extended or enlarged upon or additions made to the district to be assessed, no final determination shall be made by the council until after another hearing is held pursuant to notice as required for the original hearings. 
(Ord. 75 § 9, 1969) 
3.08.100 - Resolution of determination. 
    After said public hearings, the council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement and defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted in proportion to the benefits derived, or to be derived, and designate whether it is to be assessed according to frontage, area, valuation, benefit, or other bases. By such resolution, the council shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement; determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid; determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed six percent per annum; designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied; direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination; and designate the name by which said assessment roll shall be known and referred to. 
(Ord. 75 § 10, 1969) 
3.08.110 - Special assessment. 
    The assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll including all parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the council and shall assess against such parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at large. 
(Ord. 75 § 11, 1969) 
3.08.120 - Certificate of assessor. 
    Upon completion of such assessment roll, the assessor shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, his certificate to the effect that said roll was made by him pursuant to a resolution of the council (giving date of adoption of same) and that in making assessments therein he used his best judgment and conformed in all respects to the directions continued in such resolution and the city charter and the provisions of this chapter. Thereupon the special assessment roll shall be filed with the clerk, who shall present the same to the council. 
(Ord. 75 § 12, 1969) 
3.08.130 - Special assessment roll-Filing, hearing date. 
    Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the council shall order it filed in the office of the clerk for public examination and shall, by resolution, fix the time and place when the council shall meet and review such roll. Said meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been sent by the clerk by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. Such notice shall specify the time and place of such meeting. The council may, in its discretion, publish notice of the meeting, not less than ten days prior to date of the meeting. 
(Ord. 75 § 13, 1969) 
3.08.140 - Objections-Filing, hearing. 
    Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file his objections thereto in writing with the clerk, which written objections shall specify the manner in which he deems himself aggrieved. The council shall meet and review the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned date therefor and shall consider any written objections thereto. 
(Ord. 75 § 14, 1969) 
3.08.150 - Objections-Council vote required. 
    If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment roll, written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property who will be required to bear more than fifty percent of the amount of such special assessment, the improvement shall not be made or authorized without the affirmative vote of five members of the council. 
(Ord. 75 § 15, 1969) 
3.08.160 - Corrections and changes. 
    The council may correct the special assessment roll as to any assessment of description of any lot or parcel or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the council minutes. 
(Ord. 75 § 16, 1969) 
3.08.170 - Confirmation or rejection of roll. 
    After hearing and review the council by resolution may confirm the special assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made; or refer it back to the assessor for revision; or annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith. The clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll and upon confirmation of such roll shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 75 § 17, 1969) 
3.08.180 - Contract authorized in lieu of special assessment procedure. 
    In the event that all persons or property owners to be affected by any proposed improvement agree that such proposed improvement be made and that a special assessment be levied in connection therewith, the city may, in lieu of the foregoing procedure, enter into a written contract with all of the persons or property owners affected thereby, which contract, when approved and executed, shall operate as a complete special assessment procedure and the assessment shall be made in accordance with said contract. 
(Ord. 75 § 18, 1969) 
3.08.190 - Lien created. 
    Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessment shall become a debt to the city from the persons against whom the assessments were made, and shall, until paid, be lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by the charter for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. 
(Ord. 75 § 19, 1969) 
3.08.200 - Lien to remain unimpaired. 
    No judgment or decree, nor any action of the council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair any lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may have been equitably or lawfully charged and assessed thereon. Failure of any owner to receive any notice required to be sent under the provisions of the city charter and this chapter shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll and shall not be a jurisdictional requirement. 
(Ord. 75 § 20, 1969) 
3.08.210 - Due date-Installment payments. 
    All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments not to exceed ten in number as the council may determine at the time of confirmation. If in annual installments, the council shall determine the first installment to be due upon confirmation or on the following July 1st and subsequent installments on July 1st of succeeding years, and for any interest charge only until the due date of each such deferred installment not to exceed six percent per year, subject to the right of advance payment of any such installment with interest only to the date of payment. 
(Ord. 75 § 21, 1969) 
3.08.220 - Publication of notice. 
    The assessment roll shall be transmitted by the clerk to the treasurer for collection immediately after its confirmation. He may mail statements to the respective owners as to the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(Ord. 75 § 22, 1969) 
3.08.230 - Early payment-Division into installments. 
    The whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid during the period of sixty days from the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll without interest or penalty. Not later than fifteen days after the end of the sixty-day period, the treasurer shall transmit the roll to the assessor with all payments upon assessments noted thereon. The assessor shall then divide any remaining balance of each assessment into such number of equal installments as shall have been fixed by the council; provided that, if such division operates to make any installment less than ten dollars, then the assessor shall reduce the number of installments so that each installment shall be above and as near to ten dollars as possible. 
(Ord. 75 § 23, 1969) 
3.08.240 - Special assessments or installments. 
    Special assessments or installments thereof, which become due on July 1st of any year, shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July 1st or the same year, and if uncollected on the following first day of March, shall be returned to the county treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 11.6 of the city charter. 
(Ord. 75 § 24, 1969) 
3.08.250 - Delinquent installments. 
    The initial special assessment installments which become due other than on July 1st shall, if unpaid for ninety days or more, on May 1st of any year be certified as delinquent to the council by the treasurer; and the council shall place such delinquent assessments on the tax roll for that year together with accrued interest to July 1st of such year. The total amount of such assessments and interests shall thereafter be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July 1st of that year; shall be subject to the same fees and penalties as are city taxes due on that date; and, if uncollected on the following March 1st, shall be returned to the county treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 11.6 of the city charter. 
(Ord. 75 § 25, 1969) 
3.08.260 - Special assessment accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the city charter, monies raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account, and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments. 
(Ord. 75 § 26, 1969) 
3.08.270 - Insufficient assessments. 
    Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, the council shall make additional assessments against the city and the several lots and parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original assessments to supply the deficiency, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Ord. 75 § 27, 1969) 
3.08.280 - Excess assessments. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five percent the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments then exist, and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessment. 
(Ord. 75 § 28, 1969) 
3.08.290 - Collection of delinquent assessments. 
    In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Ord. 75 § 29, 1969) 
3.08.300 - Limitation on assessment districts. 
    No special assessment district shall be created by the council for any one public improvement which includes property having an area in excess of twenty-five percent of the total area of the city. No public improvement project shall be divided geographically for the purpose of circumventing this provision. 
(Ord. 75 § 30, 1969) 
3.08.310 - Assessments on single lots. 
    When any expenditure is made on account of any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or lands, or premises, which, by the provisions of this chapter or by law the city is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same, and which assessment is not of that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, a statement of the labor or services for which such expenditure was incurred, verified by the controller, with a description of the lot and the name of the owner or person chargeable therewith, if known, shall be reported to the council in the manner prescribed by it. The council shall determine the part of such expenditure that shall be charged, and the person against whom, if known, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied, as a special assessment. As often as the council deems expedient, the clerk shall give notice of the several amounts so determined and reported to the several persons chargeable therewith. Such notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last known addresses of such persons as shown on the assessment roll of the city, or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, and the amount thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, not less than thirty days, within which payment shall be made to the treasurer. In all cases where payment is not made within the time set, the fact shall be reported by the treasurer to the assessor, who shall charge such amounts, together with a penalty of ten percent of such amounts, against the persons or real property chargeable therewith, on the next tax roll. 
(Ord. 75 § 31, 1969) 
3.08.320 - Contested assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment (1) unless within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or action stating the ground on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal; or (2) unless such suit or action is commenced within sixty days after confirmation of the roll. 
(Ord. 75 § 32, 1969) 
3.08.330 - Illegal or invalid assessments. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of other assessments have been paid or not, subject to the decision of the court, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as prescribed for the original assessment, and whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment; or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
(Ord. 75 § 33, 1969) 
Chapter 3.12 - TAX PAYMENT SCHEDULE 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Established. 
    The tax payment schedules in the following sections for city taxes and taxes collected by the city on behalf of the state, the county and local school districts or their successors are provided pursuant to Section 9.12 of the city charter. 
(Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1990) 
3.12.020 - Summer tax collections. 
A.  All taxes paid on or before August 31st of each year shall be subject to an additional one percent property tax administration fee. Taxes paid on or before August 31st of each year shall be collected by the finance department without penalty or interest. If August 31st is a holiday or non-business day, the last day of collection without penalty and interest shall be the next regular city business day after August 31st. 
B.  In addition to the one percent administration fee, on September 1st of each year, the finance department shall add to all taxes unpaid a penalty of four percent and interest of one percent per month the taxes remain unpaid while said delinquent taxes remain under the jurisdiction of the city for collection. The penalty on the entire tax obligation and the interest due on city tax levy, as well as the administration fee, shall belong to the city and shall constitute a charge and lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectable in the same manner as the taxes for which they were added. Interest earned on the tax levy of other jurisdictions collected on behalf of these other agencies by the city shall be collected and distributed to the respective taxing authorities, unless otherwise provided by contractual agreement. All taxes paid after March 1st and the settlement of taxes with the county treasurer shall be subject to state statutory provisions regarding tax collection fees, penalties and interest. 
C.  It is provided, however, that if delivery of the tax roll to the finance department is delayed for any reason by more than thirty days after June 5th, the application of the schedule of the collection of penalties and interest provided in this chapter shall be postponed thirty days for the first thirty days of such delay and shall be postponed an additional thirty days or major fraction thereof of such delay. 
(Ord. 04-02 § 2, 2004) 
3.12.030 - Winter tax collections. 
A.  All taxes voluntarily paid before February 15th shall be subject to an additional one percent property tax administration fee. 
B.  All taxes paid to the city between February 15th and before March 1st shall be subject to a penalty of three percent on the taxes that remain unpaid in addition to the one percent tax administration fee. 
C.  All taxes paid after March 1st and the settlement of taxes with the county treasurer shall be subject to state statutory provisions regarding tax collection fees, penalties and interest. 
D.  The tax collection administration fee provided under subsection A of this section shall belong to the city and shall constitute a charge and lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectable in the same manner as the taxes for which they were added. 
(Ord. 152 § 1 (part), 1990) 
Chapter 3.16 - DISPOSITION OF REAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Authority established. 
    The city of Wixom may purchase, own and sell real property to promote the protection of natural resources, foster sound economic development, preserve land for the benefit of the public, and meet its needs for land area for the construction and maintenance of public buildings, streets and utilities. This authority is provided pursuant to regulations set forth in state statute, the City Charter, and other city ordinances. The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedure for the disposition of real property under those circumstances in which the city council makes a determination that the sale of said real property is in the interest of the public good. 
(Ord. 163 §1, 1992) 
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall be utilized in this chapter: 
    "Cemetery property" means property utilized for city-owned cemeteries. 
    "Economic development property" means property which by itself or in combination with other properties might be utilized for private development purposes. 
    "Governmental property" means property utilized for governmental purposes such as city buildings, city public works yards and/or city facilities. 
    "Historical property" means property utilized or held primarily because of its particular historical significance to the city. 
    "Land bank" means a classification to be applied to properties acquired or owned by the city for which other property designations are not immediately applicable or pertinent at the time of classification. This is property that the city council wishes to place in trust for seven years. 
    "Natural resource property" means property to be protected from development, such as wetlands or woodlands. 
    "Park property" means property utilized for city parks. 
    "Utility property" means property utilized for connection with city-owned or -operated utilities, such as well sites. 
(Ord. 163 § 2, 1992) 
3.16.030 - General provisions. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all real property classification and disposition: 
A.  All real property sales shall be evidenced by a written contract. 
B.  Except as otherwise directed by the City Charter or this chapter, the city may not sell any real property or interest therein without an affirmative vote of five or more members of the city council. 
C.  The city council shall only have power to enter into sale contracts which, by their terms, will be fully executed within a ten-year period unless said contract shall first receive the approval of the majority of the qualified electors voting at a regular or special election. 
D.  The city council, within one hundred twenty days of acquisition of property (or within one hundred twenty days of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter for property previously acquired), shall apply to the property in one of the classifications set forth in Section 3.16.020. Different classifications may be applied to several portions of a particular property in the discretion of council. 
E.  Original designations of properties shall be determined by a simple majority vote of council members present at a regular or special council meeting. 
F.  Properties designated as land bank properties shall remain so designated for a period of seven years. Such designations may be changed or the property sold during the seven-year period, or extensions thereof, only upon the affirmative vote of the electors of the city at a regular or special city election. 
G.  The designation of land bank property may be changed in relation to a particular real estate holding after a seven-year period and before any extension of said period by a simple majority vote of council members present at a regular or special council meeting. Land bank properties shall be reviewed annually, as outlined in subsection J of this section; however, action by the council to redesignate or continue land bank properties in the same classification must take place within one hundred twenty days of the first review date occurring after the seventh anniversary of the original designation or extension thereof. If the council should fail to redesignate or to continue a land bank property within said one hundred twenty days, the property shall maintain its designation as a land bank property until the next annual review date and shall continue from year to year in such classification until the council takes action on the parcel. 
H.  Properties designated as cemetery property, except for plotted grave sites which do not come within the purview of this chapter, park property, utility property, land bank property or natural resource property can be redesignated or sold only upon the affirmative vote of the electors of the city at a regular or special city election in accord with City Charter provisions and this chapter. 
I.  With the exception of properties designated as utility property, land bank property, park property, cemetery property or natural resource property, property classifications may be changed by a simple majority vote of council members present at a regular or special council meeting. 
J.  The council shall annually review all properties owned by the city and shall determine the appropriateness of the existing property classifications. The annual review shall take place at the first regular council meeting in March. Said review will be based upon recommendation made to the council by the city manager. The manager's report will include and treat all city-owned properties which will be listed by the city assessor and presented to the manager at least two months prior to the annual review date. 
K.  The city clerk shall obtain and maintain on file original deeds for all real property owned by the city. 
L.  Should historical property be destroyed or otherwise lose its historical significance, such property may be sold in accord with the procedures set forth in Section 3.16.050 dealing with the sale of economic development property. 
M.  Should the council decide that any governmental property is no longer necessary for city purposes, such property may be sold in accord with the procedures set forth in Section 3.16.050 dealing with the sale of economic development property. 
N.  Properties acquired or owned by the city which are designated as easements or rights-of-way for any municipal purpose shall not be governed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 163 §3, 1992) 
3.16.040 - Sale of park property, utility property, cemetery property, natural resources property or land bank property. 
A.  The city shall not sell all or part of any property designated as park property, utility property, cemetery property, natural resource property or land bank property unless approved by city electors voting at any general or special election in accord with City Charter provisions. The sale of park property, utility property and cemetery property must be approved by three-fifths of the electors voting. The sale of natural resources property and land bank property must be approved by a majority of the electors voting. 
B.  If the disposition of the property is approved by the electorate, the following procedure must be followed: 
1.  The city council, during a regular council meeting, shall direct the city clerk to provide for the advertisement of the availability of the land for the purpose of soliciting the submittal of sealed bids from the public for the acquisition of the land. 
2.  The city manager shall report the result of the bidding activity to the city council during a regular city council meeting. 
3.  The city council shall make the award of the bid for the acquisition of the property at a regular council meeting. The bid shall be awarded to the bidder offering the highest value for the property, unless the city council adopts a resolution finding that the award of the bid to a party other than the high bid is in the best interest of the city for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and welfare or specific economic development goals. 
(Ord. 163 § 4, 1992) 
3.16.050 - Sale of economic development property. 
A.  The electors of the city in August 1988 approved a ballot proposal to permit the city to levy not more than one mill for a ten-year period beginning in July 1989, to enable the city to acquire land, to dictate land use, encourage quality development and manage the rate of growth in the city. The funds to be received would allow the combining of parcels necessary for the assemblage of land area for suitable development which would be consistent with the city's master plan. This type of real property shall be known for the purpose of this chapter as economic development property. 
B.  The following procedure shall be utilized under the circumstance that the city council has determined that the intent of the elector authorization would be served by the disposition of acquired real property for economic purposes: 
1.  The city council shall discuss any proposal for the sale of economic development property during a regular meeting of the city council and shall be given written notice of such proposal by the city clerk prior to the council meeting. 
2.  If the matter is to be pursued, the city council shall authorize its agent, by resolution, to proceed to negotiate a sales contract which provides the city with fair consideration which results in an economic development project which is consistent with the city's master plan. 
3.  The results of the negotiation and development of a recommended sales contract shall be reported to the city council during a regular meeting. 
4.  The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed real property sales contract before authorizing the mayor and clerk to execute the contract on behalf of the city. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the city's legal newspaper at least twice prior to the conduct of the public hearing. The notice of the public hearing shall provide a map depicting the location of the property subject to disposition and a summary of the terms of the agreement. 
5.  A copy of the sales agreement shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk for review of the public during regular City Hall business hours. 
6.  Following the conduct of the public hearing, the council shall act on the sales contract, unless the matter is tabled or action postponed in accordance with the operating rules of the city council. If a decision on the execution of the sales contract is postponed, a notice shall be provided to the general public, indicating the date of the meeting during which the city council intends to again take up discussion on the matter. Authorization of the execution of the sales contract shall be pursuant to the requirement set forth in Section 3.16.030 of this chapter and must be approved by an affirmative vote of five or more members of the council. 
(Ord. 163 § 5, 1992) 
Chapter 3.20 - CITY TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE 
Sections: 

3.20.010 - Intent. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low and moderate income and preserve and encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1401 et. seq., MSA Section 16.114(1) et. seq.). The city is authorized by said Act to establish the classes of housing to which the tax exemption shall apply and to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act. It is further acknowledged that the city is and will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption therefore is a valid public purpose. 
    The city acknowledges that Maple North Consumer Housing Cooperative, a Michigan nonprofit corporation (herein the cooperative) owns and operates a housing development identified as Maple North Consumer Housing Cooperative on certain property located at (see legal description, Exhibit A, on file in the office of the city clerk) in the city to serve persons of low and moderate income, and that the cooperative has offered to pay the city on account of said development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(Ord. 135 § 2, 1985) 
3.20.020 - Definitions. 
    "Act" means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the state of Michigan, as amended. 
    "Annual shelter rent" means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent of occupance charges exclusive of charges for utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    "Consumer housing cooperative" means a nonprofit corporation incorporated pursuant to the corporation laws of this state and Chapter 5 of the Act. 
    "Federally-aided mortgage" means a mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under Section 236 of the National Housing Act of 1936, as amended. 
    "Housing development" means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low and moderate income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low and moderate income. 
    "HUD" means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    "Low and moderate income persons" means families and individuals who cannot afford to pay the amounts at which private enterprise, without federally-aided mortgages, is providing a substantial supply of decent, safe and sanitary housing and who fall within the income limits set by HUD in its regulations for occupancy of housing developments financed by federally-aided mortgages under Section 236. 
    "Utilities" means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service, electrical service, etc., which are paid for by the development. 
(Ord. 135 § 3, 1985) 
3.20.030 - Class of housing developments. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be consumer housing cooperatives which are financed by federally-aided mortgages. It is further determined that Maple North Consumer Housing Cooperative is of this class. 
(Ord. 135 § 4, 1985) 
3.20.040 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as Maple North Consumer Housing Cooperative and the property on which it is constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after December 30, 2005, for a period of ten years as long as all terms and conditions set forth herein are met. On the condition that the cooperative shall continue to operate said housing development at a cost affordable by low and moderate income persons, the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to eight and one-fourth percent of annual shelter rents as determined from the most recent income and expense statement covering said housing development. 
    A preliminary income and expense statement including the net occupancy income and an enumeration of the fuel cost, electric cost, sewer and water cost and rubbish removal cost shall be provided to the assessor of the city of Wixom by February 1st of each year of this agreement. A final audited report of the income and expenses of the development shall be provided to the assessor for the city of Wixom on or before March 31st of each year of this agreement. If either of the mentioned statements is not received by the provided dates the exemption as provided by this section may be terminated at the option of the city of Wixom. 
(Ord. 135-A-4 § 1, 2006: Ord. 135-A-3 § 1, 1996: Ord. 135-A2 § 1, 1994: Ord. 135-A1 § 1, 1986: Ord. 135 § 5, 1985) 
3.20.050 - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1st of every year except for the first year of this agreement when fifty percent of the tax shall be payable July 1st and the balance of the first year's payment on December 1st. 
    If said service charge is not received by the city on or before July 1st of each year of this the date codified in this chapter, with the exception of the first year, the exemption as provided herein may be terminated at the option of the city. All delinquent amounts for service charges ordered shall become a lien on the real estate which is the subject matter of this chapter. 
(Ord. 135-A-1 § 2, 1986: Ord. 135 § 6, 1985) 
3.20.060 - Duration. 
    This chapter shall remain in effect for a period of ten years but only if the federally-aided mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid or HUD has any interest in the property. 
(Ord. 135 § 7, 1985) 
3.20.070 - Contractual effect of ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    Notwithstanding provisions to the contrary herein contained, a contract between the city and the cooperative, with HUD as a third part beneficiary hereunder, to provide tax exemption and accept payment in lieu thereof as previously described, is effected by the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 135-A-1 § 3, 1986) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-19, § 1, adopted April 26, 2011, repealed former Ch. 5.04 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 133-A-2, §§ 1-4, 7-20, 1988; Ord. No. 133-A-3, §§ 1, 1989. 

5.04.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as the Business Licensing Ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 
    "Business" means any trade, occupation, profession, work, commerce or other activity owned or operated for a profit by any person within the city, unless otherwise licensed as a peddler, solicitor and canvasser by the city. 
    "City" means the City of Wixom. 
    "Licensing agent" means the city clerk or, in the absence of the clerk, the acting city clerk, or other such city official or employee as may be designated by city council. 
    "Persons" or "person" means a natural person and also includes corporations, partnerships and associations and their officers and officials existing under or authorized to exist under the laws of the State of Michigan or of any other state or any foreign country. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.030 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to assist the city with information to provide adequate police and fire protection including life safety issues; equitable real and personal property taxation; efficiency and economy in furnishing public utility services within the city; comprehensive and informed planning and zoning for uses of land and structures within the city; and to establish a registry of businesses operating within the city for the general information of the public and for the promotion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.040 - License requirements. 
    No person may commence or continue a business, as defined herein, within the city without having first obtained a city license therefor as provided in this chapter and without maintaining such license in current effect during any business operation or activity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.050 - Procurement procedure. 
    before a license to commence or continue a business shall be issued, the owner or operator thereof shall first obtain application approval from the licensing agent. A fee shall accompany the application as set forth from time to time by resolution of city council. the fee shall be prorated for the initial license year based upon the length of time remaining in that particular inspection/review zone, as established by the City of Wixom Fire Department. upon receipt of a properly completed application or renewal, and upon payment of the fee, and positive review by city departments (including police, fire, building, finance, public works, water & sewer, etc.), the licensing agent shall issue a license to the person(s) to commence or continue the business designated in the application. The licensing agent, or his or her designee, shall have the right of inspection of the business premises to assure compliance with this chapter. No license fee paid to the licensing agent shall be returned to the applicant, in whole or in part, for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.060 - License year. 
    The license year shall be designated for each property depending upon which inspection/review zone that property lies within, as set by the City of Wixom Fire Department. The assignment of the inspection/review zone, and the accompanying license renewal date, shall be at the total discretion of the city. The license holder shall be notified in writing of the subject zone and renewal date upon issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.070 - Exhibition of license. 
    No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade or business for which the license was granted, except where such trade or business is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, such license shall be exhibited at all times at some conspicuous place in such place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.080 - License nontransferable. 
    No license may be transferred by the holder to any other person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.090 - Compliance. 
A.  No license shall be issued or renewed to any existing or proposed business or person unless he/she has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter and with all of the provisions of all other federal, state and local laws, provisions of other ordinances, and rules and regulations applicable to the business, and the same is in full compliance with the zoning ordinance as deemed by the licensing agent. 
B.  No license shall be issued or renewed to any applicant whose business use, either alone or in combination with other businesses on the same property, violates any terms of the site plan governing the property. any business which expands operations beyond its existing site plans, subdivides its business premises or sublets its business facilities shall be subject to a site plan review, unless waived by the building and fire departments, and shall comply with any additional site plan requirements as mandated by the city zoning ordinance before a business license or renewal thereof is granted. 
C.  A license is required for every business entity within the city and for each business entity on a singular property. each business or person which occupies a site, whether alone or jointly, shall secure a license as set forth in this chapter. Any business entity conducting multiple operations within the city on noncontiguous lots or parcels shall obtain a license for each site. no business license shall be issued to any business utilizing a street address which has not been approved by state or local authorities. 
D.  Any person or entity serving as landlord to any other person or entity operating a business within the city shall be responsible for the business licensing compliance of its tenants. landlords shall be held jointly responsible for tenants' violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.100 - Suspension and revocation. 
A.  City council may suspend or revoke for cause any license issued by the city in the manner provided in this chapter. 
B.  The term "cause" as used in this chapter includes the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is granted under the provisions of this chapter, or upon any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
1.  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
2.  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
3.  The arrest and conviction of the licensee for any crime involving moral turpitude; 
4.  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted; 
5.  Forbidden by the provisions of this chapter or any other duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license has been granted; 
6.  Nonpayment of personal property taxes, real property taxes or any other obligation due and payable to the city relating to the licensed premises; 
7.  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes or ordinances. 
b.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood. 
c.  Failure to maintain the ground and exterior of the licensed premises free from litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties; 
8.  Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
C.  If the licensing agent determines that any licensee has committed a violation of this chapter, the following procedures shall occur: 
1.  The licensing agent shall prepare a report in writing specifying (1) the specific factual details of such violation(s), and (2) the particular chapter subsection(s) violated. 
2.  The licensing agent shall file the original report with the city council and serve a copy of such report upon the licensee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail. 
3.  Within twenty days from the date such report has been filed with the city council, the city clerk shall set a date for a hearing before council on the alleged violation(s) for a determination by council as to whether or not council shall suspend or revoke the license. notice of the hearing shall be served by the city clerk upon the licensee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail not less than seven days before a scheduled hearing date, and such notice shall advise the licensee of its right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing before the city council. 
4.  At all such hearings, the licensee shall have the legal right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any adverse witnesses, by being able to present witnesses in its own behalf, by being allowed to present arguments, personally or through legal counsel in its own behalf. 
5.  The city council shall prepare a written statement of its findings within ten days of the conclusion of all such hearings and shall serve such findings with the licensee either personally or by registered mail. if the city council decides that the license shall be suspended or revoked, the licensee shall forthwith surrender the same to the licensing agent and shall not thereafter conduct, operate or carry on the business for which the license was granted unless and until the license is restored and a new license issued to him/her. 
D.  Upon suspension or revocation of any license, the licensing agent shall not issue a new license of any kind to the licensee except upon the express approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.110 - License renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. should an application for a new license or a renewal of an existing license be denied by the licensing agent, the denied applicant may utilize the procedure set forth in Section 5.04.100(C) of this chapter as an appellate process by filing with the city clerk a written request for a hearing before the city council. Such request must be served upon the city clerk within ten days of the applicant's receipt of the denial notice. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
5.04.120 - Violation-penalty. 
    Any violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall be a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the payment of a civil fine, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses may be subject to increased fines. In addition, any violation of the terms of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and the city, by and through its proper officers and agents, shall have the authority and power to maintain and conduct legal action for the abatement of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1, 4-26-2011) 
Chapter 5.06 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR* 
Sections: 

5.06.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "alcoholic liquor ordinance." 
(Ord. 06-02 § 1, 2006) 
5.06.020 - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to emphasize and clarify the city's requirements for the issuance, transfer, renewal, relocation, and enforcement of liquor licenses and permits, and address the operation of licensed premises. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 2, 2006) 
5.06.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Brewpub" means a liquor license issued by the liquor control commission in conjunction with a class, tavern, or hotel license that authorizes the person licensed to manufacture and brew not more than five thousand barrels of beer per calendar year in Michigan and sell at that licensed brewery premises the beer produced for consumption on or off the licensed brewery premises in the manner provided for in Sections 405 and 407 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. A brewpub license is considered a hybrid on and off premises liquor license. 
    "Class C license" means a license to sell retail beer, wine, mixed spirit drink and spirits for consumption on premises. 
    "Club license" means a liquor license issued to a club as defined by Section 107 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 and pursuant to Rule 436.1127 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
    "Hotel license" means a liquor license issued to a hotel as defined in Section 107 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. 
    "LCC" means the Michigan Liquor Control Commission as defined in the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. 
    "Licensee" means a person who has been issued a Class C, tavern, resort, SDM, SDD, club, hotel, brewpub, or micro brewer license. 
    "Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998" means Michigan Public Act No. 58 of the Public Acts of 1998, as amended. (Michigan Compiled Laws 326.1101 et seq., as amended). 
    "Micro brewer" means a brewer licensed to manufacture and sell beer to licensed wholesalers, which produces in total less than thirty thousand barrels of beer per year and who may sell at the licensed brewery premises the beer produced to consumers for consumption on or off the licensed brewery premises. In determining the thirty thousand barrel threshold, all brands and labels of a brewer, whether brewed in this state or outside this state, shall be combined and all facilities for the production of beer that are owned or controlled by the same person shall be treated as a single facility. A micro brewer license is considered a hybrid on and off premises liquor license. 
    "Off-premises license" means a person who is licensed by the LCC to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption off the licensed premises, including SDD, SDM, brewpub and micro brewer licenses. 
    "On-premises license" means a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the licensed premises, including Class C, tavern, resort, club, hotel, brewpub and micro brewer licenses. 
    "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships or limited liability companies. 
    "Resort license" means a liquor license issued by the liquor control commission in a resort area, not to exceed twelve months, without regard to other LCC quota requirements, in accordance with the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. 
    "Special permits" means and includes, but are not limited to, outdoor service permits, "one-day" licenses, "after hours" permits, temporary dance, entertainment, "add bar" permits, specific purpose permits, and special licenses, as those terms are defined by or utilized in the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 and the Michigan Administrative Code. 
    "Specially designated distributor (SDD)" means a person, firm or corporation engaged in an approved business licensed by the LCC to distribute spirits and mixed spirit drink in the original package for consumption off the premises. 
    "Specially designated merchant (SDM)" means any person, firm or corporation to whom the LCC grants a license to sell beer and/or wine at retail for consumption off the premises of such licensed place. 
    "Tavern" means any place licensed to sell retail beer and wine for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 3, 2006) 
5.06.040 - Application procedure for new "on-premises" licenses. 
A.  Application. Every applicant for an on-premises liquor license approval must complete and file an application with the city clerk's office on forms that will be provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by the city, made payable to the city of Wixom. The application pertains to the city only, and is in addition to the separate application required by the LCC. The city application shall include the following information: 
1.  Applicant's name, address and phone number; 
2.  Names, addresses and phone numbers of all persons with an interest in a proposed business, including partners and stockholders; 
3.  Address and telephone number of resident agent for accepting service of process, if applicant is a corporation, or limited liability company; 
4.  Name and address of financial institution where an applicant's funds for establishment and operation of the entity sought to be licensed are deposited; 
5.  The sources of all funds which will be relied upon in the establishment and operation of the entity sought to be licensed; 
6.  The distance from other licensees within a two-mile radius of the area where the proposed business will be located; 
7.  A statement that the proposed business is not within five hundred feet of a church or school building; 
8.  List criminal record, if any, of the applicant, including all partnership members and all stockholders, if a corporation, and all members if a limited liability company; 
9.  A statement regarding whether applicant or any partner, member, or shareholder has ever made another application for a liquor license and the disposition of such application; 
10.  A statement that the applicant is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter or the laws of the state of Michigan; 
11.  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of Michigan or of the United States or any ordinances of the city in the conduct of its business; 
12.  The legal description, address, and zoning classification for location where business is proposed; 
13.  State whether a new building is proposed or whether an existing structure will be utilized; 
14.  A sketch, drawn to scale, showing floor plans, seating arrangements, site dimensions (including parking areas), future building alterations and other pertinent physical features for existing buildings or proposed buildings in which the applicant's business will be conducted. If the applicant is approved for issuance of a license, the city may condition its approval upon its further consideration and approval of an engineered site plan, complete with building elevations; 
15.  Details of the applicant's experience, financial capability and history of business experience, including experience as a licensee; 
16.  A general operational statement outlining the proposed manner in which the establishment will be operated, including a schedule of the hours of operation, food service, crowd control, use of facilities, parking facilities and estimated cost of development; 
17.  The name, address, and telephone number of the person to be called in the event of an emergency at the licensed establishment; 
18.  A statement demonstrating that the location proposed and the methods of operation will not detrimentally and unreasonably impact nearby property owners, businesses, and residents; 
19.  Certification of approval from the Oakland County health department of an adequate sewage disposal system if the public sewer system is not available to the proposed operation; 
20.  Any other information relevant to a determination by the city that there is or is not a need for additional licenses to be issued within the city. 
B.  License Restrictions in Application. The following restrictions will be imposed upon all applicants. No license shall be issued to: 
1.  A person ("licensee") whose liquor license has been revoked or not renewed. Licensee includes every entity, corporation or partnership, and each shareholder, member or partner. 
2.  A co-partnership, unless each of the members of the co-partnership qualify to obtain a license. 
3.  A corporation, if any officer, manager, director or stockholder would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason. 
a.  A limited liability company if any member would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason. 
4.  A person who cannot establish that the license will be used by licensee within six months of city approval and will not be held for investment. 
5.  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor. 
6.  A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license is issued. 
7.  Any law enforcing public official employed by the city. 
8.  Any person for any premises where there exists a violation of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations. 
9.  Any entity or person for any premises unless the sale of beer, wine, or spirits is shown to be incidental and subordinate to food sales, hotel or motel uses, and golf course uses. 
10.  Any person for any premises where it is determined by a majority of the Wixom city council that the premises does not or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations, comply fully with all city ordinances, including having adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise and nuisance control, and sewage disposal facilities. 
11.  Any person for any premises where the Wixom city council determines that the proposed location is inappropriate because of city policy preferring the location of licensed establishments in developed, commercial areas, rather than isolated, undeveloped areas, and also considering the following factors: the compatibility with adjacent uses of the land; traffic safety; accessibility to the site from abutting roads; capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity; distance from public or private schools for minors; proximity of the inconsistent zoning classification; and accessibility from primary roads or state highways. 
12.  Any applicant who omits or falsifies any information required by this chapter. 
C.  Investigation. Upon receipt of the application, the city clerk will refer the application to the police department, fire department, building department, health department, and such other departments as required by the city manager. All departments shall make their recommendations prior to consideration by the city council. The police chief shall cause a thorough investigation to be made of the persons and the premises, including a complete history of past business experience and any liquor law violations. The findings resulting from the investigations shall be submitted to the city council. 
D.  Hearing. After the city completes its investigation, the application will be placed on the city council's agenda for consideration. Due notice will be given to the applicant and to all residents and/or businesses located within five hundred feet of the applicant. The applicant will be required to appear before the city council and answer any questions pertaining to the application. 
E.  License Approval. If the city is satisfied that the establishment for which a liquor license is sought may constitute an asset to the community, and meets the requirements set forth herein, it may adopt a resolution granting approval, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions stated below, which will be set forth in a separate letter to the LCC. Approval of the license shall be granted with the following conditions: 
1.  In the city's discretion, issuance of an on-premises license may be restricted to a tavern license. (A tavern license is included in the state of Michigan quota allowances for Class C licenses.) 
2.  Issuance of licenses shall be contingent upon the application for and receipt of site plan approval, building permits, zoning changes and other necessary approvals required by the city within four months after the issuance. In addition, the city council may condition its issuance of a license upon its further review and approval of an engineered site plan, independent of the required approvals under the city building code or zoning ordinance. 
3.  Construction shall be pursued within six months after the issuance of a license, at which time the progress of the applicant in meeting all of the above-stated conditions shall be reported by the city manager to the city council. 
4.  The city council may extend, upon a showing of special or unusual circumstances not the fault of the applicant, the time period set forth in subsections (E)(2) and (E)(3) of this section, upon timely request. 
5.  No floor plans, building elevation, site plan, seating arrangement, kitchen layout or other pertinent facts, drawings, or documents submitted to the city may be changed, unless the change reasonably improves the design or service function of the facility, and the applicant receives approval for the change from the city council. There shall be no fee charged for city review of such an approval request. 
6.  When the building or remodeling is complete, it must meet all state and local regulations, and must comply with representations made to the city council by the applicant. 
7.  Failure of any applicant to meet any of the conditions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be reason for the city council to deny the annual renewal of any of the licenses issued. 
F.  Available Licenses. Under no circumstances is the city council obligated to issue an available license. No applicant for a liquor license has the right to the issuance of such license to him, her, or it, and the city council reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such license. Additionally, no applicant for a liquor license has the right to have such application processed, and the city council further reserves the right to take no action with respect to any application filed with the city. The city council further reserves the right to maintain a list of all applicants and to review the same when, in its discretion, it determines that the issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interests of the city at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens. Before taking action with regard to a specific application, the city council shall make a determination that a need exists for the issuance of an additional liquor license within the city based upon the following criteria: 
1.  The applicant bears the burden of establishing that the city can meet the needs for its residents for availability of liquor only by issuance of another liquor license. 
2.  Can the city's need for licenses be met if an issued, but inactive, liquor license is made active? (Issued, but inactive, licenses include licenses which have been placed in escrow pursuant to law.) 
3.  Is there currently a reasonable relationship between the number of licenses issued (whether inactive or not) and the needs of the city for availability of liquor? 
4.  Is there an unmet demand for a land use which would be enhances by the issuance of a liquor license to be used in conjunction with it? 
5.  Are currently issued licenses not being used in conjunction with another primary purpose, such as food service, recreation, or hotel uses? 
6.  Does the city have adequate police, fire, and other emergency service personnel to service an additional licensed establishment? 
Additional Criteria 
7.  The city council shall also consider whether the applicant's proposal is reasonable when measured against the following criteria: 
a.  The applicant's management experience in the alcohol/liquor business; 
b.  The applicant's general business management experience; 
c.  The applicant's general business reputation; 
d.  The applicant's moral character; 
e.  The applicant's financial status and its ability to build and/or operate the proposed facility on which the proposed liquor license is to be located; 
f.  Past criminal convictions of the applicant for crimes involving moral turpitude, violence, drug-related or alcoholic liquor offenses; 
g.  The applicant's excessive use of alcoholic beverages; 
h.  The effect that the issuance of a license would have on the economic development of the surrounding area; 
i.  The effects that the issuance of a license would have on the health, welfare and safety of the general public; 
j.  The recommendations of the police department, building department, Oakland County health department, and/or fire department with regard to the proposed facility; 
k.  Whether the applicant has demonstrated the public need or convenience for the issuance of the liquor license for the business facility at the location proposed; 
l.  The uniqueness of the proposed facility when contrasted against other existing or proposed facilities, and the compatibility of the proposed facility to surrounding architecture and land use; 
m.  Whether the facility to which the proposed liquor license is to be issued complies, or will comply, with the applicable building, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention codes, and zoning statutes and ordinances applicable in the city; 
n.  The effects that the business facility to which the proposed license is to be issued will have upon vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area; 
o.  The proximity of the proposed business facility to other similarly situated licensed liquor facilities; 
p.  The proximity to complementary uses such as office and commercial development; 
q.  The effects that the business facility to which the proposed license is to be issued would have upon the surrounding neighborhood and/or business establishments, including impacts upon residential areas, churches and school districts; 
r.  The permanence of the establishment in the community as evidenced by the proposed or actual commitments made by the applicant; 
s.  The availability of utilities to serve the facility; 
t.  Other considerations as the city council may deem proper, provided such considerations are reasonable under the circumstances. 
G.  Multiple Applicants for Available Licenses. If the city council elects to issue an available license and more than one person applies for same, the criteria set forth in this subsection shall determine which, if any, applicant is issued an available license. 
1.  The applicant that best meets the criteria set forth in Section 5.06.060. 
2.  The applicant whose operations will be most consistent with the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. 
3.  The applicant whose operations will be most consistent with the appropriate use of adjacent properties and the city as a whole. 
4.  The applicant whose operations will be most consistent with the policies of the city as expressed in its other ordinances and resolutions. 
5.  The applicant whose operations will be most consistent with the public policies of the state of Michigan as expressed in its laws, rules, and regulations. 
H.  Term of License. Approval of a liquor license shall be for a period of one year, expiring annually on April 30th following the date of issuance. The liquor license is subject to annual review by the city council. 
I.  Changes. Substantial changes in the licensee's operation shall be approved by the city council. Substantial changes include changes in space of more than ten percent, reduction of more than ten percent in percentage of food or other sales not related to liquor, or changes in the approved plan which affects capacity, parking, noise generated or other impact on adjacent residents or property owners. No fee shall be charged for this process. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 4, 2006) 
5.06.050 - Informational filing required. 
    Whenever the information submitted by a licensee pursuant to the application process changes, it shall be the duty of the licensee to notify the city and to supplement the information previously submitted. The licensee is responsible for compliance with this section within twenty days of the change of information or circumstances. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 5, 2006) 
5.06.060 - Application procedure for new permits. 
    Any permit ancillary to a liquor license, including dance, entertainment, or dance and entertainment, may be issued simultaneously to the issuance of a new license or transferred license or after the issuance of the liquor license, in the discretion of the city council. The request for a permit shall be submitted to the city clerk, in writing, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by the city. If the request for permit is made at initial application or transfer, no additional fee is required. The city clerk will set the matter for hearing before the city council, with due notice to be given the licensee. In passing on the licensee's request, the city council may consider the following: 
A.  Past record of the licensee, including liquor license violations and police contacts; 
B.  Plans presented for dealing with and for avoiding nuisances and neighborhood problems created by the permit; 
C.  The proposed changes in the licensee's operation if granted the permit; 
D.  The type of entertainment or dance proposed; 
E.  Adequate provisions for any increased parking needs; 
F.  Management operations and compliance with the informational filing required in Section 5.06.050. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 6, 2006) 
5.06.070 - Inactive licenses. 
    Any license which has not been activated by the licensee upon the city council's yearly review for renewal (Section 5.06.100) may cause the city to object to annual renewal of the license. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 7, 2006) 
5.06.080 - Transfers. 
A.  Liquor Licenses. Applications for the transfer of an on-premises liquor license will proceed and be reviewed under the new license provisions of Section 5.06.040, as any other new license, except that the following additional factors may be considered by the city council. 
1.  Consideration will be given to whether or not the operation is expected to change from the existing operation. 
2.  If continuation of an existing operation is contemplated, the licensee must present a plan relating to how it will deal with existing problems created by the business by reason of insufficient parking, nuisance created on- or off-site, civil or criminal liability. 
3.  Consideration will be given to the intentions of a licensee who obtained the license as a secured party, and does not intend to operate the premises. In this instance, the city council may use its discretion in waiving certain requirements. 
a.  If the new license provisions are waived by the city council, the license transfer will be approved only if the transferee agrees in writing that: 
i.  The licensed premises will not be operated; and 
ii.  The transferee will not operate the premises through a management agreement; and 
iii.  If the transferee operates or attempts to operate the licensed premises this shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation or nonrenewal. 
b.  A license that is transferred pursuant to this section is considered an inactive license for purposes of Section 5.06.070. 
4.  Transfers which involve the following circumstances may go directly to the city council for consideration without payment of a fee and without the necessity of furnishing the information required for new licenses by Section 5.06.040. 
a.  The exchange of the assets of a licensed sole proprietorship, licensed general partnership, or licensed limited partnership for all outstanding shares of stock in a corporation in which either the sole proprietor, all members of the general partnership, or all members of the limited partnership are the only stockholders of that corporation. 
b.  The removal of a member of a firm, a stockholder, a member of a general partnership or limited partnership, or association of licensees from a license. 
c.  The addition to a license of the spouse, son, daughter, or parent of any of the following: 
i.  A licensed sole proprietor; 
ii.  A stockholder in a licensed corporation; 
iii.  A member of a licensed general partnership, licensed limited partnership, or other licensed association. 
d.  The occurrence of any of the following events: 
i.  A corporate stock split of a licensed corporation; 
ii.  The issuance to a stockholder of a licensed corporation of previously unissued stock as compensation for services performed; 
iii.  The redemption by a licensed corporation of its own stock; 
iv.  A corporate public offering. 
B.  Permits. Existing permits ancillary to liquor licenses are transferred with the liquor license unless cancelled in writing. Transferees must present plans regarding the operation they intend to conduct using the particular permit. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 8, 2006) 
5.06.090 - Renewal. 
    The city will review each on-premises licensee's liquor license and permits annually to determine whether or not to object to the liquor control commission's renewal of said license and/or permits. If the licensee is not notified to appear before the city council by March 30th of the licensing year, then the license and/or permit will be renewed in accordance with the liquor control commission rules. The city council shall object to renewal if the following standards are not met. 
A.  Liquor Licenses. 
1.  Compliance with all standards and plans established and approved at time of issuance of license or at time of later city approvals. 
2.  The city may also object to renewal based on the criteria set forth in Section 5.06.110 regarding revocation. 
B.  Permits. 
1.  Annual renewal procedure of permits shall take place concurrent with the renewal process for liquor licenses, and shall be subject to the following considerations: 
a.  The city council will inquire into nuisances created or contributed to by the licensee. 
b.  Civil or criminal violations that cause a disturbance in the community, or that endanger person or property and which can fairly be attributed to the licensee or its customers or employees. 
c.  Licensees must demonstrate that they have continued to operate in compliance with the plan of operation submitted at the time of obtaining the permit or as subsequently supplemented with city approval. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 9, 2006) 
5.06.100 - Procedure for objecting to renewal or requesting revocation of liquor license or permit. 
A.  Procedure. Prior to filing an objection with the LCC to renewal or filing a request for revoking an on-premises liquor license or a permit, the city council shall do the following: 
1.  Serve the licensee, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to hearing with notice of a hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 
a.  Notice of proposed action; 
b.  Reasons for the proposed action; 
c.  Date, time, and place of hearing; 
d.  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses. 
2.  Hold a Hearing as Scheduled. The licensee will be given an opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present evidence and testimony and to confront adverse witnesses. 
3.  Following the hearing, the city council shall submit to the licensee and the LCC a written statement of its findings and determination. 
4.  If the city council determines that a recommendation of nonrenewal and/or a request for revocation is to be filed with the LCC it shall pass a resolution to that effect, stating the specific reasons for the determination. The resolution will be forwarded to the LCC in a timely fashion. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 10, 2006) 
5.06.110 - Revocation. 
    The city council may request that the LCC revoke an on-premises license or a permit at any time for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Failure to comply with all conditions, standards, plans, or agreements entered into in consideration for the issuance of the license; 
B.  Violations of the state liquor laws; 
C.  Violation of state law or local ordinance; 
D.  Refusal to respond to written warnings that revocation proceedings may be commenced unless the licensee or licensee's representative appears before the city council and show cause why revocation should not be initiated; 
E.  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in conjunction with the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
1.  Violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory rules, 
2.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood, 
3.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris, or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties, 
4.  Entertainment on the licensed premises without a permit and/or entertainment which disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility in the neighborhood of the licensed premises, 
5.  Any advertising, promotion, or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates, or contributes to disorder, disobedience of rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises; 
F.  Excessive police contacts with licensed premises, or its patrons off the premises determined to be the fault of the licensee; 
G.  Repeated instances where the licensee is serving minors or intoxicated persons; 
H.  Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 11, 2006) 
5.06.120 - Request for revocation of off-premises license. 
    The city council may, by resolution, request the LCC to revoke the license of an off-premises licensee (SDD or SDM) after it has been determined pursuant to LCC violation hearings that the licensee sold or furnished alcoholic liquor, on at least three separate occasions in a single calendar year, to a person who is less than twenty-one years of age, provided said violations did not involve the use of falsified or fraudulent identification by the person who is less than twenty-one years of age. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 12, 2006) 
5.06.130 - Operation of licensed premises. 
A.  Nudity on Licensed Premises. 
1.  No person, while appearing in a state of nudity as defined by this section, shall frequent, loiter, work for or perform in any establishment licensed or subject to licensing by the LCC. No proprietor or operator of any such establishment shall allow the presence in such establishment of any person who violates the provisions of this section. 
2.  "Nudity" shall be defined to be the exposure by view of persons, of any of the following body parts, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to exposure, see-through clothing articles, or boding stockings: 
a.  The whole or part of the pubic region; 
b.  The whole or part of the anus; 
c.  The whole or part of the buttocks; 
d.  The whole or part of the genitals; 
e.  The breast area including nipple, or more than one-half of the area of the breast. 
(Ord. 06-02 § 13, 2006) 
Chapter 5.08 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
Article I. - In General 

5.08.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as the Cable Communications Ordinance. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the furnishing of a high quality but economical cable communications service to the residents of the city and to regulate such service in the public interest. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.030 - Cable system requirements. 
    No person shall own or operate a cable system, as defined in this chapter, in the city, except by operating authority granted by the city, or except by franchise granted by the city, which franchise shall comply with all the requirements of this chapter, except as otherwise may be provided in a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.040 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, any subsequent ordinance dealing with cable communications, any franchise agreement between the city and a cable communications company, and any application or proposal submitted pursuant to an RFP, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    "Access cablecasting" means services provided by a cable television system on its public, education, local government, licensed or other access channels. 
    "Access channels" means channels which are dedicated to the public interest, according to the following categories (collectively "PEG access" or "PEG channels"): (a) public access; (b) educational access; and (c) governmental access. 
    "Applicant" means a person submitting a proposal for the franchise of a cable communications system. 
    "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
    "Cablecast" means to distribute programs (both from broadcasting sources and original programs) through the cable system by means of coaxial cable or other electrical conductors or fiber optical transmitters. 
    "Cable communications service" or "cable service" means (a) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (b) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    "Cable communications system," "cable system," "CATV," "SMA-TV" (satellite master antenna television), or "system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations, (B) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way, (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621 (c)) to the extent such facility is used in transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (D) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    "City" means the city of Wixom and all the territory within its corporate limits. 
    "City council" means the governing body of the city. 
    "Community-specific cablecasting" means programming or channel allocation which selectively cablecasts to individual communities to meet their unique needs or interests. 
    "Community" refers to any unit with common needs or interests such as individual cities or neighborhoods, school districts or groups with common characteristics. 
    "Connection" means the attachment of the drop to the first radio or television set of the subscriber. 
    "Converter" means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all basic subscriber signals included in the basic service delivered at designated converter dial locations. The converter may also allow reception of additional programming and/or services at extra cost to the subscriber. 
    "Drop" means the cable that connects the subscriber terminal to the nearest feeder cable of a cable system. 
    "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
    "Feeder" means an intermediate line of cable system that carries signals from trunk line to drops. 
    "Franchise" means the rights of a grantee to construct and operate a cable system in the city, subject to the city charter, this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
    "Franchise agreement" means the agreement between grantee and the city setting specific rights and responsibilities of each for construction and operation of cable system. 
    "Fraud" or "deceit" is not limited to common law fraud and deceit but include the meaning of those words under federal securities law. 
    "Grantee" means a person to whom a cable communications franchise has been granted or who otherwise has authority to operate a cable system. 
    "Gross revenues" means all revenue derived by grantee or any entity affiliated with grantee, from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the franchise area. Gross revenues shall include, but shall not be limited to, basic subscriber monthly fees, pay cable fees, converter rentals, late payment fees, installation and reconnection fees, advertising and home shopping revenue, leased access fees, and internet access service fees. The term does not include (a) any taxes on services furnished by grantee on behalf of said governmental unit, and (b) any dividends, distributions, interest or payments for service between grantee and its affiliates, subsidiaries and parent. 
    "Headend" means the equipment at the antenna site in a master antenna or cable system. The point of origination that collects all the signals (from broadcast stations, cable stations and satellite stations) and sends them to the subscribers. 
    "Hub" means one of two or more elements in a large cable system from which trunk lines originate, from which programming and data is sent out via trunk lines, where upstream messages are received and where switching is accomplished. Large systems have multiple hubs linked to each other and/or to a master headend. 
    "Installation" means the connection of the system from feeder cable to the point of connection. 
    "Interactive system" means a two-way operations system. See also "two-way capability." 
    "Interconnect" means to link cable head-ends so that subscribers to different cable systems can see the same programming simultaneously. 
    "Local public access" refers to the public opportunity to use cable channels which are dedicated to that purpose and are not under control of grantee. 
    "Local origination" means programs produced locally, the content of which may be original or produced elsewhere and sold or licensed to grantee for use. 
    "Lockout device" means a device which prevents reception of one or more channels at an individual drop. 
    "Loop" means a completely interactive closed-circuit net connecting specified municipal, educational, medical or commercial facilities within a system which should also have the capacity to be interconnected to the main cable system. 
    "Pay TV" means cable channels that require an additional subscriber fee. 
    "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity as the context may indicate. 
    "Point-to-point transmission" means a signaling path provided by a system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the system. 
    "Producer" means a user providing input services to the cable system for receipt by subscribers. 
    "Proposal" means an applicant's response to an RFP or otherwise pursuant to an applicant's request for the award of a new or renewal franchise. However, renewal proposals shall not be subject to the franchise application fee set forth in this chapter. 
    "Public property" means any real property owned by the city other than a street. 
    "RFP" means a request by the city for a proposal from applicants for a cable system. 
    "Security system" means optional two-way service(s) offered to cable subscribers which may alert authorities and/or subscribers of potential emergencies in the subscriber's home or public or private buildings. 
    "Senior citizen" means a person sixty-two years old or older. 
    "Street" or "highway" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by city which shall, within its proper use and meaning in the sole opinion of city, entitle grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, or transmitting over, poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system. 
    "Subscriber" means a person who pays an installation charge and/or monthly fee to a cable system operator for connections to the system and for programs and services carried on the cable. 
    "Subscriber service drop" means the same as "drop." 
    "Trunk" or "trunk line" means the main line of a cable system that carries signals from headend to extremities of cable system. 
    "Two-way capability" means the ability of a cable system to conduct signals to a headend as well as from the headend. See also "loop." 
    "User" means a person or organization utilizing a system channel as a producer, for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, or as a subscriber, for purposes of receipt of material. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article II. - Selection of Franchisee 

5.08.050 - Award of franchise. 
    The city council may award a franchise to an applicant only after a public hearing on the application and proposal, notice of which hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation as provided by law. Subject to applicable law, the city council may reject all applicants. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.060 - Franchise application-Contents and fees. 
    All proposals shall be submitted in writing and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount to be determined by the city council. All proposals shall contain the information required by the city, either in an RFP or otherwise. 
A.  Such information shall include, without limitation, the following: 
1.  Information regarding the identity of the applicant; 
2.  Biographical data of the applicant's principal owners and proposed management, including the experience of such persons in the cable communications field; 
3.  Audited financial statements or the applicant's most current interim financial statements, which interim statements need not be audited but which shall be reviewed by a certified public accountant in accordance with standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and which interim statements shall be accompanied by the accountant's report thereon; 
4.  A financing plan for the proposed system and a projection, covering the term of the franchise, of revenue and expense in sufficient detail to permit a determination to be made of the financial viability of the applicant's proposal; 
5.  A detailed description of the system and facilities proposed for the city, including the matters to which a response is specifically required by applicable sections of this chapter, and including a schedule of projected rates for all charges and fees to subscribers; 
6.  A detailed timetable for the construction and commencement of operation of the system, including the matters to which a response is specifically required by applicable sections of this chapter. 
B.  A new or renewal franchise may be adopted, amended or extended by resolution or ordinance as may be required by local law. 
C.  The city shall be entitled to verify any information furnished by the applicant in response to the RFP or in response to other requests for information regarding the applicant and the applicant's affairs. The city may exercise such right by requiring reports from the applicant, or from third parties having knowledge of the applicant, or by conducting such other kinds of investigation as the city may deem proper. In such cases the applicant shall furnish the city with such written authorization regarding release of information as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the foregoing provisions. All of the foregoing provisions shall also be applicable to a grantee as well as an applicant, it being deemed to be in the public interest that the city remains knowledgeable regarding grantee and the operation of the system throughout the term of the franchise. 
D.  No applicant, nor any person on behalf of any applicant, shall, in responding to an RFP or in responding to any other request for information by the city or by any other officer or agency thereof, make any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. A violation of this provision constitutes a fraud upon the city. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.070 - Criteria for award of cable franchise. 
    The award of a new or renewal franchise to an applicant shall be based upon the information contained in the applicant's proposal and such other relevant information as may be obtained by the city regarding such applicant and the proposal. Such award shall be based upon the criteria specified by law and, to the extent lawful, such other factors as the city may deem relevant including the criteria set forth below. 
A.  The experience of the applicant in the cable communications field and the credentials of its owners and managers; 
B.  The applicant's financial resources, including both present financial condition and the availability of committed funding to finance the applicant's proposed system; and the specificity and credibility of the applicant's projections of the revenue and expenses attributable to the construction and operation of the system; 
C.  The applicant's system design, including channel capacity and ability to provide a broad range of services in conformity with the highest quality standards of the cable industry; 
D.  The applicant's schedule of rates and the length of time the applicant is committed to maintain such rates; 
E.  The applicant's response to specific local concern or needs, whether formulated by the city and made known to applicant or whether ascertained by the applicant. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article III. - Franchise Agreement 

5.08.080 - Franchise agreement. 
    The franchise agreement shall be in such form and contain such terms and provisions as shall be approved by the city council. The agreement may be adopted, amended and extended, by resolution of the city council or by any other mode of adoption, amendment or extension authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.090 - Grant of franchise. 
    Grantee shall be awarded a franchise, pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08.050 of this chapter, either by resolution of the city council or by any other means authorized or required by law. Grantee shall be promptly notified of the award by the city by written notice thereof, sent by registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.100 - Execution and delivery by grantee. 
A.  The franchise agreement shall be properly executed and delivered to the city by grantee, promptly after approval by city. The franchise agreement shall not become effective until that specific date set forth in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Grantee shall pay to the city all costs incurred by the city in the franchise process as provided in the franchise agreement. All other payments which are to be made to the city by grantee shall similarly be made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
C.  Grantee shall deliver all monies, documents and instruments required by this chapter or by the franchise agreement at the times provided by the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.110 - Execution and delivery by city 
    Upon receipt by the city from grantee of the properly executed franchise agreement, together with the payment of all applicable fees, documents and instruments as may be required in accordance with Section 5.08.100, the city may execute the agreement and, upon execution, shall deliver one fully executed copy to grantee; provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from revoking the award of the franchise prior to delivery of an executed copy of the franchise agreement to grantee. In the event of any such revocation, which shall be accomplished in the same manner as that used in granting the award, any funds and all documents and instruments delivered by grantee to the city in connection with grantee's acceptance of the award, shall be returned forthwith to grantee. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.120 - Term of franchise and other provisions 
A.  The franchise agreement shall provide for a nonexclusive franchise for a term of not more than fifteen years, which term shall commence as of the date set forth in the franchise agreement. 
B.  The franchise agreement shall provide that throughout the term of the franchise, grantee shall pay the city a franchise fee at the times and in an amount provided in the franchise agreement. Acceptance of any payment by the city shall not be construed as a release of or as an accord and satisfaction regarding any claim the city may have for further and additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of any other obligation of grantee under this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
C.  The franchise agreement shall, in substance, contain the following express undertakings by grantee: 
1.  That grantee agrees to and accepts all provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter as initially adopted and waives any claim that any provision of this chapter is unlawful provided, however, grantee reserves the right to contest in good faith any interpretation by the city of a provision, which interpretation is believed by grantee to be incorrect; 
2.  That grantee recognizes the right of the city to make lawful amendments to this chapter during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.130 - Negotiated provisions. 
    The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the city and grantee except that no such conditions or provisions shall conflict with any provision of this chapter or other law. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.140 - Rights reserved by city. 
A.  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the right of the city, by resolution of the city council, to revoke the franchise for just cause. "Just cause" includes, without limitation: 
1.  A material violation by grantee of any provision of the franchise agreement or this chapter, or any rule, order, or determination of the city made pursuant thereto, where such violation remains uncured pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement; 
2.  Any attempt by grantee to dispose of any of the facilities or property of the system in contravention of the franchise agreement; 
3.  The commission of any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
B.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be subject to all lawful applicable provisions of this chapter or other city ordinances made pursuant to the powers of the city, the city charter, and any lawful amendments to the foregoing, whether made prior to or after the inception of the franchise. 
C.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be subject to the following additional rights of the city: 
1.  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance, thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement; 
2.  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
3.  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
4.  To impose such other lawful ordinances or regulations as may be determined by the city council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public; 
5.  Through its appropriately designated representatives, to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and this chapter, and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise, this chapter, and other pertinent provisions of law; 
6.  At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted or upon termination and cancellation as provided therein, to require grantee, subject to applicable law, to remove, at grantee's sole expense, any and all portions of the system from the public ways within the city; 
7.  To require grantee to safeguard and keep private all individual home subscriber information. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.150 - Procedure for termination. 
    Any termination, revocation or cancellation of the franchise prior to the expiration of the term thereof shall be made by resolution of the city council only after a public hearing thereon. Grantee shall be entitled to thirty days' written notice of such hearing and the notice shall specify with reasonable particularity the ground upon which the contemplated termination is based. Any such termination, revocation or cancellation shall be subject to any requirements of higher law and any limitations and due process procedures contained in the franchise agreement between the city and grantee. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article IV. - Design of System 

5.08.160 - Channel capacity. 
    Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise the number of channels specified to be initially activated in the franchise agreement. Grantee shall upgrade the system's facilities, equipment and service pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.170 - Picture quality and technical requirements. 
A.  The system shall produce a picture upon each subscriber's television screen in black and white or color, depending upon whether color is being telecast and provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture, which is undistorted and free from ghost images, without material degradation of color fidelity. The system shall produce a sound which is undistorted on a properly operating standard receiver of a subscriber. 
B.  The system shall transmit or distribute signals to television and radio receivers of all subscribers without causing cross-modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems or the reception of other television or radio receivers. 
C.  The system shall at all times meet not less than minimum FCC technical standards. 
D.  The system shall be designed for and operated on a twenty-four hour a day continuous operation basis. 
E.  Grantee's proposal shall specify the procedure for initially and subsequently testing the technical capacity of the system. Representatives of the city may be present during testing. The tests shall be done annually or such other periods as may be set forth in the franchise agreement. All expenses for all such tests shall be paid by grantee. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.180 - Two-way capacity. 
A.  Grantee shall provide the capability of maintaining an operational two-way system (audio, video and data impulse). 
B.  Grantee will not install or permit the installation of any equipment that will permit transmission of two-way services utilizing audio, video or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit the transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of the system performance, or utility meter reading. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.190 - Facilities. 
    Grantee's proposal shall describe, in detail, the location of its headend, hubs, distribution system, studios, equipment and other facilities and a plan for implementing the construction, utilization and maintenance of those facilities including plans for accommodating further growth and changing needs and desire of the community as determined by the city. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.200 - Special channel and access requirements. 
A.  Grantee shall carry broadcast stations in accordance with FCC rules as from time to time revised. 
B.  Grantee's proposal shall describe, in detail, the utilization of converters or other special equipment which subscribers are to receive and any charges for them. 
C.  Grantee shall provide adequate channels for PEG access. All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall also receive all PEG access channels at no additional charge. These channels shall be activated upon system activation and thereafter maintained as needed. If required by the franchise agreement, grantee shall establish rules and regulations for the use of PEG access channels which shall be approved by the city before implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without approval of the city. In preparing such rules: 
1.  Grantee shall provide an equal opportunity for use of access services; 
2.  Grantee shall present a needs assessment of the community to be served and provide a plan to meet those needs; 
3.  Grantee shall develop a plan to allocate to the city a reasonable use and fair schedule of channel time and use of equipment and facilities so that the city can send and receive programming fitted to its needs. Such plan shall be approved by the city before implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without approval of the city; 
4.  Grantee shall describe all equipment and facilities and any charges for their use; 
5.  Grantee shall comply, at a minimum, with the reasonable requirements of the city now or hereafter adopted or determined regarding access channels. 
D.  Grantee's proposal shall describe in detail all other channel offerings and charges for the same. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.210 - Service to public buildings. 
    Grantee's proposal shall designate all publicly owned buildings in the city (city hall, police department, fire department, schools, library, etc.) and any buildings owned or leased for governmental use by any state, federal or local government in the city, to which grantee intends to provide service. The provisions for such service shall be described in detail and shall be provided without charge. Grantee's proposal shall include in such designation plans for existing as well as future publicly owned buildings. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.220 - Interconnection. 
A.  Interconnection Required. Grantee shall interconnect origination and access channels of the cable system with any or all other systems in adjacent areas, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. Interconnection of systems may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate method. 
B.  Interconnection Procedure. Upon receiving the directive of the city to interconnect, grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems in order that costs may be shared equitably for both construction and operation of the interconnection link. 
C.  Relief. Grantee may be granted reasonable extension of time to interconnect or the city may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by grantee to the city. The city shall grant said request if it finds that grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the system or systems of the proposed interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates. 
D.  Cooperation Required. Grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or city, county, state or federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.230 - Community-specific cablecasting. 
    If required by the city, grantee's proposal shall describe the means and manner of providing community-specific cablecasting over the system and the time of activation and points of delivery. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.240 - Computer services. 
    If required by the city, grantee shall design and construct a system so that A and B cables (serving residential and institutional users) accommodate interactive data communications and so that the total network transmission time is less than one-tenth of a second. Further, the system shall accommodate interactive communications of point to point, point to multipoint, and multipoint to multipoint communications between subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.250 - All-channels emergency alert. 
    Except to the extent preempted by federal law, in case of any emergency or disaster, grantee shall make its entire system available, without charge, to the city or to any other governmental or civil defense agency that the city may designate. The system shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system to allow authorized officials to override automatically the audio signals on all channels and to transmit and report emergency information. The system shall also have the capability for visual transmission of emergency messages. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article V. - Services and Programming-Subscriber Contracts-Complaints 

5.08.260 - Services and programming. 
    If required by the city, grantee's proposal shall state the extent of its commitment to provide for the following: 
A.  A variety of origination programming; 
B.  Automated channels carrying information from local sources; 
C.  Local access programming; 
D.  A home security package (with mechanisms to decrease incidents of false alarms); 
E.  Access support including color broadcast studio and location production equipment, postproduction equipment, access promotion plans, and use of video facilities; 
F.  Plans accommodating growth of access, production centers; 
G.  A system to accommodate data, audio and video transmissions between institutions; 
H.  Service to public buildings; 
I.  Expanding distant signal offerings as FCC rules allow; 
J.  Broadcast stations signals in late night and early morning hours; 
K.  An FM service with individual station processing; 
L.  A means for using the system during emergencies; 
M.  Needs of schools and other learning institutions. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.270 - Local origination and cablecasting. 
    If required by the city, grantee's proposal shall include detailed information on plans for local origination, origination cablecasting, automated channels carrying information from local sources, variety of origination programming, review of and incorporation of the needs and reports of the city, channel allocations, estimated programming hours, equipment, personnel and other resources committed to local origination production. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.280 - Use of channels. 
A.  Charges made by grantee to a user, except for public access channels, which shall be free, shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. Grantee shall not discriminate among users. 
B.  Advertising for any candidate for political office for the parties sponsoring such candidates, shall be granted only upon the basis that all such other candidates for the same office, or other parties sponsoring such candidate (where a party itself so advertises in the first instance) shall be provided with comparable advertising time and at a comparable rate. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.290 - Marketing. 
    If required by the city, grantee's proposal shall describe a marketing plan, advertising policy and means to promote the use of the access channels. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.300 - Interruption of service. 
    Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service, grantee shall do so during periods of minimum use of the system. Unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, grantee shall give reasonable notice thereof to subscribers. All costs incurred in repairing the system shall be paid by grantee, and if service is interrupted or disconnected, rebates and/or reductions in charges will be made pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. The cause for any such interruption shall be removed, and service restored as promptly as reasonably possible. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.310 - Complaints. 
A.  Grantee shall maintain an office in or proximate to the city which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a listed local telephone, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time, seven days per week. 
B.  Notice of this information shall be provided to all new subscribers at time of subscription and to existing subscribers annually. 
C.  All complaints by the city, subscribers or other interested persons regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction, billing disputes, and any other matters relative to the system, shall be investigated and responded to by a service representative of grantee within twenty-four hours. If reasonably possible, grantee shall promptly rectify the cause of all valid complaints. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article VI. - Construction 

5.08.320 - Initial service area. 
A.  If required by the city, grantee's proposal shall indicate the date by which system engineering and design shall be completed and dates on which each state of system construction shall be completed. 
B.  The energized cable shall be extended substantially throughout the city (as determined by the city) within eighteen months after commencement of construction or as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. All persons along the route of the energized cable who desire them shall have individual drops installed within the same period of time. 
C.  If required by the city, a map prepared by grantee reflecting the areas within the city initially served by the system along with the schedule for development of the system shall be included in grantee's proposal. 
D.  The city shall cooperate with grantee in the development of its proposed service areas by making available to grantee for copying all maps, data and other statistical information then in possession of the city needed for the preparation of a map defining the initial service area. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.330 - Construction timetable. 
A.  Grantee's construction timetable as set forth in the franchise agreement shall reflect the specific method and schedule of construction of the system. The plan of grantee shall reflect the following: 
1.  Location of all facilities including studios, headends, microwave receivers and senders and all hubs and wiring; 
2.  A timetable reflecting when each area within the initial service area will be served; 
3.  Grantee shall provide in its timetable a construction pattern that will allow the utilization of service to the greatest number of people in the shortest time period. 
B.  Within sixty days after the effective date of the franchise term, grantee shall apply for all necessary permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business including, but not limited to, any joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses or any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of the cable communications system, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. If after six months from the commencement of franchise term, grantee has not received the permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations described in this paragraph, the city may assess penalties pursuant to the franchise agreement without regard to fault for delay in obtaining such permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
C.  Promptly after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations, grantee shall give written notice thereof to the city and commence construction and installation of the system. 
D.  Grantee shall promptly notify the city of all delays known or anticipated in the construction of the system. The city may extend the construction timetable in the event grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.340 - Construction standards. 
A.  Grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any streets or public property without first obtaining a permit from the city for which permit the city may impose a reasonable fee to be paid by grantee. The lines, conduits, cables and other property placed in the streets, and public property pursuant to such permit shall be located in such part of the street or public property as shall be determined by the city. Grantee shall upon completion of any work requiring the opening of any streets or public property, restore the same including the pavement and its foundations to as good a condition as formerly and in a manner and quality approved by the city. Such work shall be performed with diligence and due care and if grantee fails to perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and rubbish and to put the street or public property back into the condition required by this chapter, the city shall have the right to put the streets or public property back into such condition at the expense of grantee. Grantee shall, upon demand, pay to the city the cost of such work done. 
B.  All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of grantee shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic and travel upon, or other use of, the streets and public property of the city. Grantee shall keep and maintain all of its property in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. The city shall have the right to inspect and examine at all reasonable times and upon reasonable notice the property owned or used, in part or in whole, by grantee. Grantee shall keep accurate maps and records of all of its wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities located, constructed and maintained in the city. Further, grantee shall furnish copies of such maps and records from time to time as requested by the city without charge. 
C.  All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of grantee shall be constructed and installed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All wires, conduits and cables shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
D.  Grantee shall at all times comply with the following codes, rules, regulations, as amended, and any others supplemental to or in substitution thereof: 
1.  National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); 
2.  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
3.  Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; 
4.  Applicable FCC and other applicable federal, state and local regulations and ordinances. 
    In any event, the installation, operation or maintenance of the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city. 
E.  Whenever the city undertakes any public improvement which affects grantee's equipment or facilities, the city may, with due regard to reasonable working conditions and with reasonable notice, direct grantee to remove or relocate its wires, conduits, cables and other property at its own expense. 
F.  Grantee's plans for constructing its system, and the construction of the system, shall be in accordance with its proposal as modified by the franchise agreement. However, grantee shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
1.  Grantee shall construct underground in any area where both electrical or telephone lines have been installed underground. 
2.  Grantee shall change from aerial to underground at its own expense, in any area where both the telephone and electrical utilities are hereafter changed from aerial to underground. 
3.  To enable grantee reasonable opportunity to change its wiring from aerial to underground, and also to allow it to prewire all new subdivisions or new development areas, the city shall provide grantee with written notice of the following, in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement: 
(a)  Any changes of which city has knowledge, or which the city may order, regarding a change from aerial to underground of any line (telephone or electrical) within its boundaries; 
(b)  Any underground trenching that may be pending; 
(c)  New subdivisions and development. All of such subdividers or developers shall be notified of the franchise and the system; 
(d)  All ordinance changes affecting the wiring of the system. 
G.  Grantee shall, upon completion of any work on private property (or easements thereon), restore the same including any and all landscape features, plantings, turf, buildings, pipes and wires (overhead and underground), pavements, sidewalks, foundations or other features whatsoever, to as good a condition as existed before construction. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.350 - Location, maintenance and removal. 
A.  Grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main. 
B.  Grantee, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit and with not less than five days' advance notice, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires, conduits and cables. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires, conduits and cables shall be paid by persons requesting the same, and grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. 
C.  Grantee shall have the authority, to the extent the city has authority to grant the same, to trim trees upon or overhanging any street or public property so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, conduit and cables of grantee. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of grantee. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article VII. - System Operations 

5.08.360 - Information availability. 
A.  Throughout the term of the franchise, grantee shall maintain books and records in accordance with normal and accepted bookkeeping and accounting practices for the cable communications industry, and allow inspection and copying of the same at reasonable times at its designated office. The books and records to be maintained by grantee shall include the following: 
1.  A record of all requests for service; 
2.  A record of all subscriber or other complaints and the action taken; 
3.  A file of all subscriber contracts, provided, however, that grantee will not have to disclose subscriber records which would tend to invade subscriber privacy; 
4.  Grantee policies, procedures and company rules; 
5.  Financial records, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
B.  City shall give grantee at least twenty-four hours' notice before making inspections of any books or records of grantee. 
C.  Grantee shall file with the city, at the time of its payment(s) of the franchise fee, the following: 
1.  A financial statement, certified by grantee as correct, showing in such detail as may be required by the city the gross operating revenues of grantee for the period to which the fee relates, together with all other financial information customarily contained in such statements and such other financial information as may be required by the franchise agreement; 
2.  An annual certified financial statement prepared by an independent certified public accountant showing in such detail as may be required by the city the gross operating revenues of grantee for the period to which the annual fee relates, together with all other financial information customarily contained in such statements and such other financial information as may be required by the franchise agreement; 
3.  Such other information and documents required by the franchise agreement; 
4.  A statement of its current billing practices if changed from a prior filing; 
5.  A copy of its current rules if changed from a prior filing; 
6.  A copy of its current subscriber service contract if changed from a prior filing. 
D.  The city, its agents and representatives shall have the authority to arrange for and conduct an audit of and copy the books and records of grantee as provided in the franchise agreement; provided, however, that all books and records so audited shall remain the sole and exclusive property of grantee. Grantee shall first be given notice of the audit request, as provided in the franchise agreement; the description of and purpose for the audit, and the description, to the best of the city's ability, of the books, records and documents it wishes to review. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.370 - Service contract. 
A.  Grantee shall receive approval from the city of the form and content of any service contract to be used by grantee prior to entering any such service contracts with subscribers, and grantee shall make no substantive changes in the approved service contract without prior approval of the city. The service contract shall include, at a minimum, a schedule of all rates and charges, a description of services, instructions on the use of the system, and billing and collection practices. 
B.  Grantee shall have authority to promulgate rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise and to ensure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided such rules, regulations, terms and conditions are not in conflict with the provisions of the franchise agreement ordinances of the city and laws of the state or the United States. 
C.  Each subscriber shall be provided with instructions on filing complaints or otherwise obtaining information or assistance from grantee. 
D.  All items described in this section shall be provided to each new subscriber at the time a contract is entered or service begun and to all existing subscribers forthwith upon any changes therein. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.380 - Subscriber practices. 
A.  There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installment or outlet. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee or any other proper fee or charge when due, grantee may discontinue service to such subscriber; provided, however, grantee may not remove any of its equipment until after the later of (1) forty-five days after the due date of said delinquent fee or charge, or (2) ten days after delivery to subscriber of written notice of the intent to disconnect. If a subscriber pays before expiration of the later of (1) or (2), grantee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent fee or charge and the payment of a reconnection charge, grantee shall promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable service. Where a subscriber has become delinquent in payment more than once, grantee shall not be required to reinstate the subscriber's cable service. 
B.  Refunds to subscribers shall be made or determined in the following manner: 
1.  If grantee fails, upon request by a subscriber, to provide any service then being offered, grantee shall promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for the service in question by said subscriber. This provision does not alter grantee's responsibility to subscribers under any separate contractual agreement or relieve grantee of any other liability. 
2.  If any subscriber terminates any monthly service because of failure of grantee to render the service in accordance with the franchise, grantee shall refund to such subscriber the proportionate share of the charges paid by the subscriber for the services not received. This provision does not relieve grantee of liability established in other provisions of the franchise. 
C.  If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the end of a prepaid period, a proportionate portion of any prepaid subscriber service fee, using the number of days as a basis, shall be refunded to the subscriber by grantee. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article VIII. - Rates and Charges 

5.08.390 - Limitations on rates. 
    The charges made for services of grantee shall be as set forth in the franchise agreement. Grantee shall receive no consideration whatsoever from its subscribers for or in connection with its service to its subscribers other than in accordance with this section, without approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.400 - Adjustments to rates. 
    The city council shall have the power, authority and right to cause grantee's rates and charges to conform to the provisions of Section 5.08.390, and for this purpose it may deny or institute changes in such rates and charges when it determines that, in the absence of such action on its part, grantee's rates and charges or proposed rates and charges will not conform to Section 5.08.390; provided, however, that the city council shall not, in making such determination, act in contravention of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.410 - Rate schedule. 
    Grantee's proposal shall include a detailed schedule of all rates and charges applicable to the system as required by the RFP. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or connection and no charge for maintenance or repair service unless such service is required as a result of damage caused by the subscriber. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.420 - Rate changes. 
A.  The criteria and standards relating to the establishment of rate changes, whether initiated by the city or by grantee, shall include those certain criteria set forth in the franchise agreement. 
B.  The procedure for reviewing and establishing a proposed rate change shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.425 - Limitations on rate regulation. 
    The provision of this article shall apply only if, when, and to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article IX. - Landlord-Tenant Relationship 

5.08.430 - Purpose. 
    The city declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter has as one of its principal objectives the lawful public purpose of rapidly developing and maximizing the educational, community service, cultural and public safety potential of the city. The city further finds that the public interest and necessity require that no owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling (nor its agent or representative) be permitted to directly or indirectly prevent any resident of such dwelling from receiving cable communications service installation, maintenance and services from a grantee operating under a valid franchise issued by the city. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.440 - Negotiation of agreement. 
    In order to provide the opportunity for the residents of any multiple unit residential dwelling to obtain service from grantee, such grantee may negotiate an agreement with the owner of that dwelling or, failing agreement, may request that the city exercise its power of eminent domain for the necessary public purpose of enabling grantee to serve residents of that multiple unit residential dwelling. Upon request of such grantee, the city may commence condemnation proceedings in accordance with applicable law. In the event of such proceeding, in preparing its good-faith offer of just compensation, the city may consider: 
A.  The amount and fair market value of space occupied by grantee's cable and related facilities. The fair market value of the space shall be assessed in light of the prior use, if any, of that space, together with any evidence of nonspeculative alternative uses; 
B.  The present value of any funds that the owner will reasonably expend over time in ensuring that grantee conforms to all laws, regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to ensure the safety, convenient functioning and appearance of the multiple unit residential dwelling; 
C.  The continued physical availability of other space on the premises for the installation of alternative modes of television program reception or delivery; 
D.  As an offset to the amounts set forth in Sections 5.08.430 and 5.08.440, any increase in the fair market value of the multiple unit residential dwelling attributable to the availability of grantee's service to the property's tenants; and 
E.  Any other reasonable, nonspeculative factors which the city may find relevant. 
    The requesting grantee shall indemnify the city for expenses and costs incurred by the city in the condemnation proceedings as well as for the full amount of the condemnation proceedings are completed or otherwise settled. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.450 - Additional charges. 
A.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter or the franchise agreement, grantee shall be permitted to charge each resident of a multiple unit residential dwelling an additional charge, above and beyond the service rate for a single family dwelling as specified in the franchise agreement, solely to defray the exact additional per-resident cost to grantee of compensating the owner for access to the multiple unit residential dwelling. 
B.  Any such additional charge shall be subject to the approval of the city. Such additional charge shall not be included in the computation of franchise fees due to the city pursuant to this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.460 - Denial of service. 
    Notwithstanding any other language in this section or elsewhere in this chapter, grantee shall not be obligated to provide service to any multiple unit residential dwelling so long as the owner of that dwelling demands compensation from grantee in an amount that is unreasonable or imposes financial or other conditions that would, in grantee's reasonable business judgment, render provision of service to that dwelling uneconomic. Should grantee subsequently agree to render service to such multiple unit residential dwelling, there shall be no installation charges to the residents of such dwelling beyond those set forth in the franchise agreement. Grantee shall not be obligated, in such circumstances, to request the city to institute condemnation proceedings. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.470 - Discrimination against tenant prohibited-Penalty. 
    Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor its agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable communications service from a company operating under a valid and existing cable communication franchise issued by the city. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article is subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars for each offense. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.480 - Resale prohibited. 
    No person shall resell, without the express written consent of both grantee and the city, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by grantee operating under a franchise issued by the city. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.490 - Conformance with laws. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable communications system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning and appearance. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.500 - Indemnification. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit a person from requiring grantee to agree to indemnify the owner, or his agents or representatives, for damages or for liability for physical damages caused by installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable television facilities. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.505 - Limitations on landlord/tenant regulations. 
    The provisions of this article apply only if, when, and to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article X. - Miscellaneous 

5.08.510 - Administrator. 
    The city council may appoint an administrator who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and who shall be responsible for the continuing administration of the franchise on the part of the city. The city shall provide written notice to grantee of the initial appointment of the administrator and any subsequent appointments. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.520 - Advisory body. 
    The city council may appoint a cable communications advisory committee to perform such duties and to have such powers as the city council may determine. The composition and terms of office of the members of the committee, as well as the duties and powers of the committee, shall be determined and established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.530 - Delegation of authority. 
    The city reserves the right to delegate from time to time any rights or obligations under the franchise to any body or organization. Any such delegation shall be effective upon written notice thereof to grantee. Upon receipt of such notice grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions of the delegation not in conflict with the franchise. Any such delegation or revocation thereof, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed to be an amendment to the franchise or require grantee's consent. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.540 - Subliminal advertising prohibited. 
    Grantee is expressly prohibited from transmitting any form of subliminal advertising at any time. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.550 - Tampering prohibited. 
    No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system, may intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment or apparatus of grantee, or to commit any act with an intent to cause such removal or damage, or tap, tamper with or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment and apparatus and appurtenances of the licensee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system without authorization from or compensation to grantee, or obtain cable television or other communications service or sell, rent, lend, offer or advertise for sale, rental or use any instrument, apparatus, device, or plans, specifications, or instructions for making or assembling the same to connect to grantee's cable system with intent to cheat or defraud grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Article XI. - Customer Service and Miscellaneous 

5.08.610 - Customer service. 
    Grantee shall maintain a local office or offices which provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply, under normal operating conditions, with the customer service standards set forth in subsections A through E of this section. For purposes of this section, "normal operating conditions" embrace all conditions which are within the control of grantee, including special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system, but excluding conditions outside grantee's control, such as, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and extreme weather: 
A.  On a quarterly basis, sufficient customer service representatives and toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that a minimum of ninety percent of all calls will be answered within thirty seconds and ninety percent of all calls for service will not be required to wait more than thirty seconds after such call has been answered before being connected to a service representative. All incoming customer service lines shall not be simultaneously busy more than three percent of the total time the cable office is open on any business day. Grantee shall report its compliance with this section quarterly. In the event grantee ever defaults under the requirements of this section, then the city may require grantee to comply on a monthly basis and report such compliance monthly until such time that compliance has been established for three consecutive months in which case grantee may revert to quarterly compliance and reporting; 
B.  Staffed emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four hour basis, including weekends and holidays; 
C.  Maintenance of an office in the franchise area of the Western Oakland County Cable Communications Authority (hereinafter "the Authority") with adequate office hours to meet public demand. The Authority may require grantee to alter or extend these hours if there is significant evidence through subscriber complaints that the posted hours are not adequate; 
D.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing system malfunctions on a twenty-four hour basis; 
E.  An installation staff, capable of furnishing standard installation to any subscriber within seven days after receipt of a request. "Standard installations" means those located up to one hundred seventy-five feet from where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. Grantee shall, at its sole expense, cause all drops required to be buried to be properly buried within fifteen days of installation of service unless conditions during such period make burial impracticable, in which case the drop shall be buried within fifteen days after physical conditions reasonably allow for such burial. In the event of any dispute between grantee and the subscriber as to when conditions permit burial of the drop, such dispute shall be resolved by the decision of the city's building official or other official designated by the city to resolve such disputes; 
F.  Grantee shall provide written instructions and information at the time of installation and reinstallation, and at least annually thereafter, to all subscribers on products and services, prices and options, installation and service maintenance policies, instructions for using the system, and billing and complaint procedures. Such instructions and information shall include grantee's business address, applicable phone number, and the name of the appropriate official or department of grantee to whose attention the subscriber should direct a request for service, request for billing adjustment or complaint. Such instructions and information shall also include the name, business address and telephone number of the Authority's executive director and the title, business address and telephone number of the designated city employee to whom the subscriber can call or write for information regarding the terms, conditions and provisions governing grantee's franchise if grantee fails to respond within a reasonable period of time to the subscriber's complaint or request for installation, service or billing adjustment. 
1.  Grantee shall promptly furnish revised written instructions and information to each subscriber whenever the instructions and information previously provided have been changed. 
2.  The written instructions and information provided for herein shall be subject to the review and approval of the Authority which shall not withhold its approval unreasonably. The Authority shall have the power to compel changes in such material if the Authority deems the same to be misleading, incorrect or inadequate in any material respect; and grantee shall promptly institute any changes so required by the Authority. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.620 - Cable service. 
A.  Grantee shall interrupt system service only with good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after periodic cablecasting notice of service interruption for two days prior to the anticipated interruption. Services may be interrupted between one a.m. and five a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday, Sunday, holidays or the night preceding a holiday. 
B.  Grantee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, of all subscriber complaints. Such log shall list the date and time of such complaints, identifying the subscribers and describing the nature of the complaints and when and what actions were taken by grantee in response thereto. Such log shall be kept at grantee's local office, reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least three years, and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. Grantee shall submit a summary of such complaints monthly to the Authority for its review or a copy thereof if the Authority so requests. 
C.  For purposes of this section "service interruption" means any loss or distortion of picture and/or sound on one or more channels; "subscriber problem" means a service interruption affecting a single subscriber; "outage" shall mean a service interruption affecting two or more subscribers. Grantee shall maintain a sufficient repair force of competent technicians so as to respond effectively, under normal operating conditions as specified in Section 5.08.610 above, to any subscriber problem or outage within the following time periods, unless the applicable period is extended at the request of the subscriber or extended pursuant to the requirements of any applicable law or regulation: 
1.  Subscriber problem: "same day" service, seven days a week for all requests for service received prior to twelve p.m. each day. In no event shall the response time for notice received after twelve p.m. exceed twenty-four hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time grantee receives notice of the problem. 
2.  Outage: within two hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time grantee discovers or receives notice of the outage. 
D.  Upon receipt of a request for service, grantee shall establish a four hour appointment window with the subscriber (or adult representative of the subscriber). Grantee shall respond to the request for service within such established appointment window. In the event access to the subscriber's home is not made available to grantee's technician when the technician arrives during the established appointment window, the technician shall leave written notification stating the time of arrival and requesting that grantee be contacted again to establish a new appointment window. In such case, the required response time for the request for service shall be twenty-four hours from the time grantee is contacted to establish the new appointment window. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if grantee's technician telephones the subscriber's home before or during the appointment window and is advised that the technician will not be given access to the subscriber's home during the appointment window, then the technician shall not be obliged to travel to the subscriber's home or to leave the written notification referred to above; and the burden shall again be upon the subscriber (or adult representative of the subscriber) to contact grantee to arrange for a new appointment window, in which case the required response time for the request for service shall again be twenty-four hours from the time grantee is contacted to establish the new appointment window. 
E.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection D of this section, grantee, under the provisions of this Section 5.08.610, shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service, a subscriber problem, or an outage only when sufficient technicians arrive at the service location, begin work on the request for service or remedial work, as the case may be, and proceed diligently to complete such work. 
F.  No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless the problem giving rise to the service request can be demonstrated by grantee to have been: 
1.  Caused by subscribed negligence; or 
2.  Caused by malicious destruction of cable equipment; or 
3.  A problem previously established as having been non-cable in origin. 
G.  All service personnel of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of grantee shall be clearly identifiable by the public as such a vehicle. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.630 - Grantee's billings and communications. 
A.  Grantee's bills to its subscribers shall be clear, concise and understandable and shall be itemized as to each charge reflected thereon. The bill and any accompanying communication from grantee to its subscribers, and any other communication from grantee to its subscribers, shall not contain any material misstatement or omit to state a material fact which omission would make the information furnished misleading. 
B.  The billing form and content in use by grantee as of the date of adoption of this article shall be subject to the approval of the Authority. Any modification of the form and content of grantee's bills to subscribers shall also be subject to the Authority's approval. 
C.  The Authority shall not withhold its approval of the form and content of grantee's bills unreasonably. If the Authority disapproves of the form of wording of any of grantee's bills to subscribers, it shall so notify grantee and shall specify the basis for such disapproval. Grantee shall then modify the bills so as to remedy the defects specified by the Authority. The modification shall be implemented by grantee effective with the first billing after the expiration of forty-five days after receipt by grantee of the Authority's notice of disapproval, unless the Authority extends such time. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.640 - Disconnect and downgrade charges. 
A.  Grantee shall make no charge to any subscriber on account of complete discontinuance of service or, except as may be otherwise authorized by law, a net downgrade of service whereby the subscriber requests a lower tier of basic service and/or a net reduction in premium service. 
B.  Grantee may only disconnect a subscriber if at least forty-five days have elapsed after the due date for payment of the subscriber's bill and grantee has provided at least ten days written notice to the subscriber prior to disconnection specifying the effective date after which cable services are subject to disconnection; provided, however, notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee may disconnect a subscriber at any time if grantee in good faith and on reasonable grounds determines that the subscriber has tampered with or abused grantee's equipment, or is or may be engaged in the theft of cable services. 
C.  Grantee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests disconnection. No period of notice prior to requested termination of service may be required of subscribers by grantee. If the subscriber fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the effective date shall be deemed to be the day following the date the disconnect request is received by grantee. No charge may be imposed upon the subscriber for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the disconnect request. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.650 - Late payment charges. 
    Late payment charges imposed by grantee upon subscribers shall be fair and shall be reasonably related to grantee's cost of administering delinquent accounts. No late payment charge shall be imposed upon a subscriber, and a subscriber shall not be deemed to be in arrears on a bill, unless at least thirty days have elapsed after the due date specified on the bill; and, for purposes of this section and the prior section, the due date specified on the bill shall not be earlier than the first day of the monthly period to which the bill is attributable. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.660 - Notice of programming or channel change. 
    Grantee shall provide at least thirty days written notice to subscribers prior to disconnecting any channel or programming service or to realigning any channel and shall provide written notice of the same to the Authority no later than grantee's notice to subscribers. This provision shall not preclude the right of the city or the Authority on behalf of the city to contest or prohibit any such action by grantee if, and to the extent, such right exists. The foregoing notice requirement shall not apply in cases in which a programming service is discontinued because a nonaffiliated provider thereof discontinues furnishing the same to grantee on less than thirty days' notice to grantee. In any such case grantee shall nevertheless furnish notice to its subscribers and the Authority promptly upon grantee receiving notice of the discontinuance of the programming service from such unaffiliated provider. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.670 - Notice of price increase or reduction of service. 
    Grantee shall provide at least thirty days' written notice to subscribers prior to implementing any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in subscriber services and shall provide written notice of the same to the Authority no later than grantee's notice to subscribers. The provisions of this section shall not preclude the right of the city or the Authority on behalf of the city to contest or prohibit any such action by grantee if, and to the extent, permitted by law. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.680 - Grantee's communications. 
    Prior to or simultaneously with any communication made by grantee to the general public or to grantee's subscribers announcing or explaining any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in programming services, grantee shall furnish a copy of such communication to the Authority. Such communication shall not contain any material misstatement or omit to state a material fact which omission would make the information furnished misleading. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.690 - Disclosure of information on grantee's costs. 
    In the event grantee, in any communication to the general public, to the city, to subscribers, or to the Authority, justifies a price increase or reduction in service on the basis of increased costs to which grantee has been or will be subjected, then grantee, on written request of the Authority, shall promptly furnish the Authority the underlying information on which such claim of increased costs is based in such form as the Authority may request. The information furnished shall not contain any material misstatement or omit to state a material fact which omission would make the information furnished misleading. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.700 - Subscriber rebates. 
A.  Except for planned outages where subscribers are provided reasonable notification in advance, upon a subscriber's request grantee shall provide not less than a one day credit for each day in which there is a period of four hours or more during which the subscriber experienced a significant impairment of cable service not attributable to any action or omission of the subscriber or to any defect in the subscriber's equipment. The credit specified herein shall be equal to one-thirtieth of the subscriber's total monthly bill for all services and equipment other than pay-per-view; provided, however, if such monthly bill includes a charge for a pay-per-view program subject to such outage or significant impairment, then the credit shall be increased by the amount of such charge. 
B.  In the event of a violation of the provisions of this article by grantee which results in a subscriber not receiving cable programming service or receiving only significantly impaired service, the Authority may order and direct grantee to issue a rebate to such subscriber in an amount determined by the Authority to provide monetary relief to the subscriber substantially equal to the subscriber's unliquidated detriment or loss resulting from such violation, not to exceed the subscriber's monthly bill. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a subscriber from requesting and receiving from grantee a rebate greater than that provided in subsections A and B of this section. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.710 - Security fund. 
A.  Subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, within ten days after the award of a new franchise or the transfer, extension or renewal of an existing franchise, grantee thereunder shall furnish the Authority, on behalf of all of the Authority's member communities, and thereafter maintain with the Authority, throughout the term of the franchise, a cash deposit of fifty thousand dollars as security for: 
1.  The faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this article and the franchise; 
2.  Compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board or department of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise; and 
3.  The payment by grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. 
B.  Within ten days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, grantee shall pay to or deposit with the Authority a sum of money in the full amount withdrawn. 
C.  If grantee fails to pay to the city any fees within the time fixed herein; or fails, after ten days written notice, to pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the city within such ten days, any damages, costs or expenses which the city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of grantee in connection with a franchise; or fails, after any applicable notice and cure period, to comply with any provisions of the franchise which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by a withdrawal from the security fund, the Authority, on request of the city may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any additional charges, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the Authority shall notify grantee of the amount and date thereof and shall remit to the city the amount so withdrawn. 
D.  The security fund deposited pursuant to this section, including all interest thereon, if any, shall be held by the Authority, for the benefit of its member communities, in the event that the franchise is rescinded or revoked by reason of the default of grantee. Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of grantee. Any interest earned by the investment of the security fund shall become part of the security fund and unless consumed by the payment of liquidated damages, fees or other charges under this article, shall be returned to grantee at the expiration of the franchise term, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of grantee. 
E.  The Authority shall maintain the security fund in a segregated account and shall not commingle the same with any other moneys of the Authority. The Authority may, but shall not be required to, invest the security fund so as to earn interest thereon and shall not be liable to grantee on any claim based upon the lack or insufficiency of interest earned by such fund. 
F.  Payment from the security fund shall not constitute a cure of any violation or any act of noncompliance by grantee. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city whether reserved by this article or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. 
G.  The security fund provided for in this section shall be in addition to any performance bond, letter of credit or other security provided for in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.720 - Liquidated damages. 
A.  The Authority may assess liquidated damages of up to one hundred dollars per day against grantee for each day grantee is in violation of this article. Such assessment may be levied against the security fund specified in this article or any letter of credit, performance bond or other security provided for in the franchise agreement after any applicable notice and cure period. 
B.  Assessment of liquidated damages shall not constitute a waiver by the city of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise agreement or applicable law, including the right to recover from grantee any costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, which are incurred by the city on account of grantee's violation of this article. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.730 - Evaluation of violations. 
A.  The violation of this article by grantee, grantee's agents, employees and/or independent contractors employed or retained by grantee shall be grounds for evaluating: 
1.  Grantee's compliance with any existing agreement and with applicable law; and 
2.  The quality of grantee's service and whether it has been reasonable in light of community needs; and 
3.  The technical ability of grantee to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in an operator's proposal for future or renewed cable services; and 
4.  The reasonableness of grantee's proposal to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests of the residents and cable television consumers of the city. 
B.  These evaluations shall be proper and germane for the city to consider formally when reviewing a proposal for renewal of any agreement to provide cable services within the city. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.740 - Remedies available. 
    If the Authority determines that grantee has violated this article, the Authority may order appropriate rebates to subscribers as provided in this article and/or assess liquidated damages against grantee as provided in this article. In addition, the city may pursue any additional or other legal or equitable remedies available to it under the franchise agreement or any applicable law. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
5.08.750 - Appeal process. 
    With respect to matters affecting the city individually, and excluding matters affecting all of the Authority's member communities equally, grantee may appeal any action of the Authority to the city by submitting a written appeal within twenty-one days from the date of the Authority's action to which grantee objects. Upon such appeal, the city council shall conduct a de novo review of the action of the Authority being appeals and shall set a hearing date within sixty days of the date of receipt of the appeal. Grantee may present any information, data or other evidence to the city council either prior to or at the time of the hearing. Hearings shall be open to the public and members of the public and representatives of the Authority may also present any evidence or information pertinent to the matter appealed. The city council shall then determine whether to uphold, reverse, or modify the action of the Authority. The appeal shall stay any further action on the matter appealed until the appeal has been decided by the city council. 
(Ord. 03-01 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 5.09 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
Sections: 

5.09.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the city of Wixom Telecommunications Ordinance. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 1, 2003) 
5.09.020 - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 2, 2003) 
5.09.030 - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 3, 2003) 
5.09.040 - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Act" means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    "City" means the city of Wixom. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Wixom or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    "City manager" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    "Permit" means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    "Authority" means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
    "MPSC" means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
    "Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    "Public right-of-way" means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    "Telecommunication facilities" or "facilities" means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the communications act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    "Telecommunications provider," "provider" and "telecommunications services" mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
1.  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service; 
2.  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way; 
3.  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 4, 2003) 
5.09.050 - Permit required. 
A.  Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make sufficient copies of the application to distribute a copy to additional recipients as mandated by statute and regulations. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
C.  Confidential Information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
D.  Application Fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars. 
E.  Additional Information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
F.  Previously Issued Permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
G.  Existing Providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within one hundred eighty days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the five hundred dollars application fee required under subsection D of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional one hundred eighty days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 5, 2003) 
5.09.060 - Issuance of permit. 
A.  Approval or Denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 5.09.050(B) for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
B.  Form of Permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
C.  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
D.  Bond Requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection C of this section, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 6, 2003) 
5.09.070 - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under the Code of Ordinances for the city, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 7, 2003) 
5.09.080 - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 8, 2003) 
5.09.090 - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within ninety days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 9, 2003) 
5.09.100 - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 10, 2003) 
5.09.110 - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in Section 5.09.050(D), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 11, 2003) 
5.09.120 - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 12, 2003) 
5.09.130 - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section 5.09.120 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 13, 2003) 
5.09.140 - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 14, 2003) 
5.09.150 - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 15, 2003) 
5.09.160 - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 16, 2003) 
5.09.170 - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 17, 2003) 
5.09.180 - Compliance. 
    The city declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in Section 5.09.050(C); 
B.  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with Section 5.09.050(F); 
C.  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the five hundred dollars application fee, in accordance with Section 5.09.050(G); 
D.  Approving or denying an application for a permit within forty-five days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with Section 5.09.060(A); 
E.  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with Section 5.09.060(A); 
F.  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with Section 5.09.060(A); 
G.  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in Section 5.09.060(B); 
H.  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with Section 5.09.060(C); 
I.  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with Section 5.09.060(D); 
J.  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with Section 5.09.070; 
K.  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with Section 5.09.120; 
L.  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with Section 5.09.150; and 
M.  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Section 5.09.160. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 18, 2003) 
5.09.190 - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 19, 2003) 
5.09.200 - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 21, 2003) 
5.09.210 - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to municipal civil infraction fines as set forth in the Code of Ordinances of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit. 
(Ord. 03-05 § 22, 2003) 
5.09.220 - Responsibilities of city officials. 
A.  The city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized and directed to identify all telecommunications providers holding permits or authorizations issued by the city [and, as part of that process, to compile a list of all telecommunication providers who have paid fees to the city since 1990, all telecommunications providers identified in the city's engineering or construction permit files and all regulated telephone interexchange carriers and competitive access providers listed on the web site of the Michigan Public Service Commission and all regulated local telephone companies licensed in Michigan listed on such web site]; 
B.  The city manager is authorized and directed to provide a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to the cable company[ies] providing service in the city, and to all telecommunications providers identified above, in satisfaction of the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act; and 
C.  The finance department of the city is directed to return, to telecommunications providers, any checks or portion of checks received by the city from such providers for access and usage of the public rights-of-way in the city after November 1, 2002 (other than the five hundred dollars application fee allowed under the Act and any fees or funds received from the authority). 
(Res. dated 3/25/03) 
Chapter 5.10 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[2] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, adopted June 13, 2017, amended former Ch. 5.10, §§ 5.10.010-5.10.230, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, adopted May 27, 2014. 

General Provisions 

5.10.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety and welfare through regulations that promote public safety and help protect residents, businesses and the general public from crime, fraud and undue annoyance and interference with privacy rights that can be caused by peddlers, solicitors and/or canvassers in a manner that does not unlawfully interfere with or burden the exercise of First Amendment and other constitutional rights. To those ends, this chapter defines and provides procedural requirements for peddling, and general regulations applicable to peddlers, and solicitors and canvassers where applicable, with the peddler licensing regulations intended to: (i) deter persons with criminal or fraudulent intent from posing as legitimate peddlers; (ii) provide a minimal amount of basic information necessary to the city and its police department to allow efficient and effective performance of governmental, law enforcement and crime prevention functions; and (iii) provide city residents with a right to know if persons coming upon their property are in compliance with those regulations and a basis for reporting persons that are not in compliance with the these regulations to the city police department. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    "Canvass" and "canvassing" mean to enter upon private property, without any prior specific invitation or appointment, to inform, educate, advocate, petition, secure petition signatures, request or enlist support or opposition, or to convey any other message regarding religion, philosophy, ideology, politics, including parties, candidates, initiatives and issues, charitable organizations, or other cause or issue, by verbal, written, or other forms of communication, including the distribution of handbills, flyers, or other materials. 
    "Canvasser" means a person engaged in canvassing in the City without requesting or accepting the payment, delivery, donation, pledge, or commitment of money, credit, financial assistance, membership, property, goods, services, or other thing of value, and without selling or attempting to sell any property, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription, membership, or other thing, whether of value or not. 
    "Charitable purpose" means a charitable, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, veterans support, religious, youth, fraternal, social, civic, conservation, recreational, or other nonprofit objective of a charitable or religious organization, or political organization. Charitable purpose does not include political campaign fundraising or nonprofit objectives of an individual. 
    "Charitable, religious or political organization" means a charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, fraternal, social, recreational, veterans support, or civic organization, registered and in good standing under Section 501(c) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, that solicits or obtains contributions from the public of such organization. 
    "City clerk" means the city clerk for the City of Wixom, or his or her designee. 
    "Insurance" shall mean general liability insurance of a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars per person per occurrence issued with the City of Wixom, its agents and employees as additional named insureds primary and non-contributory with a notice of cancellation or non-renewal directed to the City of Wixom, attention city manager, such notice to be furnished at least thirty days prior to any cancellation or non-renewal. 
    "Parent organization" means: (1) the person or organization that a peddler is employed by or represents in the course of peddling, the principal manufacturer and distributor of goods being peddled, or the principal provider of services being peddled; or (2) a charitable, religious or political organization that a solicitor is employed by or represents in the course of soliciting in the City, or such organization that sends multiple solicitors for purposes of soliciting in areas of the city on its behalf. 
    "Peddle" and "peddling" mean traveling by foot or automobile from place to place or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, including food produces, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether the subject is collecting advanced payments on such sales or not. 
    "Peddler means any person engaged in peddling. The term "peddler" shall not include a person who conducts such activities at a social gathering within a home at the invitation of the owner or an occupant of the home. 
    "Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, nonprofit corporation, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, political party or organization, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
    "Police chief means the police chief for the City of Wixom, or his or her designee. 
    "Public way" shall mean all areas l;p0;egally open to public use such as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, alleys and public parking lots. 
    "Roadway" shall mean the area of a paved or unpaved private, or public street, highway or road designed for vehicular travel generally including the area from curb to curb, or if no curb is present, from outer edge of shoulder to outer edge of shoulder. 
    "Solicit" and "soliciting" mean a direct or indirect request by or on behalf of a charitable, religious, or political organization to any person in the city for the payment, delivery, donation, pledge, or commitment of money, credit, financial assistance, membership, property, goods, services, or other thing of value, on the plea or representation what is requested will be used for charitable purposes of the charitable, religious or political organization, and includes sales and sales offers of any property, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription, membership, or other thing, whether of value or not, on the pleas or representation that the proceeds of the sale will be used for charitable purposes of the charitable, religious, or political organization. 
    "Solicitor" means any person engaged in soliciting in the city. 
    "Special event" shall mean any occasion including, but not limited to parades, golf tournaments, fairs, shows, exhibitions, city-wide celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically defined area of the city. 
    "Stand" shall mean any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and is used for the display, storage or transportation of goods and/or services offered for sale by a peddler. 
    "Standing" shall mean to remain within the roadway other than is reasonably necessary to traverse across the roadway, or to complete activity within an area of the roadway necessitated by an emergency such as a traffic accident, mechanical breakdown, or other similar event. 
    "Street and curb soliciting" means soliciting on any street, road, highway, lane, sidewalk, curb, road edge, alley, public parking lot and/or driveway in a manner that requires the solicitor, when engaged in the transaction, to stand within the limits of streets, roads, highways, lanes, sidewalks, curbs, road edges, alleys, public parking lots and/or driveways within the City. 
    "Street soliciting" means soliciting for charitable purposes where solicitors are allowed to be within the travelled portion of a street and areas of the street abutting the traveled portion. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 12-12-2017 ) 
5.10.021 - Waivers, modifications and variances. 
    A person claiming that application of one or more provisions of this chapter to activities that person desires to engage in violates a constitutional right, may request that the city council waive, modify or vary such provision by filing a written request and statement of that position and basis for it to the city clerk who shall place the request on the next city council agenda that is at least five days after receipt of the request. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.022 - Violations and sanctions; civil Infraction. 
    Unless otherwise specified, a violation of this chapter is a civil infraction punishable as provided in the code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.023-5.10.029 - Reserved. 
Article I. - Peddlers 

5.10.040 - Peddler licensing. 
A.  No person shall be a peddler or engage in peddling in the city without first obtaining a peddler license from the city clerk, unless such person is specifically exempt from this licensing requirement under Section 5.10.060 below. 
B.  To obtain a peddler license required by this chapter, a peddler shall apply for said license upon forms prescribed and furnished by the city clerk. The information provided by the applicant shall include all the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant who proposes to peddle within the city, including his or her business street address, website address (if any) and telephone number, and the applicant's home address and telephone number, driver's license number and physical description including height, weight, and color of hair and eyes. 
(2)  The complete name, street address, website address (if any) and telephone number of the parent organization and where and when the parent organization was established or incorporated and the form of its organization. 
(3)  A detailed description of the type of peddling to be undertaken and the method to be used in conducting the peddling. 
(4)  The dates and times when, and locations where, peddling will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such peddling and the hours of the days thereof. 
(5)  The types of goods, wares, merchandise and services to be sold or for which the peddling will be made. 
(6)  Whether the applicant or parent organization has ever been denied a license for peddling, had a license for peddling suspended or revoked, or been prohibited from peddling in the City of Wixom or in any other community. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, or any officer, partner, member or director of the parent organization has been convicted of a felony or any misdemeanor within the past ten years of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the applicant's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct, and if so, a brief description of the crime or violation, including its location and date, and an explanation of the reason therefore. 
(8)  Two color photographs of the applicant, one being a photograph taken within sixty days prior to the date of filing of the application and the other photograph being from the applicant's driver's license, a copy of such driver's license to be attached to the applicant's application. The photograph that is not from the applicant's driver's license shall be at least two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. If the applicant has not been issued a driver's license or it has been revoked, then the applicant shall submit a second separate photograph with the application, such photograph being at least two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(9)  The applicant's State of Michigan sales tax license number. 
(10)  A criminal background report of the applicant's criminal history. Such reports shall be obtained by the applicant through the Internet Criminal History Access Tool (ICHAT) for applicants residing in Michigan and/or through another state- sponsored or authorized criminal history access source for applicants who reside in other states or have resided in other states within five years prior to the date of the application. The applicant is responsible for all charges incurred in requesting and receiving the ICHAT report or other criminal history report and the report must be dated within thirty days of the date of the application. 
(11)  If under eighteen years of age, the applicant must provide a copy of a valid work permit issued by the applicant's school, school district offices or other authorized issuing agency to the applicant for purposes of the peddling activity proposed to be undertaken in the city. 
(12)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the city, the applicant must provide information to verify that the applicant has a valid driver's license, has not been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation within the last three years, or has not been found responsible for three or more motor vehicle moving violations under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or local ordinances within the last three years. 
(13)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the city, the vehicle from which the peddling is to occur shall be brought to the city and inspected by a designated representative of the police department and must be found to meet any safety standards adopted by the police department and any standards adopted by the State of Michigan, and the police department's checklist form signed by the designated police department representative verifying such compliance shall be submitted with the application. 
(14)  If the applicant will be engaging in the sale of food or beverages, a health license issued by the Oakland County Health Department. Such peddler's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the Oakland County Health Department at the time of application, as required by the state public health code. 
C.  An administrative processing and license fee for a peddler license application shall be established by resolution of the city council and such fee shall be paid when the application is filed with the city. City council shall also establish fees for licenses issued for special events. 
D.  The city clerk and police chief shall examine all peddler license applications and shall make or cause to be made such further investigation of the application or applicant as the city clerk and/or police chief shall deem necessary. If the city clerk and police chief both find the application to be complete and satisfactory in consideration of the purpose, intent and applicable provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall approve and issue the license. The city clerk may deny issuance of a license if he or she finds that: 
(1)  The applicant failed to truthfully provide in his or her application the information required in this chapter; 
(2)  The applicant has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted within the past ten years of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the applicant's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct; 
(4)  The applicant is listed on any criminal sex offender registry or has any outstanding warrants for any misdemeanor or felony; 
(5)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the city, the applicant does not have a valid driver's license, has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation within the last three years, or has been found responsible for three or more motor vehicle moving violations under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or local ordinances within the last three years; 
(6)  The applicant has had a license to conduct peddling or soliciting suspended or revoked within the past ten years. 
E.  A peddler license shall bear the name, address and photograph of the peddler; the date issued; the dates within which the license holder may peddle; the expiration date of the license; and a statement that the license does not constitute an endorsement by the city of the purpose or products involved or of the persons or parent organization conducting the peddling. All peddler licenses shall be signed by the city clerk. 
F.  A peddler license shall be valid for a period of up to one hundred twenty days as determined by the city clerk with consideration of the application, except for special events, which shall be limited to the period of the special event. Peddler licenses issued under this Chapter are nontransferable. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.041 - Exempt persons. 
A.  The following shall be exempt from the licensing, registration and fee requirements of this Article II, but shall be subject to the other sections of this chapter: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the occupation of distribution of newspapers. 
(2)  City of Wixom merchants and representatives engaging in year-round business with a permanent location in the city. 
(3)  Any honorably discharged veteran who is a resident of this state and who has obtained a veteran's license from a county clerk within the state of Michigan. 
(4)  Any person who proposes to sell produce which he has raised himself. Produce may only be sold on the site where it is raised. 
(5)  Persons peddling or soliciting to fellow members of the peddler's or solicitor's parent organization. 
(6)  Persons peddling or soliciting by telephone, email or mail. 
(7)  Recognizing that the city maintains or has available to it the information otherwise required for licensing under this chapter, city public safety personnel shall be exempt from the fee and licensing requirements set forth in this chapter, provided the city clerk is provided advanced notification describing the peddling activity and its duration and verification that the peddling activity is for a recognized, legitimate and valid charitable police or fire association project. Such persons shall be subject to all other regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(8)  An individual or organization entering upon private property to inform, educate, advocate, petition, secure petition signatures, request or enlist support or opposition, or to convey any other message regarding religion, philosophy, ideology, politics, including parties, candidates, initiatives and issues, charitable organizations, or other cause or issue, by verbal, written, or other forms of communication, including the distribution of written materials. 
(9)  Solicitations made to a congregation or group in attendance at one location and made by the person or organization inviting the individuals composing the congregation or group. 
(10)  Solicitations made over the radio, television or telephone. 
(11)  Any peddler traveling on an established route at the request, express or implied, of their customers. 
(12)  Salespersons calling on regularly-licensed business establishments. 
(13)  The distribution of written materials where the individual distributing them does not accept payments, orders or contributions. 
(14)  Persons under eighteen years of age engaged in peddling or soliciting within three miles of their residence for a bona fide school, charity, religious or youth organization. 
(15)  Solicitors and canvassers. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.042 - Peddler license renewals. 
    Peddler licenses may be renewed provided an application for renewal and license fees are received by the city no later than the expiration date of the current license. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new applications. The city shall review each application for renewal to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the city finds that the new application meets the above requirements, the city shall issue a new license. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.043 - Peddler license suspension. 
A.  The city clerk may suspend a peddler license upon determining that any of the following circumstances exists: 
(1)  The licensee failed to truthfully provide in his or her application the information required in this chapter, or that the licensee has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(2)  The licensee has been convicted of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the licensee's ability to conduct the business for which the license has been issued in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct; 
(3)  The licensee is listed on any criminal sex offender registry or has any outstanding warrants for any misdemeanor or felony; 
(4)  If the licensee will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the public ways of the city, the licensee's driver's license has been suspended or revoked or the licensee has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation; or 
(5)  The licensee has, during peddling in the city, engaged in conduct that is contrary to the peace, privacy, safety, health and welfare of the residents, businesses and persons in the city. 
(6)  Intervention by the state or county health department due to uncorrected health or sanitation violations. 
B.  A licensee shall be given written notice of the cause and term of the suspension. A licensee shall have the right to appeal the suspension within thirty days of the date of suspension. A licensee shall provide written notice and request for a reversal of the suspension, and a hearing shall be conducted by the city council no later than fifteen days following receipt of a written request by the licensee, unless a later date is set by agreement of the licensee. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the city clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. At the hearing, or at an adjourned date, the city council shall determine whether to reverse, modify or affirm the suspension and shall put its decision and the reasons therefore in the form of a resolution, which the city clerk shall forward to the licensee. The city council's decision may be appealed and reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.044 - Peddler license revocation. 
A.  The city council may revoke a peddler license upon the recommendation of the city clerk and after a hearing at which it is shown that any of the circumstances listed in Section 50.10.080(A)(1)-(6) exists. 
B.  Reasonable written notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee not less than ten days prior to the hearing date. The written notice shall be mailed by regular mail to the license holder at the business address provided on the licensee's application and shall set forth the alleged reason or reasons for considering revocation of the license and also the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the city clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. At the hearing, or at an adjourned date, the city council shall determine whether the license should be revoked or suspended and shall put its decision and the reasons therefore in the form of a resolution, which the city clerk shall forward to the licensee. The city council's decision may be appealed and reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.045-5.10.049 - Reserved. 
Article II. - Solicitors 

5.10.050 - Voluntary notification. 
A.  In the interest of the general public, and to protect against the potential for crime or fraud, the city requests that solicitors voluntarily notify the city clerk's office that soliciting will be taking place the city. It is further requested that the following information be voluntarily provided: 
(1)  The names of the individuals who will be soliciting in the city and the identity of the organization associated with the solicitation efforts. 
(2)  A description of the type of soliciting to be undertaken and the method to be used in conducting the soliciting. 
(3)  The dates and times when and locations where the soliciting will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such soliciting and the hours of the days thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.051 - Failure to provide notification. 
    The failure of a solicitor to provide the voluntary notification shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.052-5.10.059 - Reserved. 
Article III - Canvassers 

5.10.060 - Voluntary notification. 
A.  In the interest of the general public, and to protect against the potential for crime or fraud, the city requests that solicitors voluntarily notify the city clerk's office that soliciting will be taking place the city. It is further requested that the following information be voluntarily provided: 
(1)  The names of the individuals who will be soliciting in the city and the identity of the organization associated with the solicitation efforts. 
(2)  A description of the type of soliciting to be undertaken and the method to be used in conducting the soliciting. 
(3)  The dates and times when and locations where the soliciting will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such soliciting and the hours of the days thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.061 - Failure to provide notification. 
    The failure of a solicitor to provide the voluntary notification shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.062-5.10.069 - Reserved. 
Article IV. - General Regulations for Peddlers/Solicitors/Canvassers 

5.10.070 - Material change to application information. 
A.  While any peddler license issued pursuant to this chapter is in effect, a peddler shall, within seven calendar days, report to the city clerk in writing any material change in any information previously provided on the application form. 
B.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person knowingly to file or to cause to be filed an application for a peddler license containing one or more false statements. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.071 - Inferred endorsement by the city. 
    A peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall not represent that its activities or speech are endorsed by the city or by any department, officer or employee thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.072 - Hours for peddling. 
    No peddling shall take place in the city after 8:00 p.m. or sunset (whichever is earlier) or before 10:00 a.m., prevailing time. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.073 - Display of peddlers license. 
    While carrying on peddling in the city, a peddler shall visibly display on the exterior of his or her clothes at all times a valid peddler license issued under this chapter and shall tender such license, upon request, to any police officer, city employee, or any person dealing with the peddler. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.074 - Obstructing traffic. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall not block, obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public highway, public parking lot, street, road, alley, drive or sidewalk or within public buildings and other public areas within the city by means of a barricade, object or device, or with his person. 
    Notwithstanding, the above prohibitions do not apply to a person who is soliciting contributions on behalf of a charitable of civic organization, during daylight hours, if all the followings conditions are satisfied: 
A.  Only charitable and civic organizations are permitted to solicit or complete solicitation transactions within the roadway. As used in this section, "charitable or civic organization" means a nonprofit organization that is qualified under section 501(c)3 or 501 (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC 501, or a veteran's organization that has tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. 
B.  All persons engaged in permitted solicitation shall wear high visibility safety apparel meeting the current American Standards promulgated by the International Safety Equipment Association. In the event that such persons are acting for or on behalf of any entity or agency, lettering identifying such entity or agency upon clothing, a hat, or any small container utilized by such individuals shall be provided that is legible from twenty feet. 
C.  Such persons shall attempt to move off the roadway portion of the road when traffic is moving. 
D.  No person under the age of eighteen shall be permitted to solicit on behalf of any charitable or civic organization. 
E.  Persons shall only carry or hold a container of a small size, shape and weight so as to not impede safe pedestrian and vehicular movement. Signs and other objects are prohibited unless approved by the city manager or his/her designee. 
F.  Solicitation shall not occur at any time when there is inclement weather such as snow, ice, or fog, as determined by the director of public safety and/or his/her designee. 
G.  Solicitation shall occur only during daylight hours which is defined to mean one-half hour after the sunrise and one-half hour before sunset based on published sunrise and sunset times on the applicable day where solicitation occurs. 
H.  Solicitation is not permitted within any work zone. 
I.  Solicitation shall not occur at any permitted intersection where traffic controlled devices are either not present or not functioning. 
J.  The charitable or civic organization shall maintain at least five hundred thousand dollars in liability insurance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 12-12-2017 ) 
5.10.075 - Harassment and noise. 
    No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall threaten or harass any resident of the city in the course of their activities or in any way engage in any conduct that would tend to threaten the health and safety of another. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.076 - Misrepresentation. 
    No fraudulent or misleading representations to any person shall be made in connection with any peddling, soliciting or canvassing, including, but not limited to, any misleading representation concerning the product or service involved, the purposes for which contributions solicited will be used, the name of the peddler, the trade name and nature of the parent organization, or the purposes for which the parent organization was organized. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.077 - Peddling on public property. 
A.  Peddling is prohibited within a public right-of-way, including any street corner or intersection road, and on any highway, street, road, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley, public parking lot any or publicly-owned property, except for peddling conducted as provided in subsections (B) and (C), below. 
B.  For special events conducted by or with the approval of the city, a peddler shall apply for a peddler's license at least thirty days prior to the scheduled special event and provide the information required in Section 5.10.040, unless exempt under Section 5.10.041. If the peddler license is approved by the city, the term of the license shall be limited to the period of the special event. If the peddler license is approved by the city, a peddler may conduct activities only on the specific public property in the location identified and approved by the city for the special event. If the special event is to take place in the Village Center Area on any of the public parks and/or adjacent public property, roads or parking lots, a peddler license shall be obtained under this chapter, and the peddler shall not be required to also obtain a permit from the parks and recreation department under Chapter 12 of the Code of Ordinances for events in the Village Center Area. 
C.  Peddlers of food products from a vehicle approved by the police department may engage in peddling on residential public streets and rights-of-way only, and may not peddle on streets considered major thoroughfares or public parking lots, provided such peddlers comply with all otherwise applicable requirements of this code, including provisions relating to noise and hours of operation, and otherwise applicable laws and regulations. In the case of ice cream trucks, the ringing of an unamplified bell is permitted so long as it does not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhoods or structures. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.078 - Fixed stands prohibited; miscellaneous. 
A.  No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall establish a fixed stand and/or store for peddling upon any street, road, highway, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley, public parking lot or publicly-owned property. 
B.  Peddler temporary stands shall not impede access to the entrance, parking lot or driveway of any adjacent building. Such stands shall be located on private property within the city, only when permission of the property owner has been obtained, unless permission to be located on public property is granted by the city for a special event in accordance with Section 5.10.077(B). Nothing herein shall be constructed as relieving an applicant from applying for any other approvals that may be required by the City Code. 
C.  All peddlers selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.079 - Posted property; access to premises restricted. 
A.  No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall enter into or upon any property that has posted a "no peddling," "no solicitation," "no soliciting", "no canvassing" or "no trespassing" sign, or similar notice in accordance with subsection (C), below. 
B.  No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall engage in peddling, soliciting, or canvassing in any residential subdivision, condominium or other neighborhood that has a privately posted "no peddling," "no solicitation," "no soliciting", "no canvassing" or "no trespassing" sign, or similar notice at each entrance to the subdivision, condominium or other neighborhood, in accordance with subsection (C), below. 
C.  A sign posted under subsection (A), above, must be a weatherproof sign measuring a minimum of three inches by four inches, the letters must be at least one-third inch in height, and the sign must be exhibited upon or near a main entrance door to the main structure, building or residence on the property. A sign posted under subsection (B), above, must be a weatherproof sign measuring a minimum of two square feet, the letters must be at least two inches in height, and the sign must be exhibited in a location visible to the drivers of vehicles at each entrance to the subdivision, condominium or other neighborhood. A sign posted under subsection (B), above, must comply with all otherwise applicable requirements of this code and city standards, including, without limitation, the requirement to obtain a permit if the sign is to be located within a public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.080 - Request to leave. 
    No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall remain on private property after having been asked or directed to leave the premises by any person lawfully in possession of the premises. In addition, no person shall remain on public property during a special event when asked or directed to leave the premises by any police officer. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.081 - Contracts. 
    The city reserves the right to contract with individual vendors to provide limited vending services in public areas. 
( Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
5.10.082-5.10.089 - Reserved. 
Chapter 5.12 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter, for brevity, may be cited, pleaded and referred to and may be amended by the short title of garage sales ordinance of the city of Wixom. 
(Ord. 103 § 8, 1977) 
5.12.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "Garage sale," "attic sale" or "lawn sale" means any sale of tangible personal property not otherwise regulated in the city and not falling with the exceptions of this chapter, advertised in such manner that the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. 
    "Goods" means any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this chapter, including the sale of previously owned vehicles. 
    "Person" means and includes all individuals living within the same household, firms, corporations or organizations. 
(Ord. 103 § 1, 1977) 
5.12.030 - License required. 
    A license issued by the city clerk shall be obtained by any person, firm, group, corporation or organization before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the types of sales enumerated in Section 5.12.020 and not falling within the exceptions of Section 5.12.070. 
(Ord. 103 § 2, 1977) 
5.12.040 - Application for license. 
    An application for a license for any of the sales regulated under this chapter shall be made at the office of the city clerk on a form to be provided thereof, which application shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or organization conducting the sale; 
B.  Location at which the sale is to be conducted and the date and nature of any prior sales conducted at the same location; 
C.  The dates during which the sale is to be conducted within the time limits hereinafter prescribed; 
D.  Date, nature and location of any past sale conducted by applicant. 
(Ord. 103 § 3, 1977) 
5.12.050 - License fees. 
    No license fee shall be paid to the city at the time of the first and second application for a sale at a particular location by a particular applicant made in any twelve-month period. The fee for the third such application in a twelve-month period is ten dollars and the fee for the fourth application during any twelve-month period is twenty dollars. No more than four sales as regulated under this chapter shall be held at a particular location by a particular individual, firm, group, corporation, association or organization during any twelve-month period, and not falling within the exceptions in Section 5.12.070. 
(Ord. 103 § 4, 1977) 
5.12.060 - Conditions of license. 
A.  No person shall conduct, advertise or promote any sale regulated by this chapter without a license issued as prescribed herein. 
B.  All such garage or rummage sales shall be held no closer than twenty-five feet from the front lot line of the premises covered in the permit. There shall be no overnight outside storage of the goods or merchandise held for purchase in the garage sale. 
C.  No signs advertising a sale regulated by this chapter shall be placed on public property or within the public right-of-way or on any utility pole or on private property, except that one sign advertising the sale may be placed on the property of the owner. 
D.  No license shall be issued authorizing any such sale to be conducted for a period longer than three consecutive days. 
E.  The license authorizing such sale shall be displayed in the front window or other prominent place, clearly visible from the street, at the location where the sale is being conducted. 
F.  The city shall retain the right to terminate the license and sale at any time for cause or violation of the above license conditions. 
(Ord. 103 § 5, 1977) 
5.12.070 - Persons and sales excepted. 
A.  Persons selling goods pursuant to any order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
C.  Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed ten in number. 
D.  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other communication media who publishes or broadcasts in good faith without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that the provisions of the city have not been complied with. 
E.  Any sale regulated under any other provisions of the ordinances of the city. 
F.  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or under the protection of the presently nonconforming section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in the ordinances of the city. 
G.  Any bona fide charitable, religious, educational, cultural or governmental institution or organization, provided, however, that the burden of establishing the exemption under this section shall be on the organization or institution claiming such exemption. 
H.  Auction by lawfully qualified auctioneer. 
(Ord. 103 § 6, 1977) 
5.12.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, group, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety days, or to both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 103 § 7, 1977) 
Chapter 5.16 - PINBALL ARCADES AND MACHINES 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Wixom Pinball Arcade and Pinball Machine Ordinance. 
(Ord. 117 (part), 1981) 
5.16.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    "Pinball arcade" means any place of business or establishment containing two or more mechanical or electrical devices which provide amusement or entertainment, which may be operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin or token. 
    "Pinball machine" means any mechanical or electrical device which provides amusement or entertainment, which may be operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin or token. This definition shall not include jukeboxes, telephone devices or machines which disburse merchandise. 
    "Operator" means proprietor, lessee, manager or employee of any pinball arcade or business operating a pinball machine. 
(Ord. 117 § 1.01, 1981) 
5.16.030 - License required. 
    No pinball arcade shall be established, maintained or conducted in the city by any person or corporation without first obtaining a license to operate such place from the city council and no operator, as defined in this chapter, shall allow or permit the use of a pinball machine unless a license for such use has been obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. 117 § 2.01, 1981) 
5.16.040 - License application. 
    Every person or operator as defined in this chapter shall file a written application to the city clerk on forms approved by the city clerk, together with a nonrefundable application fee of two hundred dollars or as hereinafter provided by resolution by the city council. The application shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant. If the applicant is in the form of a corporation, partnership, or any other type of association (profit or nonprofit), then full disclosure shall be made of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the principal officers or partners, and further a copy of documentary authority for the applicant shall be submitted along with the application; 
B.  The length of time and location of all residences within the state for the five years preceding the application; 
C.  A description of the type of business and the exact location of the licensed establishment; 
D.  Number of mechanical devices to be operated in the licensed establishment; 
E.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude; 
F.  Such other information as may be required to aid in determining the qualifications of the applicant. 
(§ 1 of Ord. dated 6-23-98: Ord. 117 § 3.01, 1981) 
5.16.050 - Inspection of premises. 
    Before any pinball arcade license or pinball machine license is issued, investigation of the application and inspection of the premises shall be made by the city building department, the fire chief or his agent, the police department, and such other city department or agencies as may be deemed necessary to determine whether the premises fully comply with all applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(§ 2 of Ord. dated 6-23-98: Ord. 117 § 4.01, 1981) 
5.16.060 - Regulations. 
    Each licensee shall: 
A.  At all times open each and every portion of the licensed premises for inspection by the police department and other city departments for the purpose of enforcing any provision of this chapter. 
B.  At all times display the license granted hereunder in a conspicuous place near the entrance to the licensed establishment. 
C.  Have at least one adult operator on the premises at all times that the premises are open to the public. Such adult operator shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(§ 3 of Ord. dated 6-23-98: Ord. 117 § 5.01, 1981) 
5.16.070 - Conduct on premises. 
    No licensee, by himself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee shall: 
A.  Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct; 
B.  Permit the licensed premises to become a resort for disorderly persons of any type; 
C.  Permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia in the premises (the winning of anything of value as a result of the operation of a pinball machine shall constitute gambling); 
D.  Permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises; 
E.  Permit the use of any pinball machine by any person under the age of sixteen years at any time unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; 
F.  Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the premises, nor shall the licensed premises be accessible in any way with any place where alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed or given away. The prohibition shall not apply while a Michigan Liquor Control Commission license is in effect at the licensed premises; 
G.  Permit the possession or use of any unlawful drug or narcotic, including marijuana, on the premises; 
H.  Permit noise or music to emerge from licenses premises which is disturbing to the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 117 § 9.01, 1981) 
5.16.080 - Denial of license. 
    No license shall be issued: 
A.  Where the individual operator, managing agent of a corporation or active partner has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
B.  For any premises unless all of the requirements of this chapter, the building code, and other applicable ordinances and regulations have been met; 
C.  Whenever the city council deems that the granting of such license will not be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(§ 4 of Ord. dated 6-23-98: Ord. 117 § 6.01, 1981) 
5.16.090 - License fees. 
    The fee to be paid upon granting of licenses issued under this chapter shall be two hundred dollars plus twenty dollars for each pinball machine on said premises, or as set by resolution of the city council. The license fee is in addition to the aforementioned application fee. 
(Ord. 117 § 7.01, 1981) 
5.16.100 - Granting of licenses. 
    After review and recommendation by all city agencies and departments, but in no event later than forty-five days from the date of filing a complete application, the city clerk shall present the application to the city council at its next regular meeting. The city council, upon receiving such application, if presented in due form, shall pass upon the same at its next regular meeting or any adjournment thereof and, if satisfied that such application possesses the qualifications prescribed in this chapter, shall grant such license for a term expiring on the thirty-first day of December in each year. In granting approval, the city council may set conditions and prohibitions for the issuance for a license. All such licenses shall be in such form as the city council may prescribe and shall contain the name, address, place of business, the number of pinball machines on the premises, and the date of expiration of such license, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the city clerk. 
(§ 5 of Ord. dated 6-23-98: Ord. 117 § 8.01, 1981) 
5.16.110 - Renewal and transferability. 
    Any license issued in accordance with this chapter may be renewed for an additional year upon the same terms and subject to the requirements as provided in this chapter for an original license. Whenever the holder of such license desires to effect a change of place of doing business he shall notify the city council and make application for a license for such new location in the same manner as in the first instance, excepting that proof of good character may be dispensed with by the city council. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be assignable or transferable, nor shall any person excepting the person to whom it was issued, be permitted to do business thereunder either directly or indirectly. 
(Ord. 117 § 10.01, 1981) 
5.16.120 - Revocation. 
    The city council shall have the right to revoke any license once granted or deny annual renewal thereof when it appears to its satisfaction that any licensee has violated this chapter or any other ordinance of the city or statute of the state. The revocation of any license or the denial or renewal thereof shall not be made without a hearing before the city council. Notice must first be given of hearing and the reasons for such revocation or denial of renewal of said license. Any conviction of a violation of this chapter, or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state involving moral turpitude by the licensee or his employees shall be grounds for revocation of any license or the refusal to renew the same. 
(Ord. 117 § 11.01, 1981) 
5.16.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each offense or to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety days, or to both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 117 § 12.01, 1981) 
Chapter 5.20 - TAXICABS AND TAXICAB DRIVERS* 
Sections: 

5.20.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Driver" means and includes every person in charge of and/or operating any taxicab, either as agent or employee or otherwise. 
    "Owner" means and includes every person having the legal or equitable ownership of any taxicab. 
    "Taxicab" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle with a seating capacity of seven passengers or less used for the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the city for pay or hire, and not over defined routes, the trip and/or its destination of which vehicle are fixed by the person hiring the same, irrespective of whether such operations extend beyond the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.020 - Driver's license. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab, and no person shall permit any agent or employee to drive any taxicab under his or her control, within the city unless such driver has first obtained a driver's license. Any driver habitually operating a taxicab in any other municipality may carry passengers from such municipality to any place or point within the city and may freely enter and temporarily travel upon the streets and thoroughfares thereof for that purpose, without procuring a license as herein provided; but such driver shall not solicit business on the streets of the city or otherwise operate within the city without a license within the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.030 - Driver qualifications. 
A.  Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must have the following qualifications and comply with the following conditions: 
1.  Be currently licensed by the state to operate an automobile as a chauffeur; 
2.  Be of the age of eighteen years or older; 
3.  Present a licensed physician's signed certificate which certifies the applicant was examined by the physician and was found to have normal eyesight and hearing and is not suffering from any disease or infirmity which would render the applicant incapable of safely operating a public vehicle; 
4.  Be able to read, write and speak the English language; 
5.  Present on forms to be provided by the chief of police affidavits of the applicant's good character, which affidavits are to be completed by two responsible citizens of the city, not related to the applicant by blood or marriage, and who have known the applicant personally and observed the applicant's conduct during at least three months next preceding the date of the application; 
6.  Complete, sign and swear to a statement to be provided by the chief of police, which statement gives the following information about the applicant: 
a.  Full name, 
b.  Present residence, 
c.  Date and place of residence for five years previous to the time of making application, 
d.  Date and place of birth, 
e.  Color of eyes and color of hair, 
f.  Name of previous employers, 
g.  Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, and the nature of such felonies, if any, 
h.  Applicant's state chauffeur driver's license number, 
i.  Whether applicant's chauffeur or operator's license has ever been suspended or revoked by the state and the reasons for such suspension or revocation, if any, 
j.  Any other information that the chief of police may require. 
B.  The chief of police shall investigate the contents of the statement submitted by the applicant. The application shall be filed with the city clerk and kept in that office as a record. Any applicant for a driver's license under this chapter is obligated to notify the chief of police of a change of address or other changes of information required in this chapter. Such notification will be made within ten days of the date of the change. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.040 - Disqualifications-Exceptions. 
A.  No driver's license shall be issued to any person under the provisions of this chapter who has been under any sentence, including parole, probation, or actual incarceration, for the commission of a felony within five years next preceding the date of application, or to any person who has at any time been convicted of a felony involving prohibited sexual conduct. 
B.  No driver's license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to any person whose state automobile operator's or chauffeur's license has been revoked or suspended within two years prior to the date of application for a driver's license, or who presently has nine or more points assessed against his or her driving record pursuant to the provisions of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the chief of police or his designated representative may approve a driver's license when, after investigation, it shall appear that a disqualified applicant is a law abiding citizen. For purposes of this section, the chief of police in determining whether an applicant is a law abiding citizen may consider: 
1.  If pertinent, the nature and circumstances of the applicant's felony conviction within five years next preceding the date of application. 
2.  If pertinent, the length of time that has passed between the date of application and the conviction of the applicant of a felony involving prohibited sexual conduct. 
3.  If pertinent, the nature and circumstances of the applicant's conviction of a felony involving prohibited sexual conduct. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the chief of police or his designated representative may approve the issuance of a driver's license to an applicant duly licensed to drive by the state when, after investigation, it shall appear that a disqualified applicant does not present an unacceptable traffic safety risk. For purposes of this section, an applicant shall be deemed to present an unacceptable traffic safety risk where he or she has, during the two years immediately prior to the date of application: 
1.  Been involved in two or more accidents; or 
2.  Been convicted of either driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs or of driving while his ability was visibly impaired; or 
3.  Been convicted of reckless driving, negligent homicide or manslaughter involving the use of an automobile. 
E.  In any case involving the grant of a license by the chief of police, the chief shall revoke such license, if upon satisfactory proof, it appears that the licensee has incurred additional points against his driving record bringing such point total to twelve or more. Such licensee shall thereafter be disqualified from receiving a driver's license until such time as his point total is reduced to fewer than nine. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.050 - Issuance of driver's license. 
    Upon certification by the chief of police of applicant's satisfactory fulfillment of the qualifications in Section 5.20.030 and in the absence of disqualifications under Section 5.20.040, the city clerk shall issue the applicant an annual driver's license which shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep a register in which shall be listed the names of all persons to whom such licenses are granted, the date any license is issued, the number of each license, and any additional data, which in the judgment of the clerk may be necessary. No driver's license shall be issued under this section until all fees required by this chapter have been paid to the city clerk. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.060 - Display of license. 
    The licensed issued pursuant to Section 5.20.050 shall be constantly and conspicuously displayed on the outside of the driver's coat or shirt when the driver is engaged in his or her employment and shall only be worn only by the person to whom the license is issued. Such license shall contain at least the following: the name of licensee; the license number; the licensee's age, height, weight, color of hair, color of eyes; a recent photograph of licensee. Upon request, the driver shall present such license for inspection. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred or assigned to any other person, nor shall the holder of such license allow the same to be used by any other person for any purpose. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.070 - Suspension or revocation of license. 
A.  Driver's licenses may be revoked or suspended for cause by the chief of police. Cause for suspension or revocation shall include the following: 
1.  The conviction of licensee of a felony; 
2.  The conviction of licensee of a violation of a criminal statute, which violation involves the use of a taxicab for unlawful purposes; 
3.  The expiration, suspension, or revocation of the licensee's state chauffeur's license, or the accumulation of nine points against licensee's driving record pursuant to Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.320a, MSA 9.2020(1)) as amended; 
4.  Any false statements made by licensee in an application for the taxicab driver's license; 
5.  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The licensee shall have a right to a hearing before the city council before the effective date of any such action by the chief of police, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of notice of such suspension or revocation. The council may confirm or overrule the proposed action of the chief of police, and the action taken by the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.080 - Taxicab license. 
    No person shall operate or permit to be operated in the city any taxicab over which that person has control without first having obtained a taxicab license therefor, or without complying in every respect with the provisions of this chapter. Any taxicab being habitually operated in any other municipality may carry passengers from such municipality to any place or point within the city; in such case it shall not be necessary to procure a license for such vehicle, but such vehicle shall not be permitted to solicit business in the city or otherwise operate within this city without a license or without complying with the requirements herein. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.090 - Taxicab license requirements. 
A.  Each applicant for a taxicab license must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual or a partnership each individual or partner must be of the age eighteen years or older. 
2.  If the applicant is a corporation, it must be authorized to operate taxicabs and carry on such business in accordance with the laws of the state. 
3.  The applicant must obtain a license for each and every taxicab to be operated. 
4.  The applicant must fill out, sign and swear to a statement on a form to be provided by the chief of police, which statement includes a description of each vehicle to be licensed; the full name and address of the owner or owners, legal and equitable, of each vehicle; the make of the vehicle; its vehicle identification number; and whatever other information shall be required by the chief of police. In addition to the above, the statement shall include the name of the company issuing a policy or certificate of liability insurance as required in Section 5.20.110. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a person from licensing a taxicab purchased under a title contract or plan of financing or the title thereto vests in some other person for the purpose of security only. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.100 - Taxicab license plate and number. 
    Upon certification by the chief of police that the applicant for a license and the taxicab to be licensed meet all the qualifications prescribed by this chapter, and upon payment by the applicant of the fee for a taxicab license to the city clerk, said fee to be set from time to time by resolution of city council, the city council shall approve the taxicab license; provided, however, that the city council shall refuse a taxicab license when in its opinion there is currently licensed a sufficient number of taxicabs to adequately serve the public convenience and necessity or when, in its judgment, existing operating transportation facilities are reasonably sufficient to serve the public demand, or when in its judgment, the use of the streets by the additional taxicabs would interfere with the public use of the street, congest traffic, or in other ways endanger the person or property of others using the streets. Upon approval by the city council the city clerk shall deliver to the approved licensee, for each and every licensed taxicab, an annual license, which license shall be in the form of a tag and shall bear the license number and the year for which the license was issued. Such tags shall be affixed by the owner upon the inside of the taxicab, facing and plainly visible from the outside rear of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.110 - Insurance. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab for hire or permit the same to be operated upon the streets of the city unless such taxicab is covered by a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to transact business in the state and insuring the owner of such taxicab against liability for the following: 
1.  Personal injury or injuries to a passenger or passengers of such taxicab or to a member or members of the general public, which injury or injuries result from an accident in which such taxicab is involved through the recklessness or negligence of its owner or operator. 
2.  Property damage resulting from an accident or accidents in which such taxicab is involved through the recklessness or negligence of its owner or operator. 
B.  The minimum insurance policy amounts for each taxicab shall be as follows: 
1. For injury to or death of one (1) person $ 50,000.00 2. For injury to or death to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident 100,000.00 3. For damage to property, including baggage or other property of passengers carried in or on any such taxicab, resulting from any single accident 10,000.00  
C.  Each policy of insurance shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give ten days' written notice before cancellation thereof to the city clerk. A certificate of insurance complying with the provisions of this section shall be deposited with the city clerk. A taxicab license issued under this chapter shall expire upon the lapse or termination of the policy required in this section. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.120 - Inspection of taxicabs. 
    No taxicab shall be licensed under this chapter until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined by the police department and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, of good appearance and well painted. The police department is authorized and empowered to establish rules and regulations for the inspection of such vehicles and their appearance, construction and condition of fitness. Any member of the police department shall have the right, at any reasonable time, after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any licensed taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.130 - Name of owner or taxicab company. 
    Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have the name of the owner of the taxicab, or the taxicab company with which the owner is associated, plainly painted on the main panel of each of the two rear doors or two front doors, in letters at least three inches in height and in legible type. In the event of change of ownership or taxicab company association, the lettering shall be removed or changed to comply with this section. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.140 - Number of cab. 
    Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have the number of the license plainly painted in figures five inches in height to be visible at a distance of at least one hundred fifty feet on the rear of such vehicle. The number of each cab shall be painted three inches high on the main panel of each of the front doors or each side of the cowl. Such number shall be removed in the event of change of ownership of such vehicle and if again used as a taxicab the proper number shall be placed thereon before the same shall be used again. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.150 - Taximeters. 
    Every taxicab operated on the streets of the city shall have affixed thereto a taximeter of a size and design approved by the chief of police or his designated representative. Such meter shall be some mechanically approved instrument or device made for the purpose of installation on taxicabs by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated for both distance traveled and waiting time, and upon which such device such charge shall be indicated by means of figures which shall be visible to the passenger in the taxicab. Such taximeter shall be inspected and tested in such manner and by such persons as the chief of police or his designated representative may from time to time direct. No taxicab shall be let or hired upon a meter basis when the taximeter thereon is broken, out of order, or for any other reason does not accurately register the fare. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.160 - Rates' display-Receipt. 
    There shall be affixed in each taxicab licensed under this chapter, for the convenience and information of passengers and in such manner as to be easily read by any person riding therein, a sign or placard, plainly legible, showing the rates of fare under which such taxicab is operated. The owner or driver in charge of such taxicab shall not demand, nor be entitled to receive any pay for the conveyance of any passengers unless such card bearing such rates of fares shall be conspicuously displayed as hereinbefore provided; nor shall such owner or driver charge or collect a rate of fare greater than that revealed on such placard or sign. If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the taxicab at the time of such payment, a receipt therefor in legible type or writing, containing the name of the owner, the driver's license number, the total amount paid and the date of payment. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.170 - Rates of fare. 
    No person owning, operating or controlling any motor vehicle used as a taxicab within the city shall hire or let such vehicle without first filing with the city clerk a schedule of rates and fees to be charged for transportation and/or other services offered. No revision of such rates and/or fees to be charged shall be made until thirty days' notice of such revision has been filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.180 - Driver shall not deceive. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning or driving any taxicab to deceive, misinform or mislead any passenger who may ride in such vehicle or who may desire to ride in such vehicle, as to his destination or the price to be charged for conveying such passengers or for other services offered. Any person owning or driving any taxicab who shall overcharge a passenger, or charge a passenger in excess of the rate of fare or fees as indicated on the taximeter, if a taximeter is placed therein and the taxi hired by mileage, or on the card or sign displayed inside of the cab, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.190 - Direct route. 
    Any taxicab driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the shortest and most direct route possible that will carry that passenger to his or her destination safely and expediently. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.200 - Driver's duty to convey. 
    No driver of a licensed taxicab shall refuse or neglect to convey any person within the city unless previously engaged or unable to do so; provided such person or persons agree to pay the fare for the operation of such taxicab, and at the expiration of the ride it shall be a violation of this chapter if such person refuses to pay. No driver of a licensed taxicab shall carry any other person than the person first employing the taxicab, without the consent of such passenger. No driver shall carry a number of passengers greater than the seating capacity of his taxicab. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.210 - Duty to transport passengers when available. 
    The driver of any taxicab who shall report from his location or stand to the central station or office of the owner that his cab is available for service and who shall receive after such report an order or direction to call at any point within the limits of the city to transport, then or within twelve hours thereafter, any passenger or passengers from such appointed place to any other point within the city, shall forthwith or at such appointed time, fill such order and transport such passenger or passengers. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.220 - Cruising and soliciting. 
    No taxicab drivers shall solicit passengers except when sitting on the driver's seat of such taxicab and no taxicab driver shall solicit passengers by driving through any public street or place at such a speed as to interfere with or impede traffic. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.230 - Return of property. 
    Whenever any package or article of baggage or goods of any kind shall be left in or on any taxicab, or when any such package or article shall be left in the custody of any driver, the driver of such taxicab shall forthwith deliver the same to the company's main office and into the hands of the management in charge thereof, and receive from such manager a receipt for same unless such package or article shall be sooner delivered to the owner thereof on the order of such owner. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.240 - Tobacco, liquor and drugs. 
    No taxicab driver shall drive such taxicab while under the influence of liquor or any narcotic drug, nor shall such driver drink any intoxicating liquor whatsoever while on duty, whether or not passengers are in the taxicab of which he or she is in charge. No driver shall use tobacco in any form while patrons are in the cab. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.250 - Temporary permits. 
    Pending completion of the investigation of an application for taxicab driver's license by the police department, a temporary permit may be issued to the applicant by the city clerk if all qualifications prescribed by this chapter except criminal history have been determined to be met by the applicant. Issuance of such permit shall not create any right in the applicant to the issuance of a license and shall not be construed as a certification by the city of the permit holder's qualification for a license. A temporary permit may be revoked at any time by the city clerk for cause. A temporary permit shall be valid for a period of not more than sixty days. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
5.20.260 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, owner or driver who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days, or to both such fine or imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 08-01 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 5.24 - MASSAGE 
Sections: 
Article I. - In General 

5.24.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    "Massage" means a method of treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
    "Massagist" means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
    "Massage parlor" means any turkish bath, steam bath, sauna bath, magnetic healing institute, or any room, place, establishment or institution where treatment of any nature for the human body is given by means of massage and where a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, physiotherapy, manipulation of the body or similar treatment is given. 
    "Massage school" means a school which is recognized by the state board of massage, which requires for admission students with a tenth grade education or its equivalent, which employs one (1) or more competent licensed massagists as instructors, and which has minimum requirements for a continuous course of study and training and consisting of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics and practical massage. For the purposes of this chapter, a correspondence school shall not be construed to be a recognized school. 
    "Student" means any person who, under the guidance of an instructor in a massage school, is being trained or instructed in the theory, method or practice of massage. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.020 - Inspections. 
A.  Every establishment ostensibly being operated as a massage parlor or massage school shall be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of any city department concerned with the licensing and supervision of such establishment during operating hours for the purpose of enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances or regulations of the city relating to the public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to refuse entry by city representatives to premises in which a massage parlor or massage school is ostensibly being operated for the purpose of making lawful inspections. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.030 - Unlawful activities. 
    It is unlawful for any person to massage any other person, or give or administer any bath or baths, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this article for illegal purposes. It is unlawful for any person, for monetary gain or profit, to have any contact with a person's breasts, genital area or buttocks in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desire. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the license. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.040 - Massagists' wearing apparel. 
    Uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massagists or employees while attending patrons. Such uniforms or garments shall be of washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. The sleeves of the uniform or garment shall not reach below the elbow. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.050 - Patronage by minors. 
    No person licensed as a massagist shall massage or treat any person under the age of seventeen upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine or physical therapist. Such order shall be dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. If the person under the age of seventeen is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this provision shall not apply. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.060 - Advertising. 
    No massage parlor, massage school or similar business or massagist granted a license under this chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any massage services. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.070 - Hours of operation. 
    No massage parlor or massage school shall be open to the public for business between the hours of twelve midnight and ten a.m. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.080 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Medical doctors, doctors of osteopathic medicine, doctors of chiropractic medicine, physical therapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers and family counselors who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state, or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed in the state, clergymen, certified members of the American Massage and Therapy Association, and certified members of the International Myomassethics Federation; 
B.  Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties; 
C.  A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in normal course of duties; 
D.  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their duties; 
E.  Participants in growth seminars or sensitivity sessions provided such seminars or sessions are conducted by a member of one of the exempted professions defined in subsection (A) of this section; 
F.  Any duly licensed establishment in which the above-described persons only exclusively practice their respective professions. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
Article II. - License 

5.24.090 - Required. 
    No person shall practice, engage in, carry on or operate the business of a massagist or conduct, operate and carry on a massage parlor, massage school or similar business within the city without first having applied for and obtained the required license and complying with all requirements of this article. No person shall employ as a massagist any person who does not hold a current unrevoked license as required by this article. No person shall practice massage for compensation without obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as a massagist as required by this article. The requirements of this article are in addition to any other requirements mandated under Title 5 of this code. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.100 - Duties of owner, operator, etc., regarding employees' licenses. 
    It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business to ensure that each person employed or engaged as a massagist in such business shall have first obtained a valid massagist license as required by this chapter. Any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, who employs a person performing as a massagist, who is not in possession of a valid massagist license, or allows such an employee to perform, operate or practice within a massage parlor, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.110 - Investigation fee. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business or to perform massage services shall make application to the city clerk. The city clerk shall refer all such applications to the police chief for an investigation. An application to obtain a license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. No part of such fee will be refundable. 
B.  Each applicant for a license to allow an individual to perform massage services shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. No part of such fee will be refundable. 
C.  This application fee shall be payable to the city finance director at the time the application is filed and shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required under this article or any other city ordinance. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.120 - Application-Contents. 
A.  Any applicant for licenses required in this article shall submit the following information: 
1.  The full name and present address of the applicant or applicants; 
2.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and dates of such residence; 
3.  A description of service to be provided; 
4.  The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment; 
5.  If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation, and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the corporation; 
6.  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners; 
7.  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age; 
8.  Individual applicant's height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair; 
9.  One portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, which shall be taken to the police chief or the chief's agent; 
10.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
11.  A certificate from a medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant has, within thirty days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease; 
12.  The history of an applicant in the operation of a massage parlor or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person has previously operated in this city or another municipality or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
13.  All criminal convictions other than traffic violations and the reasons therefor; 
14.  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
B.  The following additional information shall be contained in an application for a license to conduct a massage parlor: the number of employees and names and qualifications of all persons who are intended to give massages in the proposed parlor. 
C.  The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.130 - Review-Investigation-Inspection of premises-Issuance or denial-Appeals. 
A.  Any applicant for a license under this article shall present to the city clerk the application containing the required information. The application shall be referred to the police chief, who shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the police chief or the police chief's representative shall render a recommendation to the city clerk as to the approval or denial of the license. 
B.  The police chief shall recommend denial of an application for a license if the character, reputation, moral integrity or physical or mental condition of the applicant or his or her employees is found to be inimical to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. The police chief's recommendation shall be based on appropriate and competent evidence available to the police chief. In making such determination, the police chief shall consider: 
1.  Penal History. All the applicant's convictions, the reasons therefor and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to the applicant's release; 
2.  License and Permit History. This license and permit history of the applicant, whether such person has previously operated in this city or state or in another municipality or state under a license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
C.  The city building department and fire department as well as the county health officer shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the massage parlor, massage school or similar business and shall, within a reasonable time, make separate recommendations to the city clerk concerning compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable city laws. 
D.  The city clerk, or his or her designee, after receiving these recommendations, shall grant a license to the establishment if the recommendations received are positive and if all requirements for a massage parlor, massage school or similar business are met, and shall issue a license to all persons who have applied to perform massage services unless it appears that any person has deliberately falsified the application or unless it appears that the record of any person reveals a conviction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude. 
E.  Any person or establishment denied a license by the city clerk or his or her designee pursuant to this article may appeal to the council in writing, stating reasons why the license should be granted. The council may grant or deny the license after a public hearing, and such decision shall be final. Also, the council may elect on its own motion to review any determination of the city clerk granting or denying a license. 
F.  All licenses issued are nontransferable; provided, however, a change of location of a massage parlor or similar business may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article. (§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.140 - Minimum requirements for facilities. 
    No license to conduct a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage parlor or massage school; all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city. 
B.  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city building and electrical codes. 
C.  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city building code. 
D.  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
E.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
F.  Closed cabinets shall be provided, which shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
G.  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker with lock for each person to be served, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin, shall be provided by every massage parlor; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing, a separate massage room or rooms, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
H.  All walls, ceiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
I.  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
J.  A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage parlor for the use of the employees of any such establishment. The basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
K.  No massage shall be performed in a massage parlor or a massage school in a private room which is completely closed to the view of other persons; however, reasonable measures may be used to offer privacy to patrons such as partitions, stalls, curtains and the like. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.150 - Fee-Term. 
    Any person granted a license by the city clerk or the council to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, or to administer massages, shall pay to the city finance director an annual fee in an amount as established by resolution of the council. The license year shall be the period from the date of the license issuance to the next December 31st, inclusive, unless otherwise provided. All licenses issued for the license year shall expire on the thirty-first day of December unless suspended or revoked. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.160 - Renewal. 
    The license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, as well as massagist's license, shall be renewed at least fifteen days prior to the date of expiration. The license shall be renewed if the applicant submits a sworn affidavit that the matters contained in the original application are correct and indicates any changes necessary. In addition to the affidavit, a signed statement from a doctor stating that the applicant for a massagist's license has been examined within the preceding ninety days and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease which is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage must be presented. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.170 - Display. 
    Every person to whom or for which a license shall have been granted under this article shall display the license in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where the massage, bath or treatment is given. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.180 - Employees. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the license for the massage parlor, or the employer of any person purporting to act as a massagist, to ensure that each person employed as a massagist shall first have obtained a valid license pursuant to the provisions of this article. All other employees who work closely with the massage activities shall provide annually the medical certificate required under Section 5.24.120(A)(11). 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.190 - Emergency employees. 
    If the holder of a license to operate a massage parlor is required to use an emergency employee because of the illness or incapacity of a regular licensed employee, same shall be permitted, provided that such emergency employee shall be required to make application for a valid license as required in this article within three days from date of beginning work. "Emergency employee" shall be defined to mean an individual who possesses a valid medical certificate per Section 5.24.120(A)(11) and works no more than three days per year in the city, and does not possess a valid city license. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.200 - Operation under name specified on license. 
    No person licensed under this article shall operate under any name or conduct his or her business under any designation not specified in the license. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.210 - Revocation and suspension procedures. 
A.  No license under this article shall be revoked until after a hearing before the council to determine just cause for such revocation. The city clerk or his or her designee may order any licenses suspended pending such hearing. It is unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a massagist or to operate as a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, depending upon the particular type of license has been reinstated by the council. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of the license, or against the business carried on by the licensee at the establishment, and shall state the time of the hearing and the place where the hearing will be held. 
B.  The notice shall be served upon the licensee by delivering it to the person or by leaving the notice at the place of business or residence of the licensee in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the licensee cannot be found, and the service of the notice cannot be made in this manner, a copy of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the licensee at his or her place of business or residence and posted conspicuously on the premises at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
5.24.220 - Sale, transfer, expansion of business. 
A.  Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, the license shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage parlor, massage school or similar business. The provisions of this article shall apply to any person applying for a massage establishment license for premises previously used as such an establishment. 
B.  Any sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment or any application or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment shall require inspection and shall require compliance with Section 5.24.140. A fee in an amount as established by resolution of the council shall be payable for each application involving extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment. 
(§ 1 (part), of Ord. dated 9-27-94) 
CHAPTER 5.25 - RENTAL UNIT BUSINESS LICENSE 
Sections: 

5.25.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all rental units are being maintained in conformance with all applicable building and safety codes, rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety of the residents of the rental units and the community. The purpose is also to proactively identify blighted and deteriorated rental housing stock and to ensure the rehabilitation or elimination of rental properties that do not meet minimum building and housing code standards, exterior maintenance standards, and site maintenance standards all in an attempt to create and maintain a healthy, safe and crime and nuisance free environment to further preserve and enhance the quality of life for the residents of the city living in rental units, as well as the community as a whole. The purpose is to further regulate rental unit businesses through the issuance of a license to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to achieve the goals of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings contained in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
    "Accommodation(s)" means the room or other space provided to transient guests for lodging or sleeping, including furnishings and other accessories therein. "Accommodations" does not include food or beverage. 
    "Apartment" means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family building (as defined in Title 18 of the code) arranged and intended for a place of residence for a single family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. "Apartment" shall include an apartment efficiency, meaning a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room in addition to a kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    "Bed and breakfast" means a use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a one-family dwelling unit, and a use in which transient guests are provided a room and board for a period of less than thirty consecutive days in return for payment. 
    "Boarding house" means any building occupied as a home or dwelling unit where certain room(s) are leased or rented to one or more persons, and whose rooms may or may not contain provisions for cooking. 
    "Building official" means the building official of the City of Wixom, or in the absence of the building official, the acting building official or such other city official or employee as may be designated by resolution of the city council. 
    "City clerk" means the city clerk of the City of Wixom or, in the absence of the clerk, the acting clerk or other such city official or employee as may be designated by resolution of the city council. 
    "City council" means the city council of the City of Wixom. 
    "Dwelling unit" means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    "Employee" means any person other than the owner of a rental unit business who renders any service in connection with the operation of a rental unit business and receives compensation from the owner of the business. This definition includes a leased employee or subcontractor. 
    "Fire code official" means the fire chief, fire marshall, code enforcement officer or other designated authority charged by the city with the duties of administration and enforcement of the International Fire Code, or his/her designee. 
    "Hotel" means a building or part of a building with a common entrance or entrances in which the rooms or rooming units are offered to the public and are used primarily for transient persons for compensation for a period of less than thirty consecutive days in return for compensation, except as provided in Section 5.25.090 below, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk services, or bellboy services. Those hotels containing suites with cooking facilities shall not be subject to the thirty-day limitation noted above. 
    "Licensee" means the person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a rental unit business as defined herein. 
    "Life safety inspection" means a formal examination of an occupancy and its associated uses or processes to determine its compliance with the city adopted fire code. The types of rental unit businesses that require a life safety inspection are an apartment, bed and breakfast, boarding house, hotel, motel and tourist home. life safety inspections shall be conducted on an annual basis by the fire code official. 
    "Manager" shall mean any person(s), business entity, independent contractor, or group, responsible for the oversight and day-to-day operations of the rental unit business, including but not limited to, such duties as assisting transient guests or boarders, or assisting tenants with the application process, repairs, procuring rent, and expediting the day-to-day operations. 
    "Motel" means a series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Motel units provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public and are used primarily for transient persons for compensation for a period of less than thirty consecutive days in return for compensation, except as provided in Section 5.25.090 below, and cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    "Payment" means the exchange of money or other remuneration, or the providing of services in exchange for the ability or right to reside in a rental unit. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, limited liability company, corporation, trust or combination of individuals or business entities of whatever form or character. 
    "Premises" means the rental unit, and shall include the areas associated with the rental unit, including, but not limited to, parking lots, driveways, landscaping, accessory structures, fences, walls, lighting, swimming pools, hot tubs, spas and signage. 
    "Rental cabin" means any establishment in which individual cabins or similar structures, units or rooms are rented to transient individuals for a period of less than thirty consecutive days in return for payment. 
    "Rental unit" means a structure or building that contains one or more units or rooms providing living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for sleeping, eating, and sanitation. A rental unit may also make provision for cooking. This definition includes, but is not limited to, one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, apartments, apartment efficiencies, cooperative apartment units, condominiums, and boarding houses. For purposes of this chapter, a "rental unit" shall include those places providing rooms to transient guests, including but not limited to, hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, boarding houses, rental cabins, and tourist homes. For purposes of this chapter, each unit or room rented in return for payment in a structure or building containing multiple units or rooms shall be considered a separate "rental unit." It is the intent that this chapter apply to persons who rent single-family homes and condominiums, or any room in a single-family home or condominium; provided however, that the rental of a room in a single-family home or condominium to a member of the owner's immediate family shall be exempt from these licensing requirements. It is further the intent that this chapter shall apply to areas associated with the rental unit, including, but not limited to, parking lots, driveways, landscaping, accessory structures, fences, walls, lighting, swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas. "Rental unit" shall not include jails, hospitals, skilled care facilities, schools, assisted living facilities, retirement homes, foster care homes or similar facilities. 
    "Rental unit business" means any property that is rented for living or sleeping facilities, regardless of size, square footage, or any lease agreement. Rental unit business shall include any structure, building, portion of a building, or group of buildings, which includes a rental unit as defined above, and includes any other business or operation which rents or leases rooms or living accommodations to a person. 
    "Tenant" means one who makes payment to rent, lease or reside in a rental unit from a landlord or licensee. 
    "Tourist home" means any building, or part of a building, or group of buildings, in which there are less than ten rooms or rental units, other than rooms which are occupied by the family of the owner or lessee, which provides accommodations for transient persons for compensation for a period of less than thirty consecutive days in return for payment, except as provided in Section 5.25.080 below. 
    "Transient guest" means a person lodging for compensation in any hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, boarding house, rental cabin, or tourist home for a period of less than thirty consecutive days in return for payment. 
    "Unit block" means one-third of the rental units in a rental unit business that has a total of one hundred rental units or more. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.030 - License required. 
    No person shall lease, rent, use, operate or occupy, or cause to be leased, rented, used, operated or occupied, a rental unit without a valid, current rental unit business license. A rental unit business shall obtain a license pursuant to this chapter in lieu of the business license required in Chapter 5.04. A separate rental unit business license shall be required for each separate office or place of business address or unit block. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance and must be renewed as required by this chapter. However, an annual inspection by the fire code official shall be required for every rental unit business that qualifies for a life safety inspection as specified in Section 5.25.020 above. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.040 - Initial rental unit business license for existing rental unit businesses; self-certification program; hearing procedure for denial of initial rental unit business license. 
A.  The city is aware that there are existing rental unit businesses that are operating at the time of the adoption of this chapter, some of which contain a large number of rental units that will require time for the city to inspect. With respect to those existing businesses that have in excess of one hundred units, a separate rental unit business license shall be required for each unit block as defined above. It is the specific intent of this chapter that each rental unit, and each unit block, be inspected not less than once every three years, subject to the self-certification provisions in subparagraph (B) below. 
    The following provisions will apply to the issuance of the initial rental unit business license for an existing rental unit business: 
1.  Within sixty days of adoption of this chapter, an existing rental unit business shall apply for a rental unit business license as required in Section 5.25.050 below, and provide all required information. 
2.  After application is made, an existing rental unit business shall be allowed to operate temporarily until such time as all required investigations and inspections required by this chapter have been completed or the rental units have been self-certified as set forth in (B) below. Inspections and certifications shall include, but not be limited to, all inspections required by this chapter, well and septic certifications as needed, as well as a furnace inspection/certification secured by the owner of the rental unit business. If, after completion of all investigations and inspections, the licensee meets the requirements of this chapter, the rental unit business license will be issued. 
3.  If the existing rental unit business, or any rental unit contained therein, fails to pass all required investigations and inspections, or is not in full compliance with all federal, state, county and city laws and codes, ordinances and regulations, the applicant for a license shall have thirty days to bring the rental unit business and rental unit into compliance. This thirty-day period may be extended in the event the city determines that the applicant is working diligently toward achieving compliance, and the applicant expeditiously proceeds with the completion of all work required to bring the rental unit into compliance. 
4.  In the event the applicant fails to bring the rental unit business or rental unit into compliance the request for a license shall be considered denied. The applicant may request a hearing, in writing, within ten days following the denial. The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.25.130. The license denial and investigations and inspections which were provided to the applicant shall serve as the report required by Section 5.25.130. Within twenty days of receipt of the written request for a hearing, the city council, acting upon recommendation from the city manager, shall set a date for a hearing within a reasonable period of time. Following the hearing, the city council shall have the right to affirm the denial of a license, or the city council may grant the license, with or without reasonable conditions. The applicant for an initial license for an existing rental unit business may appeal the decision of the city council to the Oakland County Circuit Court or seek other judicial relief, and if such an appeal is taken, it shall result in a stay of the final decision of the city council pending judicial determination. 
B.  Self-Certification Program for Rental Unit Business License. Well-maintained rental units with no existing violations of federal, state, county or city law, codes, ordinances or regulations may qualify to participate in a self-certification program. To qualify for the self-certification program, the rental unit business shall contain more than thirty rental units. Further, due to the nature of the impact on property from the turn-over of transient guests, including additional wear and tear, rental unit businesses that lodge or rent to transient guests shall not qualify for the self-certification program. Life safety inspections do not qualify for self-certification and must be performed annually by the fire code official. 
    Eligibility for the self-certification program requires the rental unit business owner or designee conduct a self-inspection of all rental units within a reasonable period of time after submission of the application, including exterior conditions and site conditions, and certify on the form required by the city that the property and the rental unit complies with all applicable law, codes and ordinances. A hold harmless letter shall be provided when self-certifications are completed for fire suppression, fire alarms, and furnaces. The rental unit business owner or manager agrees to immediately respond to known criminal activity encountered during the self-certification process and to advise the city if any resident refuses entry for the purpose of interior rental unit inspections for self-certification. When the self-certification is received, the city shall inspect ten percent of the rental units that have been self-certified to verify compliance. The city will give forty-eight hours notice of the inspections to the manager of the rental unit business. If, after inspections, it is determined that any of the property or rental units that have been self-certified are not in compliance with all applicable law, codes and ordinances, the rental unit business shall be considered ineligible to participate in the self-certification program, in which event the applicant shall be required to follow the procedures set forth in Section 5.25.060 below to obtain a license. 
    For qualifying self-certification rental unit businesses, the self-certification will remain in effect during the term of the rental unit business license (three years from the date of issuance), with the exception of life safety inspections which are required annually, provided that the conditions of the property or the rental unit do not deteriorate during that time to the point where the property or the rental unit would no longer be eligible for self-certification, in which event the applicant shall be required to follow the procedures set forth in Section 5.25.060 below to obtain a license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.050 - Application for rental unit business license; fees. 
    Every applicant for a license to rent, use, operate or occupy one or more rental units shall file an application under oath with the Wixom building official upon a form provided by the city and pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee set by resolution of the city council. The application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers for the rental unit business; 
B.  The name, residence address, and telephone number of the applicant(s); 
1.  If the applicant is a corporation, the names, permanent residence address and telephone number of the individual designated by the corporation to act on its behalf, and the name and address of the resident agent in Oakland County, Michigan. It is the specific intent of these regulations that a corporation shall designate an individual located in the immediate vicinity of the city who will be principally responsible for the day-to-day operations of the rental unit business. The applicant shall provide certification that the corporation remains in good standing with the state in which it is incorporated. 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, the names, permanent residence address and telephone number of the partner designated by the partnership to act on its behalf. It is the specific intent of these regulations that a partnership shall designate an individual located in the immediate vicinity of the city who will be principally responsible for the day-to-day operations of the rental unit business. 
3.  If the applicant is a limited liability company (LLC), the names, permanent residence address and telephone number of the member designated by the LLC to act on its behalf. It is the specific intent of these regulations that a LLC shall designate an individual located in the immediate vicinity of the city who will be principally responsible for the day-to-day operations of the rental unit business. 
C.  The applicant's two immediately preceding addresses; 
D.  Proof that the applicant and manager is at least eighteen years of age; 
E.  Copy of picture identification such as a driver's license which bears a date of birth for the individual, the designated individual for the corporation, partnership or limited liability company, and the manager, or a driver's license without a photograph and other government issued identification containing a photograph; 
F.  Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
G.  The rental unit business or similar business history of the applicant(s); 
H.  Statement of whether or not the applicant(s) has previously operated a rental unit business in this or another municipality or state; 
I.  Statement of whether or not the applicant(s) has had a business license of any kind revoked or suspended and the reason therefore; 
J.  The name, address, telephone number, birth dates, and driver's license number of each individual who will be a manager or in charge of each rental unit business; 
K.  A list of the rooms, units, suites, or beds contained in the rental unit business, specifying the dimensions of each room, the number of sanitary facilities, and the maximum number of individuals that would result in full capacity of the rental unit business; 
L.  Authorization for the city, its independent contractors and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant and manager; 
M.  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters herein before specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
N.  Evidence of current valid general liability insurance with minimum limits of two million dollars per occurrence for all rental units other than those persons who rent single-family homes and condominiums or any room in a single-family home or condominium a single-family residence, or such other amount as set by resolution of city council, and Workers Compensation insurance to comply with all State of Michigan statutory requirements. Evidence of current valid general liability insurance with limits of one million dollars, or such other amount as set by resolution of city council, shall apply to persons who rent single-family homes and condominiums or any room in a single-family home or condominium, and Workers Compensation insurance to comply with all State of Michigan statutory requirements. The general liability insurance shall include an endorsement stating that the following shall be named additional insured: the city, its elected and appointed officials, its employees, independent contractors, consultants, and volunteers, and its councils, boards and commissions. A copy of the certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city each year upon renewal. If the coverage furnished by the rental unit business changes during the term of the rental unit license, a new certificate shall be delivered to the city at least ten days prior to the change date. 
O.  All information required by this section shall be provided at the applicant's expense. 
    Upon the full completion of the application form and the furnishing of all the required information and documentation, and the payment of all applicable fees, the city shall accept the application for the necessary investigations. The applicant shall notify the city of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten days after such change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.060 - License procedures; investigation; inspections. 
    Any applicant for a license pursuant to this chapter shall present to the building department the application containing the required information, signed under oath. Once a fully completed application and the required fee have been received by the building official, it shall be referred to the director of public safety and/or his/her designee, who will have thirty days in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant as to license history, and investigation of the manager as to penal history. The director of public safety or designee shall recommend denial or approval of an application for license. In making his/her recommendation hereunder, the director of public safety or designee shall consider: 
A.  The penal history of the manager to determine whether the manager has been convicted of any of the offenses outlined in Subsection 5.25.070(C), the basis of the convictions, and the demeanor of the manager subsequent to his or her conviction or release; and 
B.  The license history of the applicant(s); whether the applicant(s) has previously operated in this city or state, or in another state under a license; has had such license or a permit revoked or suspended; the reasons for the suspension/revocation; and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action. Within thirty days of the date of a positive recommendation from the director of public safety or designee and payment by the applicant of the inspection fees set by council resolution, inspections will be scheduled and subsequent inspection reports and recommendations will be transmitted to the building official upon completion. The rental unit business shall be thoroughly inspected for compliance with all city ordinances, codes and regulations, and state law. Inspections shall be conducted by the following as necessary and/or applicable: Building inspector, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, mechanical inspector, the fire code official, the department of public works, and city code enforcement, and/or their respective representatives or designees. The city will give forty-eight hours notice of the inspections to the manager of the rental unit business. The review shall include, but not be limited to, a determination of whether the building and premises are properly located, whether the building and premises are constructed and equipped for the purpose for which the license is sought, and whether the building and premises are in full compliance with all federal, state, county and city ordinances, codes and regulations. 
    No license shall be issued by the building official until the rental unit is in compliance with all applicable city ordinances, codes and regulations as certified by city departments and inspectors. The building official shall also deny an application for a license if the city is provided information of non-compliance with other applicable federal, state and county codes, ordinances, and regulations by the applicable regulatory body. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.070 - Review of recommendations; issuance of rental unit business license. 
    The building official shall issue a rental unit business license within fourteen days after receipt of all the investigations, inspections and reviews required under Section 5.25.060 if all requirements in this chapter are met. The license shall not be issued if the building official determines: 
A.  The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city and/or a check or bank draft given to the city has not been honored with payment upon presentation. 
B.  The operation as proposed by the applicant(s), if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, the city's building, zoning and health regulations. 
C.  The manager investigated in accordance with Section 5.25.060 above, has been convicted of any of the following offenses within or without the State of Michigan: 
1.  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony; 
2.  An offense involving sexual misconduct, including prostitution, that amounts to a misdemeanor or a felony; 
3.  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
4.  An offense involving fraud or embezzlement. 
5.  An offense involving larceny of any type, including but not limited to larceny by conversion. 
    Exception: If any of the persons described above have been convicted of the crimes described above, the director of public safety may recommend approval, and the building official may issue, a license to the applicant(s) if he/she finds that such conviction occurred at least ten years prior to the date of the application and the person has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in Subsection (C)(1), (2) or (3) above. 
D.  The applicant has knowingly made any false or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction with the application process. 
E.  The applicant has had a rental unit business license or other similar permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other similar license denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within ten years prior to the date of the application and that denial, revocation or suspension was based on criminal activity (by either the applicant or on about the premises or property occupied by the rental unit business), fraud, or a violation of the health, safety and welfare provisions of a municipal ordinance or state law. 
F.  The applicant or the manager is under the age of eighteen years; 
G.  The applicant has not received a recommendation of approval from the director of public safety, the building department, the fire code official, and other applicable governmental approvals required for the license in question; 
H.  For "cause" as defined in Section 5.25.130 below. 
    In the event an application for a license is denied, the applicant may request a hearing, in writing, within ten (10) days following the denial. The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.25.130. The license denial and investigations and inspections which were provided to the applicant shall serve as the report required by Section 5.25.130. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.080 - Duties of licensee; rental restrictions; rules and regulations. 
A.  Every licensee issued a rental unit business license under this chapter shall display such license in a prominent place in the rental unit, or in the case of a rental unit business with multiple units, in the on-site office. 
B.  The licensee operating a rental unit business shall maintain a register of all persons employed. Such registry shall be available at the rental unit business to representatives of the city during regular business hours. The rental unit business shall be responsible for the acts, errors or omissions of its employees. 
C.  Every licensee and manager shall permit and cooperate with the reasonable inspection of the rental unit business by public authorities as authorized by law. This shall include applying for and obtaining an annual life safety inspection if applicable. 
D.  A holder of a license to lease, rent, use, operate or occupy a rental unit must keep written records, including the full name, home address (if applicable) and driver's license number of any and all transient guests or tenants of the premises. Failure to maintain the required records, or to provide the building official with such written information upon request, shall result in a revocation or suspension of the license. 
E.  No room or unit licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be rented or let for a period of less than twenty hours. 
F.  No room or unit of the premises shall be used for gambling, prostitution, the sale or use of illegal drugs or other immoral purposes, or any other unlawful act. 
G.  All accommodations must afford easy and unobstructed access to a hall or passageway or to the outdoors. 
H.  In a tourist home, there must be at least one toilet provided for each eight or fewer occupants. Hot and cold running water must be provided. 
I.  The third or higher floor of any building, or the sub ground level of any rental unit business, shall not be used for lodging or sleeping purposes unless equipped with fire escape facilities as required by all applicable regulations and codes or fire suppression in compliance with the International Fire Code, and unless approved by all applicable authorities. 
J.  Rooms must be kept clear and free from mold, debris, vermin, garbage and rubbish. 
K.  Clean sheets, pillow cases and towels must be provided before a transient guest may occupy a bed or room previously occupied by another person. 
L.  The cooking of food in or upon the premises is prohibited, other than in a kitchen or a kitchenette facility in compliance with applicable laws, codes and regulations, and approved by all applicable authorities. The use of hotplates or similar equipment which can be utilized to heat or cook food is specifically prohibited in premises servicing transient guests. A notice to this effect shall be provided by the rental unit business through room signage, signage at the registration counter, separate written notice, notice on the check-in form, or through any other reasonable manner that assures the notice is provided. Facilities not intended for cooking, but for heating and warming (such as coffee pots and microwave ovens) may be allowed if provided by the rental unit business licensee, after approval by the city. 
M.  For those rental units serving transient guests, a register shall be provided and maintained on the premises near the main entrance and shall be submitted, upon request by the building official and/or the director of public safety or designees. The register shall contain the following information: 
1.  The correct name and address of every transient guest renting or occupying a room, including minor children. Proof of identity showing a valid driver's license or voter registration card or similar identification and a date of birth shall be provided by at least one of the adult transient guests. 
2.  Each transient guest with a motor vehicle on the premises shall provide the make, year and model of the motor vehicle, as well as the license plate number. 
3.  The date and time of arrival and date of departure of every transient guest, and the number of days each transient guest has been at the establishment during the calendar year. 
4.  Where two persons occupy the same room and at least one of the persons is a minor, the relationship of said person shall be noted on the register. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to inscribe false information in the register or for any person to provide false information that will be inscribed in the register. If the licensee, manager, or independent contractor or employee of the licensee, has reasonable cause to believe the information being provided is false, the licensee, manager, or independent contractor or employee shall notify the Wixom Police Department of such fact, and failure to do so shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
N.  No licensee shall permit, or allow the manager, independent contractor, or employee to permit, a minor under the age of eighteen years of age to obtain accommodations in any rental unit without another individual who has reached the age of majority unless the licensee, manager, independent contractor, or employee notifies the Wixom Police Department, orally and in writing, of the presence of such minor. This prohibition shall not apply to an emancipated minor with required legal proof of this status. 
O.  Accommodations shall not be made available for a period in hourly increments, nor shall any accommodations be made available more than one time during the twenty-hour period of 12:00 noon to the following morning at 8:00 a.m. The right to occupy any accommodation shall not be assigned or transferred. No transient guest shall obtain accommodations in any hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, boarding house, tourist cabin, or tourist home, for more than thirty consecutive days, except as provided in Section 5.25.090 below. 
P.  Occupancy of a room shall be limited as required by the property maintenance code. 
Q.  It shall be unlawful for any transient guest to smoke while in bed, or for any licensee to permit smoking in bed. A notice to this effect shall be posted in each sleeping room. 
R.  Each licensee shall immediately notify the City of Wixom Fire Department when a fire occurs at the rental unit business. 
S.  The above rules and regulations shall be conspicuously displayed with the license at each registration area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.090 - Longer term occupancy limitations. 
    Longer term occupancy and accommodations may be permitted in a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, boarding house, tourist cabin, or tourist home, provided that no rental unit may be occupied for a period of thirty consecutive days or more by more persons than permitted by the minimum area for occupancy requirements of the all applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.100 - Health requirements. 
    All licensed premises shall at all times be kept and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building and housing codes, ordinances and regulations of the city, Oakland County, and the state housing law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.110 - Name and place. 
    No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate a rental unit business under a name not specified in the license, nor shall they conduct business under any designation or location not specified in the license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.120 - Lien against property. 
    If any individual fails to pay any fees or fines required by this chapter, then the amount due shall accrue at a rate of six percent per annum from the date when it becomes due and shall be filed with the city's assessor's office and shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and assessments. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.130 - Suspension or revocation of license; notice and hearing; appeals; grounds for immediate suspension of license. 
    When any of the provisions of this chapter are violated by the licensee, manager, an employee, or independent contractor of the rental unit business, and/or when any licensee, manager, employee, or independent contractor of the licensee is engaged in any conduct which violates any state law or city ordinance, or for any good "cause", the city may suspend or revoke the license after notice and a hearing. The term "cause" as used in this chapter includes the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any rental unit business for which a license is granted under the provisions of this chapter, which act, omission or condition is contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature, is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license issued, or is forbidden by this chapter or any other law. "Cause" shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Acts, omissions or conditions that are contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
B.  Acts, omissions or conditions that are unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
C.  The arrest and conviction of the licensee or manager for any crime involving moral turpitude; 
D.  Acts, omissions or conditions that are unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted; 
E.  Acts, omissions or conditions that are forbidden by the provisions of this code or any other duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the rental unit business license; 
F.  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
1.  An existing violation of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes or ordinances; 
2.  A pattern of patron or tenant or guest conduct in or about the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood; 
3.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises free from litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties; 
4.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises in accordance with an approved site plan; 
5.  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public. 
G.  Failure by the licensee or manager to permit and cooperate with the reasonable inspection of the rental unit business by public authorities as authorized by law. 
H.  Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application for a license by the applicant or Manager or in the operation of the licensed business; 
I.  "Cause" shall also include the nonpayment of personal property taxes, real property taxes or any other obligation due and payable to the city relating to the licensed premises. 
    If the building official, director of public safety, fire code official, and/or other city, state or county official or employee, determine that any licensee or manager has committed a violation of this chapter, the respective official shall prepare a report in writing specifying: (1) the specific factual details of such violation; and (2) the particular code subsection violated. The original report shall be filed with the city manager or designee, who shall provide a copy to city council, and serve a copy of such report upon the licensee or manager by personal service or by registered mail. 
    Within twenty days from the date the report has been filed with the city council, the city council shall set a date for a hearing before it, within a reasonable period of time, on the alleged violation for a determination by city council as to whether or not city council shall suspend or revoke the license. The hearing shall continue until such time as completed. Notice of the hearing shall be served by the city upon the licensee or its manager, by personal service or by registered mail not less than seven days before a scheduled hearing date, and such notice shall advise the licensee of its right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing before the city council. Additionally, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the front of the rental unit business. The notice shall indicate that the City of Wixom has initiated suspension and/or revocation proceedings before city council and state the reason or reasons why the city is considering a suspension or revocation. The notice shall state the location of the hearing and the date and time that the licensee may appear before city council to give testimony and show cause why the rental unit business license should not be suspended or revoked. The notice shall also provide for the right of interested parties, including tenants, to comment. 
    At all hearings, the licensee shall have the right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any adverse witnesses, by being able to present witnesses in its own behalf, and by being allowed to present arguments, personally or through legal counsel. 
    City council shall hear evidence and testimony by city departments and other concerned individuals regarding the request for suspension or revocation. After the hearing, the city council may revoke the rental unit business license, deny the request to suspend or revoke the license, or suspend the license for a specific period of time to require the licensee to take certain corrective actions before the license will be restored. If the licensee fails to take corrective action by the date specified, the license shall be revoked. 
    The city council shall prepare a written statement of its findings within thirty days of the conclusion of all such hearings and shall serve such findings with the licensee either personally or by registered mail. If the city council determines that the license shall be suspended or revoked, the licensee shall forthwith surrender the license to the building official. If city council decides that the license shall be suspended or revoked, the licensee shall have a period of thirty days to commence the appropriate proceedings to recover possession of the rental unit under state law, if not already done. The licensee shall then diligently pursue the process of recovering possession to completion. The licensee shall provide copies of all documents provided to any tenant or filed with the court concerning the eviction process to the city manager. If the licensee fails to comply with these provisions and the decision of the city council, or hearing officer under Section 5.25.140 below, the licensee shall be cited for violation of this chapter. In addition to issuance of civil infractions, the city may file for injunctive or other legal or equitable relief to enforce the decision of the city council or hearing officer. In the case where a rental unit business license has been suspended or revoked, or refused to an existing rental unit business under Section 5.25.040 above, the licensee shall not conduct, operate or carry on the business for which the license was granted unless and until the license is restored (in the case of a suspension) or a new license is issued pursuant to this chapter (in the case of a revocation or refusal to issue to an existing rental unit business), subject to the provisions set forth in the above paragraph. 
    The licensee may appeal the decision of the city council to the Oakland County Circuit Court or seek other judicial relief, and if such an appeal is taken, it shall result in a stay of the final decision of the city council pending judicial determination. 
    For conditions posing an imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the community, patrons, employees or others, a compliance officer of the Oakland County Health Department, or the building official, code enforcement officer, director of public safety, fire code official or a police officer, with the approval of the city manager or his/her designee, is hereby granted the authority to suspend immediately, without notice or a hearing, any license granted hereunder; provided, however, that notice of the suspension shall be given to the licensee or manager within seventy-two hours from the time and date of suspension and the reason for the action. The notice of suspension to the licensee or manager shall contain the effective date and time of such suspension. Notice shall be hand delivered to the manager and sent by first class mail to the licensee's last known address. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the front of the facility. A rental unity business that has had its license suspended under this provision may request a hearing as set forth above in this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.140 - Referral to hearing officer; appeals. 
    In lieu of conducting the hearings set forth in Section 5.25.040 and 5.25.130 above, the city council may alternatively appoint a hearing officer to conduct such hearing. Such appointment shall be made within twenty days of the report required in Section 5.25.130 being filed within the city council. Thereafter, the hearing officer will follow the applicable procedures for the hearing, and shall set a date for a hearing within twenty days after his or her appointment. The hearing shall continue until such time as completed. Within thirty days of completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall submit to the city and the licensee a written statement of his or her findings and determination. Service of the findings and determination on the licensee and manager may be by personal service or registered mail. 
    The licensee shall have the right to appeal an adverse decision by the hearing officer to the city council, provided that a written request for appeal is filed within twenty days of the day the findings and determination were served by the hearing officer. The appeal to the city council shall be upon the record made before the hearing officer. An appeal to the city council from a decision of the hearing officer shall result in a stay of that decision until final determination by the city council. 
    The licensee may appeal the decision of the city council to the Oakland County Circuit Court or seek other judicial relief, and if such an appeal is taken, it shall result in a stay of the final decision of the city council pending judicial determination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.150 - Sale, transfer or change of location. 
    Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a rental unit business, the license issued for that rental unit business shall be null and void. A new application shall be filed as provided in this chapter prior to the leasing, renting, operating or occupying of the premises, and the investigations and inspections required by this chapter shall be conducted. It shall be the duty of all licensees having knowledge of the sale, transfer or relocation of a rental unit business, to immediately report such sale, transfer or relocation to the building official. The failure to do so shall result in an immediate suspension of the rental unit business license. A prospective purchaser of a rental unit business may apply for a rental unit business license pending purchase of the rental unit business, and any license issued upon application of a prospective purchaser shall be contingent upon the actual completion of the purchase of the rental unit business and shall not be transferrable. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.160 - Expiration of license. 
    All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire either: 
A.  Three years from the date of issuance, subject to the provisions of Section 5.25.040 above, and subject to the annual life safety inspection, if applicable; 
B.  Any time the ownership of the premises changes; or 
C.  Any time the license is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.170 - Renewal of rental unit business license. 
    An application to renew a rental unit business license shall be filed at least sixty days prior to the date of expiration. Such renewal shall be on a three-year basis and shall be accompanied by the application fee. Rental unit businesses which qualify for self-certification under Section 5.25.040 may utilize the self-certification program for renewal of a rental unit business license. 
A.  The applicant shall present the following information to the building official. 
1.  A sworn affidavit by the applicant stating that the matters contained in the original application and required by Section 5.25.040 have not changed, or if they have changed, specifically stating the changes that have occurred. 
2.  The names, addresses, telephone number, birth dates and driver's license number of the manager principally in charge of the day-to-day operations of the rental unit business. 
B.  The application shall be referred to the director of public safety who shall investigate the manager as required in Section 5.25.050. Inspections shall be conducted by appropriate departments of the city as required in Section 5.25.050 to verify that all building, mechanical, plumbing, electrical and fire codes are being met prior to renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.180 - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The sanction for a violation includes the payment of a civil fine as specified in Title 5, Section 5.09.210 of this code, plus costs and other sanctions and fees for each infraction. Each day such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offence. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided in Title 5 of this code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person or licensee of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
5.25.190 - Applicability of regulations to existing businesses. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all rental unit businesses, whether the rental unit business was established before or after the effective date of this chapter. However, those businesses operating prior to the date of adoption of this chapter will have a sixty-day grace period from the date of adoption within which to comply with all the conditions and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the city of Wixom Animal Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens and animals by regulating the ownership, harboring, or maintaining of animals; preventing injury to person and property; limiting the number of certain animals that may be kept; regulating the confinement of animals; prohibiting the keeping of certain animals; requiring that sanitary conditions be maintained both inside structures and on premises within the city; licensing certain animals; requiring rabies shots for certain animals; and regulating noise and odors made by animals. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.030 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Abuse," in addition to its common meaning, means failure of any owner as defined in this chapter, to seek veterinary treatment for an injured domestic animal on their premises or failure to request and permit proper public authorities to remove stray domestic animals on property owned, leased, or occupied by them. 
    "Animal" means any living organism typically capable of moving about, but not of making its own nourishment by photosynthesis, including any mammal, reptile, bird, snake, turtle, fish, mollusk, crustacean, or any other vertebrate other than a human being. 
    "Dangerous animal" means an animal that has menaced or scratched or which has bitten a person or animal so as to draw blood or break bones. An animal shall not be considered dangerous because it has bitten or attacked a person or an animal that has, without justification, provoked it by attacking or tormenting it, or attacking its owner, or tormenting its young. Nor shall an animal be considered dangerous because it bites or attacks a person who is trespassing, committing another tort, or committing a crime on the property of the animal's owner or if the animal is responding in a manner that a reasonable person would conclude was intended to protect a person if that person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject of an assault. 
    "Domestic animal" means an animal that has traditionally, through a long association with humans, lived in a state of dependence upon humans or under the dominion and control of humans and has been kept as a tame household pet, including but not limited to: dogs, cats, hamsters, gerbils, ferrets, mice, rabbits, cockatiels, cockatoos, canaries, parrots, and tropical fish. 
    "Exotic animal" means an animal of a species not indigenous to the state, and which is not a domesticated animal, including any hybrid animal that is part exotic animal. 
    "Owner" means every person having any right of ownership in any animal, every person who keeps or harbors any animal, every person who has an animal in his or her care or possession, and every person who permits an animal to remain in or around premises owned, leased, or occupied by him or her. 
    "Person" means any individual and includes partnerships, associations, and corporations. 
    "Provoke" means to perform a wilful act or omission that a reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate a bite or an attack by an animal. 
    "Public nuisance animal" means an animal which unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens (other than the owner of such animal) to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" means an animal which: 
1.  Repeatedly is found at large; 
2.  Damages the property of any person other than the owner of such animal; 
3.  Disturbs or intimidates pedestrians or passersby; 
4.  Chases vehicles; 
5.  Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, meowing, squawking, whining or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; or 
6.  Causes fouling of the air by odor, thereby creating unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
    "Reasonable control" means having an animal on a suitable leash, confined in a suitable cage or location, confined to designated property by radio collar or similar device, or under the oral control of the owner or a responsible person designated by the owner at all times when the owner is not on private property with the permission of the person or persons with the right of occupancy of that private property. 
    "Torment" means a wilful act or omission that causes pain, suffering or distress to an animal or causes physical, mental, or emotional anguish in an animal. 
    "Wild animal" means a living member of the animal kingdom, including, animals born or raised in captivity, except human beings, domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild and captive-bred species or common cage birds. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.040 - Application of ordinance. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to a person engaged in farming or agriculture and the keeping of farm animals or livestock in the ordinary course of that business; museum or demonstration projects operated by governmental entities or bona fide nonprofit or charitable institutions; the business premises of a licensed veterinarian or veterinary hospital; an animal shelter owned or operated by a public entity; a bona fide private animal shelter located in a nonresidential zoning district; pet shops located in nonresidential zoning districts; commercial kennels located in a nonresidential zoning district; pet service establishments located in a nonresidential zoning district; public or private stables; riding academies; or circus. 
B.  This chapter does not apply to service dogs for the blind, deaf, and physically disabled. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.050 - Abuse-Poisoning-Injuring or disturbing. 
A.  A person shall not abuse, mistreat, torment or treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane fashion. 
B.  A person shall not knowingly leave or deposit any poison on any public place or exposed private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal. This section shall not prohibit the use of poisonous bait upon vermin in any area which does not endanger any other animal, nor does it prohibit the use of poisons by licensed exterminators in the course of their business. 
C.  No person, except a public officer or peace officer acting in his official capacity, shall injure, kill or capture any wild animal or disturb any wild animal's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.060 - Harboring and maintaining animals. 
A.  A person shall not own, harbor or maintain any animal within the city of Wixom, except a domestic animal as defined in this chapter. No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild, dangerous, exotic or undomesticated animal as a pet. 
B.  A person shall not keep, harbor, or maintain any dangerous or public nuisance animal within the city of Wixom. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.070 - Abandoned or unwanted animals. 
    It is unlawful to abandon or release into the wild any animal, or cause any animal to be abandoned or released into the wild, in any place, without making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless the premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while traveling, walking, hiking or hunting shall not be regarded as abandoned under this section when the owner or custodian has made a reasonable effort to locate the animal. Unwanted animals shall be offered to an animal shelter. If an unwanted animal is not accepted by an animal shelter, the animal shall be humanely disposed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.080 - Number of animals-Vaccination-Confinement and control. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a person shall not harbor or maintain more than three domestic animals of any species, except fish, six-month of age or older on any premises at any time. 
B.  A person shall not own, harbor or maintain a dog or cat that is six months or older without obtaining certificate of vaccination for rabies and being able to produce proof of current vaccination at the request of any city official. 
C.  A person shall keep all domestic animals under reasonable control at all times. 
D.  An owner shall not allow any dog, cat, or ferret to leave the owner's premises under any circumstances unless the dog, cat, or ferret is currently immunized against rabies. This section does not prevent an owner from taking his or her dog, cat, or ferret to the offices of a veterinarian for the purpose of having the dog, cat, or ferret immunized or has obtained a waiver for immunization from the appropriate authorities. 
E.  A dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall be confined to the owner's premises at all times, except when the dog, cat, or other domestic animal is otherwise under the reasonable control of the owner as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.090 - Ferrets. 
A.  A person shall not own, harbor, or maintain more than one ferret. 
B.  A person shall not own, harbor or maintain a ferret over twelve weeks of age unless the ferret has a current vaccination against rabies, with an approved rabies vaccine administered by a veterinarian. 
C.  A person who owns, harbors, or maintains a ferret that has bitten, scratched, or injured any human being shall report the incident within forty-eight hours to the Oakland County Health Department. 
D.  A person who owns or harbors a ferret shall produce proof of valid rabies certificate signed by a veterinarian upon request of a city official or law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.100 - Removal of waste-Sanitary conditions. 
A.  A person shall not permit an animal to discharge fecal material upon any public or private property within the city, unless the person has the permission of the owner, lessee, or occupant or the property or immediately cleans up and removes the fecal material. 
B.  A person shall not walk or exercise any animal on any property not owned by the person walking the animal, whether public or private, unless the owner has appropriate device or means for the collection of fecal material in his or her immediate possession and an appropriate container for the transportation of the fecal material for proper disposal. 
C.  A person shall maintain real property where an animal is harbored or maintained in a sanitary manner so that animals and humans are not harmed or affected by dangerous conditions, disease, odor, or vermin. 
D.  A person shall ensure that dog, cat, or animal food, urine or fecal material on the property where an animal is harbored or maintained does not threaten the health, safety, or welfare of others or constitute a nuisance to others due to unsightly conditions, odor, disease, or the attraction vermin. 
E.  All persons who own, manage, lease, rent, occupy, or control any dwelling, garage, outbuilding, or other structure shall be equally responsible for keeping each structure in a clean and habitable condition and shall take all necessary steps to prevent conditions detrimental to the public health, including, but not limited to, rotting food, garbage, trash, urine, fecal material, or unsanitary conditions which could lead to disease, odor, or vermin. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
6.04.110 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  A violation of the city of Wixom animal control ordinance shall be deemed to be a civil infraction. In the event a determination of responsibility for a civil infraction under this chapter is made, a maximum fine of one hundred dollars may be imposed. 
B.  In addition to ordering the defendant responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, the court shall also impose any other costs, damages, and expenses as provided by law. 
C.  In addition to civil infraction enforcement, the court shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ, order or equitable relief necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this chapter. 
D.  Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 05-04 § 1 (part), 2005) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.08 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
Article II. - Installation and Maintenance of Refuse Containers 

8.08.100 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all premises in the city which are served by collective refuse removal service in the form of collectively utilized refuse containers, within all residential, business, commercial, industrial, office and quasipublic zoning districts within the city. 
(Ord. 149 § 1, 1989) 
8.08.110 - Prohibited activities. 
    No persons owning, leasing, occupying or otherwise being responsible for the use of property in the city shall permit any of the following prohibited activities to occur: 
A.  Place or allow refuse to accumulate above and outside of a refuse container; 
B.  Permit hazardous materials, as defined by applicable city, state and federal law, to be deposited in the container; 
C.  Permit the container to serve as a habitat for vermin; 
D.  Permit contents of the refuse container to be dispersed by the wind or otherwise contribute to littering of the subject site or adjacent properties; 
E.  Place the refuse container within the public right-of-way or on the subject site so as to pose a vehicular or pedestrian traffic problem; 
F.  Fail to maintain the refuse container and/or the screening provided for the refuse container so as to pose any eyesore, detriment to the value of the subject and adjacent properties, public health concern or be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; 
G.  Use of wooden refuse containers. 
(Ord. 149 § 2, 1989) 
8.08.120 - Screening required. 
A.  To further address the public safety, health and welfare concerns outlined in Section 8.08.110 associated with the installation and maintenance of refuse containers, it is provided that all refuse containers located in the city subject to regulation under this article must be enclosed or screened from public view from anywhere on the subject site, with the exception of that side which may remain open pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  Screening must be achieved to a height of not less than one foot above the height of the container, to completely conceal the contents from public view, but in no case shall the screening be less than five feet in height and on three sides. 
C.  Posts, bollards or bumpers shall also be provided to protect the screening from damage which may result from maintenance of the containers. 
D.  The inside dimensions of the enclosure must be adequate to permit access for refuse collection vehicles as well as completely enclose refuse bins within three sides so that no refuse container projects beyond the enclosure. 
E.  The requirement to screen refuse containers is not intended to apply to any refuse container which may be used on a temporary basis during the construction of any building, provided that the refuse container is removed from the premises prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the building under construction. 
(Ord. 149 § 3, 1989) 
8.08.130 - Screening materials permitted. 
    To satisfy the requirements of this article, screening materials for refuse containers shall consist of the following, singly or in combination, and must be architecturally consistent with the materials utilized in the surrounding buildings: 
A.  Masonry, such as exterior wall brick or finished precast concrete block, such as striated or fluted block; unfinished cinder block not permitted; 
B.  Wood, provided that the wood is cedar, redwood, or marine grade exterior plywood or equivalent of at least five-eighths inch thickness or other types of wood pressure treated with preservatives. If cedar, redwood or plywood are used in the screening, it shall be protected from possible rot or decay by the application of a preservative on a regular basis by the owner, occupant or person otherwise responsible for the maintenance of the subject premises. The appearance of the wood screen cannot be permitted by the owner or their agent responsible for maintenance to deteriorate over time to the point of causing an eyesore or diminishing the effect of the screen which was achieved in the original installation; 
C.  Evergreen shrubbery consisting of permanent, living materials which shall be continuously maintained in a sound, health and vigorous condition, free of plant diseases, insect pests, weeds, refuse and debris. The shrubbery shall be maintained so as to create a continuous barrier, at the height specifications provided in this article; 
D.  Earthen berm or recession within an embankment so as to achieve a continuous barrier. 
(Ord. 149 § 4, 1989) 
8.08.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  The building official, code official or his or her designee are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
B.  The enforcement duties authorized by this article include, among others, the following: 
1.  Investigation of ordinance violations; 
2.  Serving notices of violations; 
3.  Serving appearance tickets as authorized under Chapter IV of Public Act 175 of 1927, as amended, and Public Act 366 of 1984; 
4.  Appearance in court of other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators; and 
5.  Such other ordinance enforcement duties as may be designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. 149 § 5, 1989) 
8.08.150 - Appeals. 
A.  The zoning board of appeals, as constituted under Ordinance 34, the zoning ordinance, shall serve as the appeal body for all provisions of this article and may, upon written application, consider appeals for waivers to the requirements of the ordinance governing the maintenance and enclosure of refuse containers. 
B.  The board may consider granting a waiver upon finding that strict application of the provisions of this article would result in practical difficulties or undue hardship to the landowner, lessee or occupant of the subject premises. In granting the waiver, the board may impose reasonable conditions in fulfillment of the spirit and intent of this article. 
C.  All meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman of the board. 
D.  The meetings of the board and any public hearing that may be called by the board shall be at reasonable times and places to accommodate the attendance of the petitioners and members of the general public. 
(Ord. 149 § 6, 1989) 
8.08.160 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 149 § 7, 1989) 
Chapter 8.12 - HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the city's Hazardous Chemicals Ordinance. 
(Ord. 146 § 1.01, 1989) 
8.12.020 - Findings-Purpose. 
    The city council finds as follows: 
A.  There are certain commercial enterprises currently operating in the city, and there is a potential for the development of future business, industry, research and testing enterprises that engage in the handling, storage, use, processing, and disposal of hazardous chemicals. 
B.  The public health, safety and welfare of the citizens may be endangered by the improper handling, storage, use, processing, and disposal of such hazardous chemicals. 
C.  The surface waters, groundwater and soils within the city are particularly susceptible to damage from the improper handling, storage, use, processing, and disposal of hazardous chemicals. Moreover, the expense and difficulty of cleaning up surface water, groundwater and soils that have been damaged by hazardous chemicals makes it imperative that protective measures be taken to limit the threat of damage from such chemicals. 
D.  Article IV, Section 52 of the constitution of the state provides that the conservation and development of the natural resources of the state is of paramount public concern in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the people. 
E.  The health, safety and welfare of the fire, police and other emergency service personnel have in the past, and may in the future, be endangered because of a lack of complete knowledge of the types and locations of such hazardous chemicals. 
F.  Protection for the community is best advanced by regulation that is enforced with a spirit of mutual cooperation between the government and business entities, so that compliance will be achieved. 
(Ord. 146 § 2.01, 1989) 
8.12.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
    "Carcinogen" means a chemical (a) regulated by OSHA as a carcinogen; or (b) that has been evaluated by the International Agency for Research on Cancer and found to be a carcinogen or potential carcinogen; or (c) that is listed as a carcinogen or potential carcinogen in the Annual Report on Carcinogens published by the National Toxicology Program. 
    "Chemical" means any element, chemical compound or mixture of elements and/or compounds. 
    "Combustible liquid" means any liquid having a flashpoint at or above one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (37.8° C), but below two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (93.3° C), except any mixture having components with flashpoints of two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (93.3°C) or higher, the total volume of which make up ninety-nine percent or more of the total volume of the mixture. 
    "Compressed gas" means (a) a gas or mixture of gases having, in a container, an absolute pressure exceeding forty psi at seventy degrees Fahrenheit (21.1°C); or (b) a gas or mixture of gases having, in a container, an absolute pressure exceeding one hundred four psi at one hundred thirty degrees Fahrenheit (54.4°C) regardless of the pressure at seventy degrees Fahrenheit (21.1°C); or (c) a liquid having a vapor pressure exceeding forty psi at one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (37.8°C) as determined by ASTM D-323-72. 
    "Critical Materials Register" means the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Toxic Chemical Evaluation Section of the Environmental Services Division of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, as the same may be updated from time to time. 
    "Employer" means an individual or organization which employs one or more persons. 
    "Explosive" means a chemical that causes a sudden, almost instantaneous release of pressure, gas and heat when subjected to sudden shock, pressure or high temperature. 
    "Fire chief" means the fire chief of the city or such other person as he may designate to act under the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Flammable" means a chemical that falls into one of the following categories: 
1.  "Aerosol, flammable," means an aerosol that, when tested by the method described in 16 CFR 1500.45, yields a flame projection exceeding eighteen inches at full valve opening, or a flashback (a flame extending back to the valve) at any degree of valve opening. 
2.  "Gas, flammable," means (a) a gas that, at ambient temperature and pressure, forms a flammable mixture with air at a concentration of thirteen percent by volume or less; or (b) a gas that, at ambient temperature and pressure, forms a range of flammable mixtures with air wider than twelve percent by volume, regardless of the lower limit. 
3.  "Liquid, flammable," means any liquid having a flashpoint below one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (37.8°C), except any mixture having components with flashpoints of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (37.8°C) or higher, the total of which make up ninety-nine percent or more of the total volume of the mixture. 
4.  "Solid, flammable," means a solid, other than a blasting agent or explosive as defined in 29 CFR 1910.109(a), that is liable to cause fire through friction, absorption of moisture, spontaneous chemical change, or retained heat from manufacturing or processing, or which can be ignited readily and, when ignited, burns so vigorously and persistently as to create a serious hazard. A chemical shall be considered to be a flammable solid if, when tested by the method described in 16 CFR 1500.44, it ignites and burns with a self-sustained flame at a rate greater than one-tenth of an inch per second along its major axis. 
    "Flashpoint" means the minimum temperature at which a liquid gives off a vapor in sufficient concentration to ignite when tested as follows: 
1.  Tagliabue Closed Tester (see American National Standard Method of Test for Flash Point by Tag Closed Tester, Z11.24-1979 (ASTM D 56-79)) for liquids with a viscosity of less than forty-five Saybolt Universal Seconds (SUS) at one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (37.8°C), that do not contain suspended solids and do not have a tendency to form a surface film under test; 
2.  Pensky-Martens Closed Tester (See American National Standard method of Test for Flash Point by Pensky-Martens Closed Tester, Z11.7-1979 (ASTM D 93-79)) for liquids with a viscosity equal to or greater than forty-five SUS at one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (37.8°C), or that contain suspended solids, or that have a tendency to form a surface film under test; 
3.  Setaflash Closed Tester (See American National Standard Method of Test for Flash Point by Setaflash Closed Tester (ASTM D 3278-78)). 
    Organic peroxides, which undergo auto-accelerating thermal decomposition, are excluded from any of the flashpoint determination methods specified above. 
    "Hazardous chemical" means any chemical or waste which is a physical hazard or health hazard. 
    "Health hazard" means a chemical or waste for which there is statistically significant evidence, based on at least one study conducted in accordance with established scientific principles, that acute or chronic health effects may occur in exposed persons. The term "health hazard" includes chemicals which are carcinogens, toxic or highly toxic agents, reproductive toxins, irritants, corrosives, sensitizers, hepatotoxins, nephrotoxins, neurotoxins, agents which act on the hematopoietic system, and agents which damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or mucous membranes. 
    Further definition and explanation of the scope of health hazards covered by this chapter are to be found in Appendix A to 29 CFR 1910.1200, which is incorporated in this chapter by reference. 
    The criteria to be used to determine whether or not a chemical is to be considered hazardous are further described in Appendix B to 29 CFR 1910.1200, which is incorporated in this chapter by reference. 
    "Highly toxic material" means a material so toxic to man as to afford an unusual hazard to life and health during fire fighting operations. Examples are parathion, TEPP (tetraethyl phosphate), HETP (hexaethyl tetraphosphate), and similar insecticides and pesticides. 
    "Mixture" means any combination of two or more chemicals if the combination is not, in whole or in part, the result of a chemical reaction. 
    "Organic peroxide" means an organic compound that contains the bivalent -O-O structure and which may be considered to be a structural derivative of hydrogen peroxide where one or both of the hydrogen atoms has been replaced by organic radical. 
    "Oxidizer" means a chemical other than a blasting agent or explosive as defined in 29 CFR 1910.109(a), that initiates or promotes combustion in other materials, thereby causing fire either of itself or through the release of oxygen or other gases. 
    "Physical hazard" means a chemical or waste for which there is scientifically valid evidence that it is a combustible liquid, a compressed gas, explosive, flammable, an organic peroxide, an oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable (reactive) or water-reactive. 
    "Poison A" means poison gas or liquid of such nature that a very small amount of the gas, or vapor of the liquid is dangerous to life. 
    "Radioactive material" means any material that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation. 
    "Use area" means any area where hazardous chemicals are utilized, treated or processed. 
(Ord. 146 § 3.01, 1989) 
8.12.040 - Pollution, impairment or destruction of natural resources. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to cause or permit the pollution, impairment or destruction of air, ground waters, surface waters, soils or other natural resources in the city. 
(Ord. 146 § 4.01 (part), 1989) 
8.12.050 - Permits required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to operate nay business or conduct any activity requiring a permit or other approval under any of the following statues, without first having obtained such permit: 
A.  The Hazardous Waste Management Act, Act 64 of the Public Acts of 1979, as amended, MCL 299.501, et seq.; MSA 13.30(1), et seq. 
B.  The Solid Waste Management Act, Act 641 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, MCL 299.401, et seq.; MSA 13.29(1), et seq. 
C.  The Water Resources Act, Act 245 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended, MCL 323.1, et seq.; MSA 3.521, et seq. 
D.  The Liquid Industrial Waste Act, Act 136 of the Public Acts of 1969, as amended, MCL 323.271, et seq.; MSA 3.533(101), et seq. 
E.  The Underground Storage Tank Act, Act 423 of the Public Acts of 1985, as amended, MCL 299.701, et seq.; MSA 13.29(71), et seq. 
F.  The Air Pollution Act, Act 348 of the Public Acts of 1965, as amended, MCL 336.11, et seq.; MSA 14.58(1). 
G.  The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, 42 USC § 6901, et seq. 
H.  The Clean Air Act, as amended, 42 USC § 7401, et seq. 
I.  The Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC § 1151, et seq. 
J.  The Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended, 42 USC § 300f, et seq. 
(Ord. 146 § 4.01 (part), 1989) 
8.12.060 - Hazardous chemicals survey- Required. 
A.  The fire chief shall promulgate and make available a hazardous chemicals survey form to be utilized in accordance with this section. 
B.  All developers of property, all businesses or all employers shall complete and file with the city a hazardous chemical survey: 
1.  Upon submission of a preliminary site plan for the development of any property within the city; 
2.  With the filing of any business license form required by the city; 
3.  Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or premises within the city; 
4.  Upon request of the fire chief pursuant to Section 8.12.070. 
(Ord. 146 § 7.01, 1989) 
8.12.070 - Hazardous chemicals survey- Material safety data sheets. 
    Upon written request of the fire chief, an employer within the city shall, within ten working days, provide a completed hazardous chemical survey to the fire chief, and for hazardous chemical quantities meeting or exceeding the threshold requirements stated in Section 8.12.140, shall provide the list required to be prepared pursuant to 29 CFR 1910.1200, Section 14a, of the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Act, MCL 408.1014a; MSA 17.50(14a), and Section 5p of Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended, MCL 29.5p; MSA 4.559 (5p), and, when requested, a material safety data sheet for each hazardous chemical identified on the list. 
(Ord. 146 § 5.01, 1989) 
8.12.080 - Quantity and location of hazardous chemicals. 
    Upon written request of the fire chief, an employer within the city shall, within ten working days, provide a description of the quantity and location (by floor plan or diagram) of any hazardous chemicals specified by the fire chief after review of the lists provided under Section 8.12.070. Reporting of quantities shall include the maximum quantities expected at any given time. Upon request, the fire chief may extend the period for providing the information described in this section by an additional five working days. The requirement for this information may be satisfied in conjunction with the filing of the completed hazardous chemicals survey as provided in Section 8.12.060. Pursuant to Section 5p of the Michigan Fire Prevention Code, MCL 29.5p, MSA 4.559(5p), information obtained by the fire chief under Sections 8.12.070 and 8.12.080 of this chapter may be made available to a public official, agency or employee, but is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, as amended, MCL 15.231, et seq.; MSA 4.180 (1), et seq. 
(Ord. 146 § 6.01, 1989) 
8.12.090 - Updating of information. 
    A person subject to Sections 8.12.060, 8.12.070 and 8.12.080 shall provide the fire chief a written update of the information required by those sections when there is a change in the quantity, location or presence of hazardous chemicals in the workplace, or any other of the information required to be transmitted under those sections. 
(Ord. 146 § 8.01, 1989) 
8.12.100 - Outdoor storage. 
    The outdoor storage of hazardous chemicals is prohibited except in product-tight containers, recognized and accepted in accordance with federal and state standards, which are protected from weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in violation of the city Zoning Ordinance. No indoor storage shall be permitted in violation of the state Construction Code or the city Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. 146 § 9.01, 1989) 
8.12.110 - Containment of storage or use areas. 
A.  All storage or use areas for hazardous chemicals where the quantities meet or exceed the threshold amounts listed in Section 8.12.140 shall be paved, diked, curbed, structurally enclosed or otherwise protected by spill control measures or mechanisms that are sufficient to prevent the release into the surface waters, groundwaters and soils. Secondary containment shall be by a method to be sufficient to safely contain any hazardous chemical which may escape from its primary container, in accordance with federal and state standards for secondary containment. When necessary for review of proposed methods of secondary containment, the fire chief may utilize the services of environmental or engineering consultants. The area shall be so constructed that no liquid polluting material can escape therefrom by gravity through building sewers, drains, other otherwise directly or indirectly into any sewer system, storm drainage system or the surface waters, groundwaters or soils of the city. Secondary containment shall not be mandated for flammable and nonflammable gases. 
B.  A secondary containment method expressly approved by the Water Resources Commission or its designated representative pursuant to Act 245 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended, MCL 323.1, et seq., MSA 3.521, et seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder, shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of this section. 
C.  All secondary containment shall be continuously maintained so as to guarantee the containment of all polluting material. 
(Ord. 146 § 10.01, 1989) 
8.12.120 - Pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP). 
A.  No employer shall use, handle or store a hazardous chemical in quantities which meet or exceed the threshold amounts listed in Section 8.12.140 without having first filed with the city and having had approved by the fire chief a pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP). The PIPP shall be in a form as provided by the city and shall set forth: 
1.  The procedures by which such entity proposes to prevent pollution of the surface waters, groundwaters and soils of the city from storage and use areas, manufacturing, processes, treatment systems, shipping, and disposal of the hazardous chemicals; 
2.  The emergency clean-up procedures to be used in case of a spill, discharge, seepage, runoff, or leakage of any hazardous chemicals in the surface waters, groundwaters or soils of the city; 
3.  The type of surveillance employed by such entity; 
4.  The method by which inventories are made of hazardous chemicals from the time such chemicals are received or manufactured until such time as they are treated and discharged or otherwise disposed by the facility. 
B.  An updated PIPP shall be filed for review and approval by the fire chief whenever there is a change in the use, handling or storage of any hazardous chemicals. When necessary for the review of any PIPP, the fire chief may utilize the services of environmental or engineering consultants. 
C.  A PIPP expressly approved by the Water Resources Commission or its designated representative pursuant to Act 245 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended, MCL 323.1, et seq., MSA 3.521 et seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section. 
D.  Approved pollution incident prevention plans shall be followed at all times, including in the event of any spill, discharge, seepage, runoff, or leakage of any hazardous chemicals. 
(Ord. 146 § 11.01, 1989) 
8.12.130 - Secondary containment and PIPP approvals-Notice to adjacent property owners. 
    Prior to approval of a secondary containment system or PIPP, the fire chief (or city administration acting on behalf of the fire chief) shall mail notice of the request to those persons to whom real property adjacent to the proposed activity is assessed. The notice shall state that the application may be examined and shall indicate a date (not later then ten business days after receipt by the city of the application) prior to which written comments regarding the request may be submitted to the city for consideration by the fire chief. 
(Ord. 146 § 12.01, 1989) 
8.12.140 - Hazardous chemical thresholds. 
A.  The requirements for submission of the hazardous chemical list shall apply where the aggregate quantity of any given hazardous chemical meets or exceeds the state and federal thresholds for regulation, adopted by the city council by resolution. 
Chemical Type 
    Poison A 
    Highly toxic material 
    Explosives and blasting agents (including Class C explosives) 
    Radioactive material (Yellow III label) 
    Carcinogens 
    Other hazardous chemicals 
Material safety data sheets shall be provided as requested by the fire chief. 
B.  The requirements for providing secondary containment shall apply where the aggregate quantity of the given hazardous chemical meets or exceeds the quantities listed below: 
1.  Nonuse (storage) areas: 
a.  100 kilograms for hazardous chemicals listed on the Critical Materials Register; 
b.  1,000 kilograms for all other hazardous chemicals; 
2.  Use area: 
a.  227 kilograms (or 60 gallons) for hazardous chemicals listed on the Critical Materials Register; 
b.  1,000 kilograms for all other hazardous chemicals. 
C.  The requirements for providing pollution incident prevention plans (Section 8.12.120) shall apply where the aggregate quantity of any given hazardous chemical meets or exceeds one thousand kilograms, or in the case of gases, seven thousand cubic feet. 
D.  Hazardous chemical lists, secondary containment and pollution incident prevention plans shall not be required for quantities of hazardous chemicals consisting only of regular and experimental motor vehicle fuel contained within motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 146 § 13.01, 1989) 
8.12.150 - Inspections-Right of entry-Lock boxes. 
A.  The fire chief and building official shall inspect all structures and premises utilized by employers as often as may be necessary for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the information provided under this chapter and ascertaining whether there exist any violations of this chapter or any other federal or state statutes, rules or regulations, or local ordinances relating to the use, storage, handling or disposal of hazardous chemicals. The inspections shall be coordinated to the extent practical with inspections conducted under the Business License Ordinance of the city. 
B.  Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the fire chief or building official have reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises, any condition which would constitute a violation of this chapter or any other federal or state statutes, rules or regulations, or local ordinances relating to the use, storage, handling or disposal or hazardous chemicals, the fire chief or building official may enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the city official by this chapter, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied, the city official shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such entry is refused, the city official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including the obtaining of a search warrant. 
C.  In those cases where the fire chief or building official observes or otherwise discovers violations of federal or state statutes, rules or regulations relating to the use storage, handling or disposal of hazardous chemicals, such violations shall be reported to the appropriate federal or state agency authorized to enforce such statute, rule or regulations. In addition, the fire chief or building official may request the city attorney, upon proper authorization, to commence proceedings pursuant to Section 8.12.160 of this chapter. 
D.  Inspections conducted pursuant to subsections (A) and (B) of this section may include the taking of samples of groundwater, surface water, soil or other substances for testing. Where such inspections or sampling reveal or confirm the violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or code provision of the city, or the violation of any state or federal statute, the cost of such sampling and related tests shall be assessed to the owner of the business of property involved. The relevant company may also take split samples. In the event such costs are not paid within thirty days of notice to the owner, the costs shall be assessed as a lien against the property which may be enforced as a delinquent city property tax. 
E.  Where the fire chief determines it is necessary for purposes of safe and efficient response to potential fire emergencies, the fire chief shall require a business to provide at its premises an accessible lock box for the storage of all material safety data sheets, pollution incident prevention plans and hazardous chemical surveys. The lock box shall be installed at a location approved by the fire chief, and shall be equipped with a lock operable by a master key system approved by the fire chief. 
F.  The ordinance enforcement duties authorized in this chapter shall include, among others, the following: 
1.  Investigation of ordinance violations; 
2.  Serving notices of violations; 
3.  Serving appearance tickets as authorized under Chapter IV of Public Act 175 of 1927, as amended, and Public Act 366 of 1984; 
4.  Appearance in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators; and 
5.  Such other ordinance enforcement duties as may be designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. 146 § 14.01, 1989) 
8.12.160 - Enforcement-Penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
C.  In the event of a violation of this chapter that results in damage to the surface waters, groundwater, or soils within the city, the city shall have the power to order complete clean-up and restoration of the area involved by the person or agent responsible for the violation. If such responsible person or agent does not complete such restoration within the time specified in the order, the city shall have the authority to clean up and restore the affected area to the prior condition wherever possible; and the person or agent responsible for the original violation shall be held liable to the city for the cost of restoration. 
D.  In addition to remedies provided in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section, the city may maintain an action for declaratory or equitable relief against the state, any political subdivision thereof, any person, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other legal entity for the protection of the air, water and other natural resources and the public trust therein from pollution, impairment or destruction, including those instances where the air, water and other natural resources are threatened by violations of federal or state statutes, rules or regulations relating to the use, storage or handling of hazardous chemicals. In such action, a prima facie case for relief shall be made by a showing that the conduct of the defendant has, or is likely to pollute, impair or destroy the air, water or other natural resources or the public trust therein. The defendant may show, by way of affirmative defense, that there is no feasible and prudent alternative to its conduct and that such conduct is consistent with the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare in light of the state's paramount concern for the protection of natural resources from pollution, impairment or destruction. 
(Ord. 146 § 15.01, 1989) 
8.12.170 - Appeals-Variances. 
A.  The hazardous chemicals appeals board shall have jurisdiction over appeals and variances as provided in this chapter. The hazardous chemicals appeal board shall consist of three members, appointed by city council, employed or trained in one of the following occupations: biochemist, biologist, chemist, chemical engineer, civil engineer, environmental engineer, environmental scientist, geochemist, hydrologist, hydrologic engineer, industrial hygienist, industrial chemist, occupational safety engineer, physician, soils engineer, water quality specialist, or such occupation, similar experience, education and expertise as the above. The membership of the board shall include at least one person, but not more than two persons, representing business interests within the city. Board members shall be resident of the city or, in the case of a member representing business interest, be employed by an entity conducting business at a location within the city. The members of the hazardous chemicals appeal board shall generally serve for a three-year term. However, the initial board shall consist of one member appointed for a one-year term, one member appointed for a two-year term, and one member appointed for a three-year term. 
B.  The hazardous chemicals appeal board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there is an error in a determination by the city fire chief or building official to deny approval of a proposed method of secondary containment or a proposed PIPP. A claim of appeal to the hazardous chemicals appeal board shall be filed with the city clerk within twenty days of the date of such denial. The hazardous chemicals appeals board shall conduct a de novo review of the determination of the fire chief and determine whether it shall be affirmed or modified. 
C.  The hazardous chemicals appeals board may authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter where such strict application would result in practical difficulties or undue hardship, where such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance the hazardous chemicals appeal board may attach thereto such conditions as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. The relief granted shall in no instance be greater than necessary to relieve the practical difficulty or undue hardship. 
(Ord. 146 § 16.01, 1989) 
8.12.180 - Grace period. 
    The requirements for secondary containment (Section 8.12.110) and pollution incident prevention plans (Section 8.12.120) shall be effective ninety days after the original adoption of this chapter. However, where the fire chief or building official determines that there is otherwise an imminent danger to the surface waters, groundwater or soils of the city, immediate compliance shall be required to those sections. In such instances, the fire chief or building official shall notify the owner or occupant of the property in writing that immediate compliance is mandated. No appeal to the hazardous chemicals appeals board shall be permitted under Section 8.12.170 from a determination by the fire chief that there is an imminent danger to surface waters, groundwater or soils which requires immediate compliance with the requirements for secondary containment or PIPP preparation. 
(Ord. 146 § 17.01, 1989) 
Chapter 8.16 - LANDFILLS 
Sections: 
Article I. - In General 

8.16.010 - Scope-Intent. 
A.  The regulations in this chapter apply to all filling of land within the city by the deposition of materials originating off the premises on which the fill is located. They cover the review of proposed fill sites, information to be supplied with applications for landfill permits, fees for review of applications and plans, inspection charges, deposits to ensure payment of inspection charges and compliance with regulations and conditions of permits, design of landfills, operations and equipment. 
B.  It is intended to regulate the location, design, materials and operation of landfills so that no landfill shall be a nuisance, nor cause any damage to surrounding property, nor endanger the health or safety of the community. 
(Ord. 85 §§ 1.0, 2.0, 1971) 
8.16.020 - Building official-Defined. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, "building official" is defined as the building official for the city of Wixom. 
(Ord. 85 § 3.0, 1971) 
Article II. - Application for Permit 

8.16.030 - Exceptions-Permits not required. 
    No permits shall be required for the following: 
A.  Excavation for building construction purposes pursuant to a duly issued building permit; 
B.  Excavation, removal or filling of an individual lot or single family home building site by a home owner; 
C.  Where the moving, grading or leveling of material is carried on by the landowner for the immediate use or development of the land upon which these substances are found; provided, however, that where sand, gravel, topsoil or other substances are removed from the site where found to another site of different ownership that a permit under these regulations will be required. A building permit shall be required for any construction activity to be carried on at the site. 
(Ord. 85 § 4.01, 1971) 
8.16.040 - Preliminary application and determination. 
A.  The owner of land upon whose premises it is proposed to construct a landfill shall submit an application, prepared in accordance with the following requirement, to the city for determination of the acceptability of proposed location. The application shall include a legal description of the land owned by the applicant within which the proposed fill site is located, with a statement of the type of ownership possessed by the applicant, a scale drawing showing the outline of the area on which filling is proposed, with sufficient landmarks to enable the city to identify the proposed fill area on the ground, a description of the type of landfill proposed, and a statement of the intended use of the area after completion of the fill. The city will thereupon examine the proposed site and determine whether it is suitable. 
B.  Should the applicant propose the actual construction and operation of the landfill to be conducted by a party other than himself, any permit which the city may subsequently issue will issue to the landowner and proposed operator jointly and will embody the joint and several obligations of each in accordance with these regulations. 
(Ord. 85 § 4.02, 1971) 
8.16.050 - Information-Supplied by applicant. 
    If the city finds the site to be suitable for the construction of a landfill, within the intent of this chapter, the applicant shall submit to the city the following information, which shall be prepared and signed by a competent registered professional engineer: 
A.  A map at a scale not smaller than one hundred feet to one inch on which there shall be shown: 
1.  The outline of the proposed fill area, identified on a rectangular coordinate system referred to the most convenient exterior section line and section corner or quarter section corner, 
2.  All boundaries of the property which are located closer than six hundred feet from any part of the fill area, 
3.  Areas from which cover material will be obtained, 
4.  Existing surface elevations of fill area, borrow areas, and of contiguous areas whose future utility will be directly influenced by the fill and/or borrow, shown by accurate contours at intervals not exceeding two feet. Elevations shall be expressed, directly, on U.S.C & G.S. datum, 
5.  Location of proposed access road from public highway to the fill area, 
6.  Drainage channels or other provisions to be made for drafting surface runoff from the fill area during construction and after completion of fill, 
7.  Location of employee facilities; 
B.  A similar map showing, by contours as previously specified, the surface elevations and slopes which will be established when fill and borrow operations are complete; 
C.  If any waste material, other than earth, is to be included in the landfill there shall be submitted a comprehensive statement describing the source and type of materials proposed to be placed in fill, together with plans showing the complete design of fill, including the following details: 
1.  Typical sections of fill, 
2.  Depth of layers, 
3.  Height of lifts, 
4.  Thickness of cover, 
5.  Number of lifts, 
6.  Surface slopes of lifts and final surface, 
7.  Direction of filling progress; 
D.  If the fill area is subsequently to be included in a plat or subdivision of land contemplating erection of buildings for any purpose, the maps referred to in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall show the proposed subdivision layout; and the future locations of streets, building sites, and utility easements shall be clearly excluded from fill with any material other than earth. Such subdivision layout need not be shown in final exact detailed dimensions; however, if significant latitude is retained for future alteration of layout, the areas restricted to earth fill only shall be expanded accordingly. 
E.  Where waste material other than earth is to be included in the landfill there shall be submitted a report of a competent professional investigation and determination of the highest ground water level which can be expected in the fill area. The report shall indicate whether the ground water may have connection with an aquifer constituting a source of water supply and, if lowering of the ground water level by drainage is contemplated, shall indicate whether the proposed drainage would be likely to adversely affect any water supply. 
(Ord. 85 § 4.02*, 1971) 
* Ord. 85 contained two sections numbered 4.02. 
Article III. - Design 

8.16.060 - Filling on floodplains prohibited. 
    No landfill shall be permitted which will encroach upon the flood area of any drain or stream. 
(Ord. 85 § 5.01, 1971) 
8.16.070 - Earth fills. 
    Where a landfill will consist of earth only, the design of fill shall provide for the stripping of all areas where the total depth of fill will be less than six feet, so that the earth fill will be placed upon bare earth. In areas where the depth of fill will exceed six feet, all trees, vegetation and other materials whose consistency, shape or decomposition might cause significant settlement, shall be removed in advance of filling. Excepting in locations where the future use of the area is such that settlement will be of no consequence, earth fills shall be controlled so that the completed fill shall be compacted throughout to a density not less than ninety percent of the maximum unit weight of the earth material. 
    Unless otherwise specifically permitted by the city, all fill placed in water in existing ponds or pits shall be granular material which will be compact when placed in water. 
    Excepting in situations covered in the last preceding paragraph, drainage of earth fills, during and after construction, shall be maintained in such manner that fill shall not be placed in pond water, nor earth be washed from the fill into natural water courses nor onto the property of others. 
(Ord. 85 § 5.02, 1971) 
Article IV. - Fees and Deposits 

8.16.080 - Fees. 
    Fees payable to the city for review of landfill plans and inspection of landfill operations shall be as follows: 
A.  For examination of site and determination of suitability ..... $175.00 
B.  For review of plans for landfill consisting of earth only per acre of fill area ..... $10.00 
C.  For inspection of construction of earth land-fill for each month in which fill construction occurs ..... $50.00 
(Ord. 85 § 6.01, 1971) 
8.16.090 - Deposits. 
    Deposits shall be made with the city as follows: 
 To ensure payment of inspection fees and completion of fill in accordance with approved plans and these regulations, for landfills consisting of earth only, per acre of proposed fill area ..... $100.00 
With a minimum of ..... $1,000.00 
(Ord. 85 § 6.02, 1971) 
8.16.100 - Payment. 
A.  Fees for examination of proposed sites shall be paid with initial applications. 
B.  Fees for review of plans shall be paid with submission of plans. 
C.  Deposits as required in this section shall be paid before permits for approved fill will be issued. 
D.  Inspection charges will be billed and shall be paid monthly. 
(Ord. 85 § 6.03, 1971) 
Article V. - Permits 

8.16.110 - Issuance and renewal. 
    Permits for landfills will be issued for periods of one year. Permits will be renewable, without additional charge therefor, if: 
A.  Reasonable progress has been made in the construction of landfill; 
B.  Operation of the landfill has conformed to the approved plans and these regulations; and 
C.  Inspection charges have been paid when due. 
(Ord. 85 § 7.01, 1971) 
8.16.120 - Refusal of renewal. 
    Renewal of permits may be refused if: 
A.  Filling operations are inactive or conducted on so small a scale that, in the opinion of the city, the duration of filling operation will itself constitute a nuisance; or 
B.  Operation of the fill develops any unforeseen nuisance or hazard to the health or safety of the community, and adequate measures are not put into effect, forthwith, to correct such conditions. 
(Ord. 85 § 7.02, 1971) 
8.16.130 - Cancellation. 
    Permits will be subject to summary cancellation, and filling must stop, if: 
A.  Operations are in violation of the approved plans or these regulations; or 
B.  Unpaid inspection charges shall accumulate to such an amount that in the opinion of the city the balance of deposit may not be sufficient to guarantee satisfactory completion of fill in event of its neglect by the permit holder. 
(Ord. 85 § 7.03, 1971) 
Article VI. - Operations 

8.16.140 - Hauling 
A.  The hauling of landfill materials shall be confined to routes which shall be approved by the city and included in provision of permit. The city reserves the right, from time to time, in its discretion, to make revisions in approved routes. 
B.  Vehicles hauling landfill materials shall not be overloaded so that materials are spilled upon the highway. 
C.  On-site access roads shall be maintained, and if necessary, vehicle wheels shall be cleaned before leaving the fill premises, so that dirt and mud will not be tracked onto the highways. 
(Ord. 85 § 8.01 (part), 1971) 
8.16.150 - Hours of operation. 
    Landfills which are so located and operated that noises of operation can reasonably be considered disturbing to neighboring residents shall not carry on operations between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m., nor on Sundays or holidays. Other reasonable restrictions on hours of operation may be included in or added to the conditions of individual permits. 
(Ord. 85 § 8.01 (part), 1971) 
8.16.160 - City right of entry. 
    The officers and agents of the city shall have at all times the right of entry to any premises where any city landfill permit is in effect. 
(Ord. 85 § 8.01 (part), 1971) 
8.16.170 - Dust control. 
    Suitable control measures shall be used to prevent dust becoming a problem or nuisance, both at the fill and on access roads. 
(Ord. 85 § 8.01 (part), 1971) 
8.16.180 - Winter operations. 
    In winter operation snow and ice shall be removed before any earth cover is placed and spread on the fill. A supply of unfrozen earth cover material shall be maintained available, either in protected stock piles or in a natural bank protected from or not subject to freezing. Frozen cover material shall not be placed on the fill. 
(Ord. 85 § 8.01 (part), 1971) 
8.16.190 - Completion of landfill. 
    Within one year after the completion of the placement and grading of final cover on any landfill the area shall be dressed with topsoil and shall be seeded with a hardy, tough grass which will serve as a binder of the cover and eliminate problems of erosion and dust. This requirement may be waived by the city if the use of the area after completion of the fill includes other measures which will accomplish the same purposes. 
(Ord. 85 § 9.0, 1971) 
8.16.200 - "As-built" plan. 
    On completion of a landfill the permit holder shall supply to the city an "as-built" engineering plan which shall show by accurate survey data and references the actual location, depth, and final surface elevations of all areas containing fill. This plan shall be to the same scale and referred to the same control lines and datum as the plan submitted with the application for permit. The as-built plan submitted shall be an original tracing, in ink on cloth, or an original or acceptable reproduction made on a permanent transparent film. 
    The as-built plan shall be retained in the city files for reference in the consideration of developments which may subsequently be proposed on or adjacent to the fill area. 
(Ord. 85 § 10.0, 1971) 
8.16.210 - Work by city. 
    If the permit holder for any landfill fails or neglects to do any of the things required by the permit or these regulations, and he fails to remedy such omissions forthwith after notice thereof delivered to him or to his supervisor or the fill, or if neither the permit holder or fill supervisor can be readily located, the city shall have the right to enter on the property and to do by its own forces or its agents whatever may be necessary to eliminate any dangerous or objectionable conditions. The permit holder shall be billed and shall pay for all such work done by the city. 
(Ord. 85 § 11.0, 1971) 
Article VII. - Use and Refund of Deposit 

8.16.220 - Collection of unpaid charges. 
    The city may withdraw such amounts as required from the deposit on hand and apply the same to any inspection charges or charges for work done by the city. If such charges remain unpaid sixty days after billing, they are mailed to the record address of the permit holder. 
(Ord. 85 § 12.01, 1971) 
8.16.230 - Reduction of deposit. 
    On completion or discontinuation of any landfill, if in the judgment of the city the amount of deposit on hand is more than sufficient to ensure the performance of any further actions required of the permit holder, the city may reduce the amount of deposit to such sum as the city considers appropriate and sufficient and any additional amount of deposit on hand may be refunded to the permit holder. 
(Ord. 85 § 12.02, 1971) 
8.16.240 - Final disposition of deposit. 
    The balance of the deposit held on account of any landfill of earth only will be refunded when the fill has been completed or terminated and finished off to the satisfaction of the city and all amounts owed the city on account of the landfill have been paid. 
(Ord. 85 § 12.03, 1971) 
Article VIII. - Enforcement 

8.16.250 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety days or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of the prosecution. 
(Ord. 85 § 12.04, 1971) 
Chapter 8.20 - OPEN BURNING 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Findings. 
    The city finds the burning of leaves and other yard waste to be a matter of public health concern. The burning of these materials results in the production of air pollution which is laden with suspended particles, and the emission of a known carcinogenic agent (benzo a pyrene) and mold spores, which are known to aggravate hay fever and allergies and cause respiratory distress. The city finds that these deleterious effects can be mitigated by the prohibition of leaf and yard waste burning. The regulation of this activity has been deemed to be in the interest of the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 150 § 1.01, 1989) 
8.20.020 - Burning prohibited. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall permit or engage in the act of burning of leaves or other yard waste (such as woody and vine growth, vegetation and paper products) within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 150 § 2.01, 1989) 
8.20.030 - Enforcement. 
A.  The Wixom police department is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The enforcement duties authorized by this agreement shall include, among others, the following: 
1.  Investigation of ordinance violations; 
2.  Serving notices of violations; 
3.  Serving appearance tickets as authorized under Chapter IV or Public Act 175 of 1927, as amended, and Public Act 366 of 1984; 
4.  Appearance in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators; and 
5.  Such other ordinance enforcement duties as may be designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. 150 § 3.01, 1989) 
8.20.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 150 § 4.01, 1989) 
Chapter 8.24 - OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES 
Sections: 
Article I. - In General 
Article II. - Application 
Article III. - License 
Article IV. - Enforcement 
Article I. - In General 

8.24.010 - Findings. 
    The city council finds and declares that the interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens require the regulation licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in the city. 
(Ord. 82 § 1, 1970) 
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 
    "Attendant" means any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly by the payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the payment of money for admission. 
    "Licensee" means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Outdoor assembly," hereinafter referred to as "assembly," means any event, attended by more than one thousand attendants, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar gatherings, but does not mean (1) an event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property; or (2) an event which is conducted or sponsored by any entity qualifying for tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, being 26 U.S.C. s 501(c)(3) as incorporated by reference in Section 201 of the Michigan Income Tax Act of 1967, Act 281 of the Public Acts of 1967, being Section 206.201 of the Compiled Laws of 1948; or (3) an event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure. 
    "Person" means any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or organization. 
    "Sponsor" means any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly. 
(Ord. 82 § 2, 1970) 
8.24.030 - License required. 
    A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor assembly in the city unless he has first made application for, and obtained, as prescribed in this chapter, a license for each such assembly. 
(Ord. 82 § 3, 1970) 
Article II. - Application 

8.24.040 - Application for license. 
    Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly in the city must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the city clerk and shall be made at least sixty days prior to date of the proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars and shall include at least the following: 
A.  The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application (Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officer and directors or members. Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed, and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having financial interest greater than five hundred dollars.); 
B.  A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed assembly; 
C.  The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed assembly; 
D.  The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted; 
E.  An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or other method which will be used for accounting purposes. 
(Ord. 82 § 4, 1970) 
8.24.050 - Required information. 
    Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following: 
A.  Police and fire protection; 
B.  Food and water supply and facilities; 
C.  Health and sanitation facilities; 
D.  Medical facilities and services, including emergency vehicles and equipment; 
E.  Vehicle access and parking facilities; 
F.  Camping and trailer facilities; 
G.  Illumination facilities; 
H.  Communications facilities; 
I.  Noise control and abatement; 
J.  Facilities for clean-up and waste disposal; 
K.  Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
    In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map or maps of the overall site of the proposed assembly. 
(Ord. 82 § 5, 1970) 
8.24.060 - Requirements for processing. 
    In processing an application, the council shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
A.  Security Personnel. The licensee shall employ at his own expenses such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of property in an around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the chief law enforcement officer for the city, in cooperation with the director of state police, is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly. 
B.  Water Facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in quantity and pressure to ensure proper operation of all water-using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then from a source constructed, located and approved in accordance with Act 294, Public Acts of 1965, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the city health officer. 
C.  Restroom Facilities. The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water closets as defined in Act 266, Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. If such flush-type facilities are not available, the city health officer may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with Act 273, Public Acts of 1939, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. 
    The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with Act 266 of the Public Acts of 1929, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water and soap and paper towels. 
    The number and type of facilities required shall be determined on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities Male Female Toilets 1:300 1:200 Urinals 1:100 Lavatories 1:200 1:200 Drinking Fountains 1:500 Taps or Faucets 1:500  
    Where the assembly is to continue for more than twelve hours, the licensee shall provide shower facilities on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities Male Female Shower Heads 1:100 1:100  
    All facilities shall be installed, connected and maintained free from obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable condition as determined by the city health officer. 
D.  Food Service. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of Act 269, Public Acts of 1968, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. 
    It the assembly is distant from food service establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services available on the premises as will adequately feed the attendants. 
E.  Medical Facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind, location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such facilities shall be as prescribed by the city health officer. 
F.  Liquid Waste Disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto established by the city health officer. If such rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, the liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with Act 243, Public Acts of 1951, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, and, prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the city health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
G.  Solid Waste Disposal. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, fly-tight and rodent-proof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the city health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
    The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food, equipment, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin. 
H.  Public Bathing Beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with Act 218, Public Acts of 1967, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
I.  Public Swimming Pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools only in accordance with Act 230, Public Acts of 1966, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
J.  Access and Traffic Control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off of the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the director of the department of state police and the director of the department of state highways must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control. 
K.  Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles but in no case shall he provide less than one automobile space for every four attendants. 
L.  Camping and Trailer Parking. A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in accordance with Act 171, Public Acts of 1970, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. While Act 171 does not become effective until January 1st, 1971, for purposes of this chapter, its provisions shall be effective and applicable upon the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
M.  Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the police chief. 
N.  Insurance. Before issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars/three hundred thousand dollars (select appropriate figure) and property damage insurance with a limit of not less than twenty-five thousand dollars (select appropriate figure) from a company or companies approved by the state commissioner of insurance, which insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the city clerk in writing at least ten days before the expiration or cancellation of said insurance. 
O.  Bonding. Before the issuance of a license the licensee shall obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in Michigan, a corporate surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars, fifty thousand dollars, one hundred thousand dollars, or select appropriate figure in a form to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state of local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers, and employees and the council against any and all loss, injury or damage whatsoever arising out of or in any way connected with the assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash or other waste resultant from the assembly. 
P.  Fire Protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps as determined by the state fire marshal, to ensure fire protection. 
Q.  Sound-producing Equipment. Sound- producing equipment, including but not limited to public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens of Wixom. 
R.  Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and safe ingress and egress. 
S.  Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each one thousand attendants. 
T.  Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of license, the council may impose any other condition(s) reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens. 
(Ord. 82 § 10, 1970) 
8.24.070 - Review by city officials. 
    On receipt by the clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the chief law enforcement and health officer for the city, the state fire marshal, and to such other appropriate public officials as the clerk deems necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within twenty days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the council. 
(Ord. 82 § 6, 1970) 
8.24.080 - Time limit after filing. 
    Within thirty days of the filing of the application, the council shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny a license. The council may require that adequate security or insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, within five days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed to the applicant by certified mail and, in the case of denial the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice. 
(Ord. 82 § 7, 1970) 
Article III. - License 

8.24.090 - Contents-Posting. 
    A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Ord. 82 § 9, 1970) 
8.24.100 - Denial. 
    A license may be denied if: 
A.  The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this chapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter, or with any other applicable provision of state or local law; or 
B.  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
(Ord. 82 § 8, 1970) 
8.24.110 - Revocation. 
    The council may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth herein or with any and all provisions and requirement set forth in this chapter or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated in this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. 82 § 11, 1970) 
Article IV. - Enforcement 

8.24.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for a licensee, his employee or agent to knowingly: 
A.  Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct or operate an assembly without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter; 
B.  Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance;C.Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display, exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement; 
D.  Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in, around, or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct; 
E.  Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess intoxicating liquor while on the premises; 
F.  Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined in Act 343, Public Acts of 1952. 
    Any of the violations enumerated in this section is a separate offense, is a nuisance per se immediately enjoinable in the circuit courts, and is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety days or by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
    It is further provided that any of the above violations is a sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the immediate enjoining in the circuit court of the assembly. 
(Ord. 82 § 12, 1970) 
Chapter 8.28 - MUNICIPAL COST RECOVERY 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Findings and purpose. 
    The city of Wixom finds that a significant and continuous potential exists for extraordinary response situations based upon prior events which have taken place in the city, including those involving specialized response resources, that have and will continue to place a substantial financial and operational burden upon police protection services, fire protection services, emergency medical services, public works services, and other municipal services. The city finds that this chapter is necessary to protect the city from excessive expense resulting from the utilization of city resources in response to defined extraordinary situations and to fairly allocate the costs resulting from incidents among those responsible for them. The city further finds that the use of municipal personnel for certain responses interferes with the provision of routine and necessary public services to the residents of the city. The city has also determined that in traffic accidents involving drivers who are operating under the influence there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. The city finally finds that this chapter is necessary to authorize the imposition of charges and to establish a policy and set forth the methods by which the city will recover actual costs incurred in making extraordinary responses and providing services in connection with the same. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 1, 2008) 
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
    The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    "Accident, including natural disaster," means an unforeseen or unexpected happening or occurring which of itself causes great harm or damage, or which creates the potential for great harm or damage to individuals and/or property, and which requires immediate and prudent securing and monitoring by the city and/or agents of the city, to reduce the potential for such damage, but not including an extraordinary response. 
    "Alarm system" means any system or device that is designed to alert emergency or municipal personnel of the city of the commission of a crime and/or the existence of fire, smoke, or other emergency, which when activated, does any of the following: 
1.  Transmits such a signal to the city police department and/or city fire department; 
2.  Transmits such a signal to an alarm company or other remote location, which results in a notification being made to the city police department and/or the city fire department; 
3.  Causes the activation of an audible warning device. 
    An "alarm system" is a device or assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which emergency personnel are expected to respond. The term alarm system shall include, but not be limited to, automatic hold-up alarm systems, burglar alarm systems, intrusion alarm systems, manual hold-up alarm systems, and fire/smoke alarm systems. 
    "Alarm user" means any person or entity on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for alarms systems on motor vehicles (unless the alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system on premises). Excluded from this definition are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons entirely within the premises in which the alarm is located of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or other criminal activity; however, if such system employs an audible signal emitting sounds or flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm system. 
    "Assessable costs" means those costs for services, (including police, fire, rescue, emergency medical services, emergency or municipal personnel, public works, and any other municipal services) at the scene of an extraordinary response, incurred by the city, or a private person, corporation, or other assisting governmental agency, operating at the request or direction of the city. The term "assessable costs" means and includes, but is not limited to, the costs of providing: 
1.  Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed and expended specifically for the purpose of the extraordinary response; 
2.  All salaries, wages, and compensation of responding, supervising, investigating, reporting, and testifying city personnel where such services are required by an extraordinary response, the investigation of an extraordinary response incident, or any prosecution brought in connection with such an incident. This shall include, but not be limited to, the actual labor costs of the city (including, without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead, whether or not the services are provided by the city or by a third party at the request of the city); 
3.  All salaries, wages and compensation of responding, supervising, investigating, reporting and testifying personnel of any assisting governmental agency or consultant or contractor acting at the request or direction of the city where such services are required by an extraordinary response, the investigation of any extraordinary response situation, or any prosecution brought in connection with such an incident; 
4.  Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the extraordinary response (such as, but not limited to, protective equipment or clothing, scientific and technical equipment); 
5.  The replacement costs of all disposable materials and supplies used in connection with an extraordinary response; 
6.  The actual replacement costs for equipment that is contaminated beyond reuse or repair during an extraordinary response; 
7.  Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the extraordinary response; 
8.  Special technical services specifically required for the extraordinary response (such as costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts or specialists; 
9.  Other special services specifically required for the extraordinary response; 
10.  Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the extraordinary response; 
11.  Costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of hazardous materials; 
12.  Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment procured for a specific evacuation; 
13.  Medical expenses incurred as a result of extraordinary response activities, including ambulance conveyance to a hospital; 
14.  Service charges and interest; 
15.  The cost of any type of chemical testing for blood alcoholic content or for the presence of controlled substances and for videotaping of the driver, if applicable; 
16.  Related administrative costs, which shall be fifteen percent of the actual cost charged by the city, accruing after the occurrence of an extraordinary response; 
17.  All costs involved in the extraordinary use of emergency or municipal personnel, including, but not limited to, the actual labor costs of the city (including, without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead, whether or not the services are provided by the city or by a third party at the request of the city); 
18.  Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the extraordinary response situation, including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this chapter, attorneys fees, expert witness fees, litigations costs, court costs, charges, fines, or penalties to the city imposed by any court or other municipal, state or federal governmental entities; 
19.  Costs incurred in accounting for the extraordinary response expenditures, including billing and collection costs. 
    "Bomb threats" means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive device, which if discharged as threatened would violate a federal, state or local law. 
    "Emergency assistance" means extraordinary response by emergency and/or other municipal personnel. 
    "Emergency personnel" means police protection services, fire protection services, emergency medical services, public works services, other emergency health and safety services, and other city personnel, consultant, or contractor provided by the city or by a private entity, corporation, expert, consultant, or other assisting governmental agency operating at the request or direction of the city of the state of Michigan, or at the request of the city. 
    "Excessive requests for extraordinary response" means any request for extraordinary response made to a particular location or premises if such location or premises has requested extraordinary response more than five times within a calendar year. 
    "Extraordinary response" means the providing, sending, and/or utilizing of emergency or municipal personnel to or at an incident presently of serious and/or urgent threat to human life, public health, safety and welfare, or to real or personal property. 
    "Extraordinary response situations" means situations requiring extraordinary response by municipal personnel, rendered in response to: 
1.  Excessive requests for extraordinary response; 
2.  A false alarm; 
3.  A dangerous or hazardous materials incident, emergency, or release; 
4.  An illegal fire; 
5.  A bomb threat; 
6.  A threat of harm to oneself or others; 
7.  A structure demolition; 
8.  An utility line failure; 
9.  Any building fire or other building matter that requires extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel; 
10.  Any motor vehicle accident that requires extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel; 
11.  Any motor vehicle fire that requires an extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel; 
12.  Any ambulance conveyance by emergency personnel to a hospital; 
13.  Any confined space, trench rescue, or similar incident requiring extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel; 
14.  The providing, sending and/or utilizing emergency or municipal personnel by the city to an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcohol liquor and any controlled substance, or the making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the driver was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or other controlled substance; 
15.  Any investigation by emergency or municipal personnel that results in the issuance of a complaint and arrest warrant for "Filing a False Police Report"; 
16.  Abatement of any nuisance as included in the city code, or abatement of any other matter required to protect and maintain the health, safety and welfare of the city's resident; 
17.  Any other extraordinary situation whereby extraordinary response was taken by the city which is above and beyond normal or routine emergency standards. 
    "Extraordinary use of municipal personnel" means the use of emergency or municipal personnel at special events such as athletic events, religious-sponsored events, school functions, charitable events, or any private sector gathering or event. 
    "False alarm" means any automated or manual device designed to request or summon emergency assistance, which device was activated in the absence of an actual need for extraordinary response, whether through inadvertence, negligence, or intentional or unintentional acts. A determination that there was no actual need for extraordinary response shall be made by the most senior person responding to a false alarm. A false alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred if: 
1.  It was caused by an act of God, such as a tornado, earthquake or other violent conditions; 
2.  It was caused by an electrical power or phone service interruption resulting from any condition beyond the control of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of their employees or agents, or resident or guest of a resident; 
3.  It originates from a motor vehicle alarm system, unless the alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at premises; 
4.  It is a prearranged alarm system test; 
5.  It was a result of an alarm system malfunction, if corrective measures have been instituted within ninety-six hours of notification of the police department, and the alarm user presents documentation of repair service having been performed by an alarm company to remedy the malfunction; 
6.  It has not occurred more frequently than two times in a calendar year, commencing anew on January 1st of each and every year. 
    "False alarm" also includes, but is not limited to, the intentional activation of a hold-up or robbery alarm for other than a robbery in progress, the intentional activation of a burglar alarm for other than a burglary in progress, the intentional activation of a medical alarm for other than a medical emergency, or the intentional activation of a fire alarm for other than a fire. 
    "Hazardous or dangerous material" means those elements, substances, wastes or by-products, including, but not limited to, combustible liquid, flammable gas, explosive flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable or reactive matter, water reactive matter, petroleum products, anti-freeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, or materials similar to those listed, which are or potentially harmful to the environment or human or animal life, or which pose an unreasonable or imminent risk of life, health or safety of persons or property, or to the essential balance of the environment as determined by the director of public safety or the senior official of the city in charge at the scene. The term "hazardous materials" also includes hazardous materials defined by MCLA 286.452. 
    "Hazardous or dangerous material incident or emergency" means any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of hazardous materials has occurred, or is reasonably imminent to occur, and where the director of public safety, or his/her designee, has declared such activity, accident or emergency a hazardous or dangerous material incident or emergency. 
    "Illegal fire" means a fire set, or determined to have been set, in violation of any federal, state or local law, and shall include an arson fire and a fire set in violation of a "No burning" ban or order. An illegal fire does not include an unintentional fire or a fire cause by an act of God (for example, a lightning storm). 
    "Municipal personnel" means police protection services, fire protection services, emergency medical services, public works services, other emergency health and safety services, and other city personnel, consultant, or contractor provided by the city or by a private entity, corporation, expert, consultant, or other assisting governmental agency operating at the request or direction of the city of the state of Michigan, or at the request of the city. 
    "Operating under the influence" means the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or controlled substance or while visibly impaired by intoxicating liquor and/or a controlled substance, or with an unlawful alcohol content by weight of alcohol, regardless of whether such person is charged or convicted of any crime relating to the incident causing the extraordinary response. 
1.  It shall be presumed that a person who was less than twenty-one years of age was operating a motor vehicle under the influence if chemical analysis of the driver's blood, urine, or breathe indicates the presence of any amount of a controlled substance or any bodily alcohol content. The term "any bodily alcohol content" means the presence of any alcohol within the driver's body which is due to consumption of intoxicating liquor other than consumption which was part of a recognized religious ceremony. 
2.  It shall be presumed that a person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle was under the influence if chemical analysis of the driver's blood, urine or breathe indicates the presence of any amount of a controlled substance or that the amount of alcohol in the driver's blood contained .04% or more, but not more than 0.07% by weight of alcohol. 
3.  Other than in subsections 1 and 2 of this definition, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle under the influence if chemical analysis of the driver's blood, urine, or breathe, indicates the presence of any amount of a controlled substance or that the amount of alcohol in the driver's blood was in excess of 0.07% by weight of alcohol. 
    "Release" means any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or dispensing of hazardous materials into the environment (including, but not limited to, the air, soil, surface waters or groundwater, which causes danger or harm to the public health or environment), or the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles containing a hazardous material. 
    "Responsible party" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any other legal entity responsible for an extraordinary response situation. Any owner, tenant, occupant or party, including the estate, heirs, successors and assigns of that responsible party, who is in control of real or personal property from which, onto which, from which, or related to which there is a hazardous materials release. Responsible party will also include the individual or entity which requests an extraordinary use of municipal personnel. 
    "Specialized response resources" means equipment, supplies, vehicles, and specially-trained personnel that may be utilized to provide extraordinary response services or mitigation in connection with a specialized response. 
    "Structure demolition" means the tearing down of a structure damaged by fire, explosion, or by other means which must, in the opinion of the director of public safety or building official, or their designee, be properly demolished in order to protect public safety. 
    "Threat of harm to oneself and others" means the verbal or written threat of harm to oneself, another or another's property, which, if carried out, would be in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
    "Utility line failure" means the disabling of any transmission or service line, electric conduit, pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect or transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals (including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable television and stereo signals) and water, sanitary or storm sewage lines, if the owner of such utility line does not respond within one hour to the request to repair or correct such a failure. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 2, 2008) 
8.28.030 - Cost recovery authorization and procedure. 
    The city may recover all assessable costs in connection with extraordinary response situations from any or all responsible parties, jointly or separately. The 52-1 Judicial District Court is authorized to collect the costs for the city, and may impose an additional administrative fee upon the city in an amount mutually agreed upon by the Court and the city. The city may recover all assessable costs in connection with extraordinary use of municipal personnel from the person, entity or organization which requested the services. However, any and all costs associated with false alarms shall be assessed in the manner provided in Section 8.28.040 of this chapter. For all other extraordinary response situations, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall determine the total assessable costs and shall, in consultation with other city personnel involved in responding to an extraordinary response situation, determine whether to assess all or part of such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such a determination, the following will be considered: 
A.  The total assessable costs; 
B.  The risk that the extraordinary response situation imposed on the city residents and their property; 
C.  Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property; 
D.  Whether the extraordinary response situation required evacuation; 
E.  The extent the extraordinary response situation required an unusual or extraordinary use of municipal personnel and equipment; and 
F.  Whether there was any damage to the environment. 
    After consideration of the above listed factors, the city manager may allocate assessable costs among responsible parties, including allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally against all parties, rather than one responsible party, regardless of whether a responsible party has legal liability therefore or is legally at fault. If the city manager determines not to assess all or part of assessable costs against a responsible party, such determination shall not in any way limit or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to other parties. 
    The city council may, from time to time, adopt a resolution that establishes a general fee schedule or fee guidelines, which may be associated with the city's administrative costs in providing extraordinary response. Such schedule or guidelines may include, among other things, the actual labor and material costs of the city (such as employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of transportation and costs of material disposal, whether or not the services are provided by the city or by a private entity, corporation, expert, consultant, or other assisting governmental agency operating at the request or direction of the city of the state of Michigan); service charges and interest; administration fees; attorneys fees; litigation costs; court costs; and any charges, fines or penalties to the city imposed by any court or other municipal, state or federal governmental entities. In the event the city council adopts such a resolution, the fee schedule or guidelines shall be used by the city manager, and all emergency or municipal personnel, in making any cost assessment determinations. The fee schedule or guidelines shall not prohibit the imposition of other costs permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 3, 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
8.28.040 - False alarms. 
A.  Regulations. 
1.  No person or entity shall install or operate an alarm system in the city unless the alarm system is installed by a licensed alarm system contractor or the owner or occupant of a residence in his or her own residence. 
2.  No person shall operate an alarm system on property within the city unless and until the alarm system has been registered with the city police department. Failure to register shall result in a fee of one hundred dollars in addition to those fees set forth in subsection B of this section. 
3.  Alarm systems employing audible signals shall be equipped with shut-off devices that automatically silence the audible signal after fifteen minutes. 
4.  Any alarm company shall diligently attempt to make telephone contact with the alarm site whenever an alarm is activated. Attempted verification of an emergency and the type of emergency shall occur prior to the alarm company notifying the city police department or city fire department. 
5.  No alarm system when activated shall be permitted to connect with the communication facility of the city police or fire departments by means of the city departments' telephone system. 
6.  A company which monitors an alarm system in the city, or any other person or entity who monitors an alarm system in the city, shall register such alarm system with the city by providing the following information to the city police and fire departments: 
a.  The type of alarm system; 
b.  The location of the alarm system in the building or other structure; 
c.  The easiest and safest method of access to that alarm system; 
d.  The name of the person or entity responsible for monitoring the alarm system; and 
e.  A local telephone number or a toll-free number by which the alarm system representative can be reached twenty-four hours a day. If this telephone number changes, the representative shall immediately notify the city policy and fire departments. Should any person or entity operating an alarm system within the city fail to register such system with the city, and the city is required to render emergency assistance in response to a third false alarm of that system within any calendar year, the false alarm fees set forth below shall be doubled. 
B.  Fees. Any person or entity utilizing an alarm system which causes false alarms that occur more frequently than three times in a calendar year, commencing anew on January 1st of each and every year, shall be subject to the following fines: 
First false alarm beyond yearly allowance $75.00 Second false alarm beyond yearly allowance 100.00 Third false alarm beyond yearly allowance 150.00 Fourth false alarm beyond yearly allowance 250.00 Fifth or more false alarm beyond yearly allowance 500.00  
C.  Notification Procedure. The city will mail an alarm notification form to an alarm user following an extraordinary response to a false alarm. The alarm user shall return the completed form to the city police/fire department within ten days of receipt. Failure of the alarm user to return the form shall cause an automatic billing of the false alarm fee to be sent to the alarm user. 
    If the alarm user wants to request a waiver of the assessed costs due to extenuating circumstances, the alarm user may do so in writing with ten days of the notice of the assessment. The writing shall contain documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within ten days of the receipt of the waiver request, the director of public safety or his/her designee shall make a final determination of the waiver request and notify the alarm user of the decision. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 4, 2008) 
8.28.050 - Hazardous materials release. 
A.  Duty to Remove. It shall be the duty of the responsible party who causes or controls leakage, spillage of any other dissemination of dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to immediately remove such hazardous substances or materials and complete a cleanup of the area of the release to insure that the hazardous substances or materials are fully removed and the area is fully restored to pre-release condition. 
B.  Failure to Remove. In the event that the responsible party fails to immediately and completely comply with subsection A of this section, the city, its employees, agents, contractors, consultants, or otherwise, may enter the property where the release occurred and conduct a cleanup. 
C.  Charges Imposed Upon Responsible Party. Where emergency and/or municipal personnel have an extraordinary response in connection with a hazardous materials release, all assessable costs incurred by the city shall be imposed upon the responsible party. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 5, 2008) 
8.28.060 - Billing and collection of assessable costs and late payment fees. 
A.  Upon a determination to assess costs made under this chapter, the city will submit an itemized invoice, by first class mail or personal service, to each responsible party. Such invoices shall be due and payable within thirty days after the date of mailing, and any amounts unpaid, including any previously imposed late payment fees remaining unpaid, after such date, shall bear a late payment fee equal to one and one-half percent per month. 
B.  A determination not to assess costs pursuant to this chapter shall in no way limit, extinguish or constitute a defense to the liability of any responsible party to any third party. 
C.  If the responsible party appeals assessable costs pursuant to Section 8.28.070, such costs, if upheld, in whole or in part, shall be due and payable thirty days from the date of determination of the appeal and any late payment fees shall apply thereafter. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 6, 2008) 
8.28.070 - Procedure for appealing assessable costs. 
A.  Any responsible party who receives an invoice for assessable costs shall have the opportunity to meet with the city manager, or his/her designee, to request modification of the assessable costs. The responsible party shall request in writing such a meeting within seven calendar days of the date of the invoice assessing the assessable costs. 
B.  If after the meeting with the city manager, or his/her designee, the responsible party is still not satisfied, he/she may request an opportunity to appear before the city council to further request a modification of the assessable costs. A responsible party who desires to appear before the city council must first meet with the city manager, or his/her designee, as provided above, and shall file a written request to appear before the city council with the city clerk within seven calendar days of the meeting with the city manager. 
C.  Upon receipt of such request, the city clerk will place the responsible party on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled city council meeting, which meeting is at least fourteen calendar days after the date on which the responsible party files the request to appear. 
D.  The filed request to appear shall specifically identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the assessed costs should be modified, and the person has the burden of proving by a preponderance of relevant facts that the determination appealed from is erroneous in whole or in part. Any reasoning, basis or argument for modification of assessable costs not set forth in the request to appear shall be deemed waived by the responsible party. Failure to timely file a written request to appear shall constitute a waiver of the responsible party's right to appear before the city council and shall further constitute the responsible party's agreement to pay the assessable costs invoiced. 
E.  Once the responsible party has been given the opportunity to appear before it, the city council shall, within a reasonable time, affirm, reverse, or modify all or a portion of the payment of the assessable costs invoiced. Failure of the responsible party to appear before the city council on the appeal shall constitute a waiver of that party's objections to the assessable costs. The decision of the city council shall be final when made. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 7, 2008) 
8.28.080 - Assessable costs constituting a lien upon property. 
    Any assessable costs which have been assessed but not paid when due, including any late payments fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible party in the city, from which, upon which or related to which, an extraordinary situation occurred. Such a lien shall be of the character and effect as the lien created by state statute for general law city real property and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The city treasurer shall verify on March 1st of each year and certify to the city assessor the fact that such assessable costs are delinquent and unpaid. The city assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 8, 2008) 
8.28.090 - Other remedies. 
    In addition to the remedy set forth in Section 8.28.080 of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate court action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a responsible party. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 9, 2008) 
8.28.100 - No limitation of liability. 
    The recovery of assessable costs pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. 08-02 § 10, 2008) 
Chapter 8.29 - INCARCERATED PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR HEALTH CARE COSTS INCURRED WHILE IN CUSTODY 
Sections: 

8.29.010 - Findings and purpose. 
    The city has determined that it is in the best interests of the city to protect its financial resources through requiring incarcerated individuals to pay all health care costs incurred while the individual is in custody of the City of Wixom Police Department. The city finds that this chapter is necessary to protect the city from excessive expense resulting from the utilization of city resources and funds in response to health care costs of an individual in custody. 
( Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-10-2015 ) 
8.29.020 - Definitions. 
    "Custody" shall mean that term as defined in 72 FR 47405 and in accordance with how custody is defined by federal courts for the purposes of the habeas corpus protections of the constitution. For example, the term "custody" is not limited solely to physical confinement. Individuals on parole, probation, bail, or supervised release may be "in custody." "Custody" includes but is not limited to individuals who are: (1) under arrest (2) incarcerated, (3) imprisoned, (4) escaped from confinement, (5) under supervised release, (6) on medical furlough, (7) residing in a mental health facility or halfway house, (8) living under home detention, (9) or confined completely or partially in any way under a state or local penal statute ordinance or rule. An individual in custody is referred to herein as an "incarcerated person." 
    "Health care costs" shall mean and shall include any and all costs of medical services, including but not limited to costs related to transportation to and from a medical facility, doctor's charges, hospital charges, charges for medical testing and exams, charges for medication, and charges for any treatment deemed necessary by an incarcerated person's treating physician. 
    "Police department" shall mean the city of Wixom Police Department. 
( Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-10-2015 ) 
8.29.030 - Incarcerated persons responsible for health care costs incurred while in custody. 
    Any person in the custody of the police department shall be solely responsible for the payment of any and all health care costs rendered to or received by that person during the course of his or her confinement or while they are in custody of the police department. The incarcerated person shall be required to reimburse the city in full for any fees or charges incurred for such health care costs, if not paid directly to the medical facility, ambulance provider, or medical provider by the incarcerated person or his or her insurance carrier. Under no circumstances will the city be responsible for the cost of any health care provided to an incarcerated person. 
( Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-10-2015 ) 
8.29.040 - Remedies. 
    The city shall be entitled to pursue any remedy or may institute any appropriate court action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect health care costs from the individual responsible for the health care costs under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-10-2015 ) 
8.29.050 - No limitation of liability. 
    The recovery of health care costs pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of the individual responsible for the same under applicable local, state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-10-2015 ) 
Chapter 8.32 - NOXIOUS WEEDS 
Sections: 

8.32.010 - Noxious weeds defined. 
    Weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, all those plants described in Section 2 of Act No. 359 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941 (M.C.L.A. 247.62) as amended, and all other weeds, wild grasses and plants the uncontrollable growth of which would constitute a nuisance are designated as "noxious weeds." 
(Ord. 129-A-2 § 1, 1992) 
8.32.020 - Owner's duty to eradicate. 
    If noxious weeds are found growing: 
A.  Within an area of one hundred feet or less from a platted subdivision in which there are buildings on sixty percent of the lots; 
B.  Within a platted subdivision in which there are buildings on sixty percent of the lots; 
C.  Within one hundred feet of any major roads; 
it shall be the duty of all owners of land on which noxious weeds are found growing to cut the weeds to a maximum height of nine inches above the ground, before they reach a flower-bearing state, and prevent such weeds from becoming a detriment to public health. 
(Ord. 129-A-2 § 2, 1992) 
8.32.030 - Notification to remove authorized when. 
    The city manager or his or her designee shall notify, by certified mail with return receipt requested, the owner, agent or occupant of any of the above-mentioned lands on which noxious weeds are found growing. The notice shall contain a summary of the provisions of this chapter. Failure of the city manager or his or her designee to give the notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty provided for or debt created under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 129-A-2 § 3, 1992) 
8.32.040 - Failure to cut weeds-City to perform work when-Costs. 
A.  An owner, agent or occupant of land described in Section 8.32.020 must cut the noxious weeds or cause them to be cut to a maximum height of nine inches above the ground, before they reach a flower-bearing state, within ten days after notice is given. 
B.  If the noxious weeds have not been cut after ten days, the city manager or his or her designee may enter upon the land and cut the noxious weeds with appropriate equipment which will not damage the property or sidewalk adjacent thereto. 
C.  All expenses incurred in the cutting of the noxious weeds shall be paid by the owner of the land. The city shall have a lien for the expenses to be enforced in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall apply to weeds in the fields devoted to growing any small grain crop such as wheat, oats, barley or rye. 
(Ord. 129-A-2 § 4, 1992) 
8.32.050 - Notice of weeds to be cut by city. 
    In lieu of the notice required by Section 8.32.030, the city manager or his or her designee may publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county during the month of March in each year. The notice shall state that weeds not cut by June 1st of that year may be cut by the city and the owner of the property will be charged with the costs under the provisions of Section 8.32.040. The publication shall also contain all other information required of the notice provided for in Section 8.32.030. The city may cut weeds as many times as is necessary and charge the costs to the property owner. 
(Ord. 129-A-2 § 5, 1992) 
8.32.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In addition to the costs assessed pursuant to this chapter for the cutting of noxious weeds by the city, any owner who refuses to cut the noxious weeds as provided for in this chapter shall, upon finding of being responsible, be subject to a civil fine of not more than five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 129-A-2 § 6, 1992) 
Chapter 8.36 - NOISE AND NUISANCE 
Sections: 

8.36.010 - Purpose. 
    An ordinance to preserve the peace, welfare, order, health, and safety of persons and property in the city, and to prescribe a penalty for the violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
8.36.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
    "Nuisance" means any act or acts or omission to act on the part of any person which creates or permits the existence of a situation which annoys, injures or endangers the peace, welfare, order, health or safety of the public in their persons or property. As defined herein, a nuisance includes, but is not limited to, conditions which render persons insecure in life or in the use and enjoyment of their property, such as effects and emanations from noise, glare, lights, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, gas, steam, acids, chemicals, fumes, worms, insects, rodents, flies, decaying matter, whether such effects and emanations are natural or result from human or mechanical alteration or manipulation of materials. A nuisance also include residues or leaching from deposits of matter which seep into water on the surface or in the ground thereby making it unfit or unpalatable for human consumption, or for use by domestic animals. A nuisance includes a condition which is indecent, obnoxious, or offensive to the senses. 
    "Persons" or "person" means a natural person and also includes corporations, partnerships and associations and their officers and officials existing under or authorized to exist under the laws of the State of Michigan or of any other state or any foreign country. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
8.36.030 - Prohibited noises. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. Any violation of the enumerated acts below constitutes a civil infraction subject to the fines and penalties as mandated by law. 
B.  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but this enumeration is not exclusive: 
1.  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place, except as a danger warning, the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust, and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up; 
2.  Except as otherwise permitted by city council, as hereinafter prescribed, the use, operation or permitting the use or operation of any radio or receiving set, musical instrument, audio or video device, or other machine or equipment designed for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of others in the vicinity, or with a volume louder than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The operation of any of the above-named devices between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or in such a manner that the noise is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise will be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection; 
3.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, audio or video device, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or to attract attention of the public to any building or structure; 
4.  Except as otherwise permitted by city council, as hereinafter provided, yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets or any other public place, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity; 
5.  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises; 
6.  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or annoyance; 
7.  Creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers; 
8.  The erection (including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair) of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city manager, or his or her designee, which may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the city manager, or his or her designee, determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets or highways between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he/she further determines that loss or inconvenience will result to any party in interest, he/she may grant permission for the work to be done during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon application. If the city manager, or his or her designee, shall determine that such work does actually impair the public health and safety, then such permit may be revoked by the city manager, or his or her designee; 
9.  The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, medical facility, or court while the same is in session, which interferes with the work of the institutions or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a street upon which a school, hospital or church or court is located; 
10.  Shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood; 
11.  The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any commercial performance, show or sale by creation of noise; 
12.  The transportation of any material over the streets and other public places so as to cause loud noises or so as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets; 
13.  The operation between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, pneumatic hammer, derrick, electric hoists or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise; 
14.  The operation of any noise created by any blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from the blower is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden the noise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
8.36.040 - Penalty. 
    Any person who creates, causes, allows, suffers or permits the existence of a nuisance shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction. Each day that such nuisance is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
8.36.050 - Abatement. 
    It is the duty of the person who creates, causes, allows, suffers or permits the existence of a nuisance, to abate the same. The term "abate" or "abatement" shall include demolition removal, repair, maintenance, construction, reconstruction, replacement and reconditioning of structures, appliances, appurtenances or equipment; and it shall also include removal, transportation, buying, disposal and treatment of refuse, manure or other substance or media capable of causing obnoxious odors or of attracting or breeding flies, and the application of chemicals insecticides or other substances or the use of mechanical means to control, eradicate and eliminate the nuisance conditions, including screen-belts of trees and fences. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
8.36.060 - Enforcement. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to enforce this ordinance, and he/she may delegate the enforcement to any administrative official or employee of the city. The city may seek abatement of a nuisance and such other relief as may be obtained by civil proceedings in court. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
8.36.070 - Emergency measures 
A.  When, in the opinion of the city manager, or his or her designee, there is imminent danger caused by any nuisance, which endangers public health and safety or creates actual or potential danger to the public which must be immediately abated, the city manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized and empowered to abate such nuisance as necessary. 
B.  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform any emergency abatement work as expeditiously as possible. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the city. The city shall send notice of payment for the recovery of costs to the person found responsible by the city manager, or his or her designee, for causing the nuisance. 
C.  Any person ordered to reimburse the city for costs related to emergency abatement, may petition the city council of wixom for an appeal of that decision within twenty days after the day notice for payment was served, as evidenced by certified mail receipt. 
D.  All appeal hearings before the city council shall be open to the public. the appellant, the appellant's representative, the city manager, or his or her designee, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. City council shall modify or reverse the decision of the city manager only by a concurring vote of majority of the total number of appointed city council members. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 9.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Criminal Code of the city. 
(Ord. 88 § 1, 1972) 
9.04.020 - Rules of construction. 
    The rule that a criminal statute is to be strictly construed shall not apply to this title or any of the provisions thereof. All provisions of this title shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law. 
(Ord. 88 § 2, 1972) 
9.04.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this title the following terms have the following meanings: 
    "Act" or "doing of an act" includes "omission to act." 
    "Person," "accused," and similar words include, unless a contrary intention appears, public and private corporations, copartnerships and unincorporated or voluntary associations. 
    "Property" includes any manner of thing upon or in respect to which any offense may be committed. 
    "Public place" means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
(Ord. 88 § 3, 1972) 
9.04.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Unless otherwise prescribed, any person or persons who violates any of the sections of this title shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars by the city or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 88 § 91, 1972) 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 3-8-11) 
Chapter 9.08 - PUBLIC OFFICES AND OFFICERS;[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-17, adopted March 22, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.08, §§ 9.08.010-9.08.040, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88, §§ 14, 19, 21, adopted in 1972. 

9.08.010 - False report of crime. 
    A person who intentionally makes a false report of the commission of a crime, or intentionally causes a false report of the commission of a crime to be made, to a peace officer, police agency of this state or of a local unit of government, 9-1-1 operator, or any other governmental employee or contractor or employee of a contractor who is authorized to receive reports of a crime, knowing the report is false, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
9.08.020 - Retaliate, threaten or intimidate. 
    A person, who does any of the following, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
A.  Retaliate or attempt to retaliate against another person for having reported or attempted to report a crime committed or attempted by another person. 
B.  Give, offer to give, or promise anything of value to any person to influence a person's statement to a police officer conducting a lawful investigation of a crime or the presentation of evidence to a police officer conducting a lawful investigation of a crime. 
C.  Threaten or intimidate any person to influence a person's statement to a police officer conducting a lawful investigation of a crime or the presentation of evidence to a police officer conducting a lawful investigation of a crime 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
9.08.030 - Aiding escape from officer. 
    Any person who shall aid or assist any prisoner in escaping or attempting to escape from any officer or person who shall have the lawful custody of such prisoner is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
9.08.040 - Interference with police department. 
    No person shall resist any police officer, any member of the police department or any person duly empowered with police authority while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
9.08.050 - Disguise; unlawful display badge, patch or uniform. 
A.  Any person who in any manner disguises himself or herself with intent to obstruct the due execution of the law, or with intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any officer or any other person in the legal performance of his or her duty, or the exercise of his or her rights under the constitution and laws of this state, whether such intent be effected or not, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Unless any of the following apply, a person who sells, furnishes, possesses, wears, exhibits, displays, or uses the badge, patch, or uniform, or facsimile of the badge, patch, or uniform, of any law enforcement agency, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both: 
i.  The person receiving or possessing the badge, patch, uniform, or facsimile is authorized to receive or possess the badge, patch, uniform, or facsimile by the chief officer of the law enforcement agency. 
ii.  The person receiving or possessing the badge, patch, uniform, or facsimile is a member of the law enforcement agency. 
iii.  The badge is a retirement badge and is in the possession of the retired law enforcement officer. 
iv.  The badge, patch, or uniform is the badge, patch, or uniform of a deceased law enforcement officer and is in the possession of his or her spouse, child, or next of kin. 
v.  The person receiving, possessing, exhibiting, displaying, or using the badge, patch, uniform, or facsimile is a collector of badges, patches, uniforms, or facsimiles. 
vi.  The person is in the theatrical profession and wears the badge, patch, uniform, or facsimile while actually engaged in following that profession. 
vii.  The person is engaged in Halloween activities or celebrations, trick-or-treating, costume parties or other similar acts, which are solely intended for recreation and entertainment purposes, and are not intended to lead reasonable persons to falsely believe that person is an actual law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
Chapter 9.12 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.12, §§ 9.12.010-9.12.270, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88, §§ 5-13, 15, 16, 18, 20, 22-29, 35, 77, 85, 86, 1972; Ord. No. 88-A, § 1, 1978; Ord. of 1-11-94; Ord. No. 99-23, § 1, 1999; Ord. of 8-10-99. 

9.12.010 - Assault; penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, a person who assaults or assaults and batters an individual, if no other punishment is prescribed by law, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.020 - Domestic assault; penalty. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, an individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. "Dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context. 
B.  Within twenty-four hours after the initial contact between the victim of a reported crime and the law enforcement agency having the responsibility for investigating that crime, that agency shall give to the victim the following information in writing: 
1.  The availability of emergency and medical services, if applicable. 
2.  The availability of victim's compensation benefits and the address of the crime victims' compensation board. 
3.  The address and telephone number of the prosecuting attorney whom the victim should contact to obtain information about victim's rights. 
4.  The following statements: 
i.  "If you would like to be notified of an arrest in your case or the release of the person arrested, or both, you should call the Wixom Police Department at (248) 624-6114 and inform them." 
ii.  "If you are not notified of an arrest in your case, you may call the Wixom Police Department at (248) 624-6114 for the status of the case." 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.030 - Disorderly persons. 
A.  A person is a disorderly person if the person is any of the following: 
i.  A person of sufficient ability who refuses or neglects to support his or her family. 
ii.  A common prostitute. 
iii.  A window peeper. 
iv.  A person who engages in an illegal occupation or business. 
v.  A person who is intoxicated in a public place and who is either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
vi.  A person who is engaged in indecent or obscene conduct in a public place. 
vii.  A person who loiters in or about a police station, police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building, or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances. 
viii.  A person who is found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
B.  A person convicted of being a disorderly person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 10-8-2013 ) 
9.12.040 - Disturbance in public place. 
    Any person who shall make or excite any disturbance or contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park, or at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.050 - Disturbing the peace. 
    It is unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.060 - Fighting. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.070 - Hurling projectiles. 
    A person shall not throw, propel, or drop a stone, brick, or other dangerous object at or from a passenger train, sleeping car, passenger coach, express car, mail car, baggage car, locomotive, caboose, or freight train or at a street car, trolley car, or motor vehicle. A person who violates this section is guilty a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.080 - Indecent exposure. 
    A person shall not knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his or her person or of the person of another 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.090 - Loitering. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly loiter in or about any place where illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any street, sidewalk, overpass, parking area or public place. For the purpose of this section, loitering is defined as the act of standing or idling in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass, parking area or public place so as to hinder or impede or tend to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians or vehicles after having been told to move by a police officer. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person, individual or in concert with others, to willfully enter or remain in any area open to the public in any hotel, motel, office, business establishment, church or public building in the City of Wixom; to use any area open to the public for business or social purposes; or to obstruct the entrance to any area open to the public as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of such area open to the public by others lawfully there contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. The term "area open to the public" for the purpose of this section includes any parking area, basement, attic, building entrance or doorway, lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public restroom, sitting room or any other place used in common by the public, tenants, occupants, guests or customers, and on the premises of a hotel, motel, office building, public building, church, or business establishment in the city of Wixom. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.100 - Malicious annoyance by writing. 
    Any person who shall knowingly send or deliver or shall make, and for the purpose of being delivered or sent, shall part with the possession of any letter, postal card or paper or electronic writing containing any obscene language with or without a name subscribed thereto, or signed with a fictitious name, or with any letter, mark or other designation, with the intent thereby to cause annoyance to any person, or with a view or intent to extort or gain any money or property of any description belonging to another, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.110 - Malicious use of telecommunication service. 
A.  A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service provided by a telecommunications service provider with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest, or annoy another person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of another person by any of the following: 
i.  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
ii.  Falsely and deliberately reporting by message through the use of a telecommunications service or device that a person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime or an accident. 
iii.  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telecommunications device and another telecommunications device or between a telecommunications device and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages through the use of a telecommunications service or device 
iv.  Using vulgar, indecent, obscene, or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
v.  Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
vi.  Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call that is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this subdivision, "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call made by a person or recording device, on behalf of a person, corporation, or other entity, soliciting business or contributions. 
vii.  Deliberately engaging or causing to engage the use of a telecommunications service or device of another person in a repetitive manner that causes interruption in telecommunications service or prevents the person from utilizing his or her telecommunications service or device 
B.  "Telecommunications service" shall mean a service which facilitates the origination, transmission, retransmission, emission, or reception of signs, data, images, signals, writings, sounds, or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence of any nature over any telecommunications system by any method, including, but not limited to, electronic, electromagnetic, magnetic, optical, photo-optical, digital, or analog technologies. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.120 - Prostitution. 
A.  A person sixteen years of age or older who accosts, solicits, or invites another person in a public place or in or from a building or vehicle, by word, gesture, or any other means, to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
B.  A person sixteen years of age or older who receives or admits or offers to receive or admit a person into a place, structure, house, building, or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation, or who knowingly permits a person to remain in a place, structure, house, building, or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.130 - Prowling. 
    It is unlawful for any person to prowl about any alley or private premises of any other person in the night time, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.12.140 - Fireworks. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth herein: 
    "Act" means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
    "Alcoholic liquor" means that term as defined in Section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1d. 
    "Articles pyrotechnic" means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
    "Consumer fireworks" means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    "Controlled substance" means that term as defined in Section 8b of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.8b. 
    "Display fireworks" means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    "Firework" or "fireworks" means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
    "Low-impact fireworks" means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    "Minor" means an individual under eighteen years of age. 
    "National holiday" means New Year's Day (January 1); Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr. (third Monday in January); Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4); Labor Day (first Monday in September); Columbus Day (second Monday in October); Veterans Day (November 11); Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); and Christmas Day (December 25). 
    "Novelties" means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
i.  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
ii.  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (i) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
iii.  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch in diameter. 
iv.  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than twelve pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices. 
B.  General Prohibitions; Exception. No person shall ignite, discharge, or use fireworks within the city at any time, except that: 
(1)  Fireworks may be discharged in strict compliance with any permit issued by the city in accordance with the Act. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks may be discharged between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight only on the day before, the day of, and the day after, a national holiday, except on New Year's Day when consumer fireworks may also be discharged between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. A person who ignites, uses or discharges a consumer firework at any time except as set forth in this paragraph is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine up to five hundred dollars. 
(3)  This subsection (B) shall not apply to low impact fireworks. 
C.  Additional Prohibitions; Penalties. 
(1)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used on public property, including public streets and rights-of-way, or on school property, church property, or the private property of another, without the express written permission from the person or entity legally in possession and control of that property to undertake such action. A person who ignites, uses or discharges a consumer firework at any time except as set forth in this paragraph is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine up to five hundred dollars. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both. A person who violates this paragraph is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable of a fine of up to five hundred dollars. 
(3)  Low impact fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both. A person who violates this paragraph is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable of a fine of up to five hundred dollars. 
(4)  Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to a minor. A person who violates this paragraph is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars for the first offense, or one thousand dollars for a second or subsequent offense. 
(5)  No minor shall use, ignite or possess any consumer fireworks unless under the direct supervision of an adult at all times. A person who violates this paragraph is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable of a fine of up to five hundred dollars. 
D.  Novelties Not Regulated. This Section does not apply to novelties. 
E.  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the fire chief and police chief, their designees, and any sworn law enforcement officer. 
F.  Determination of Violation; Seizure of Fireworks. 
(1)  If an enforcing official determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the official may seize the fireworks as evidence of such violation. Upon a finding of responsibility or guilt for violation of this section, the city may dispose of or destroy any consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks retained as evidence for prosecution of the violation. 
(2)  In addition to any other penalty provided herein, a person found responsible or guilty for violation of this section shall reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying any consumer or low impact fireworks seized. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 8-27-2013 ) 
Chapter 9.16 - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.16, §§ 9.16.010-9.16.170, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88, §§ 37, 50-63, 1972; Ord. No. 88-B, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 99-24, §§ 1-6, 1999; Ord. of 6-8-99 

9.16.010 - Breaking and entering. 
A.  Any person who breaks and enters or enters without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, factory or other building, boat, railroad car or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boat house, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the out-buildings belonging thereto, any ice shanty with a value of one hundred dollars or more, or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  This section does not apply to entering without breaking, any place which at the time of the entry was open to the public, unless the entry was expressly denied. 
C.  This section does not apply if the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was committed by a peace officer or an individual under the peace officer's direction in the lawful performance of his or her duties as a peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.020 - Damaging or unauthorized tampering or meddling with motor vehicle. 
    Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, who shall: 
A.  Intentionally and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of said motor vehicle; or 
B.  Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof; or 
C.  Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure said machine or cause the same to be removed without the consent of the owner. This section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.030 - Interference and destruction of public property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light, street sign, or mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of, any public building, or destroy tree or pole within the city, or destroy, take or meddle with any property belonging to the city, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority, or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage a water meter without proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.040 - Larceny. 
    A person who commits larceny by stealing any of the following property of another person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-threee days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value of the property stolen, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine: 
i.  Money, goods, or chattels. 
ii.  A bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order, or certificate. 
iii.  A book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due, to become due, or to be delivered. 
iv.  A deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or other valuable contract in force. 
v.  A receipt, release, or defeasance. 
vi.  A writ, process, or public record. 
vii.  Nonferrous metal 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.050 - Larceny from libraries. 
    Any person who shall procure, or take in any way from any public library or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the same to his own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, or who having procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, shall thereafter convert the same to his own use or fraudulently deprive the owner thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.060 - Littering. 
A.  A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. 
B.  A person who removes a vehicle that is wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road, or street shall remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road, or street as a result of the accident. 
C.  A person shall not knowingly cause litter or any object to fall or to be thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle traveling upon a highway. 
D.  The following persons are presumed responsible for litter that comes from a vehicle: 
i.  The driver of the vehicle. 
ii.  The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle. 
iii.  In the case of abandoned vehicles, the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle. 
E.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 
    "Litter" means rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris, or other foreign substances or a vehicle that is considered abandoned under section 252a of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.252a. 
    "Public or private property or water" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
i.  The right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach of a body of water or watercourse, including the ice above the water. 
ii.  A park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area. 
iii.  Residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
    "Vehicle" means a motor vehicle registered or required to be registered under the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923. 
    "Vessel" means a vessel registered under part 801. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.070 - Malicious burning of property. 
A.  A person who willfully and maliciously burns any personal property, other than personal property owned by himself or herself, and the value of the personal property burned or intended to be burned is less than two hundred dollars, that person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or 3 times the value of the personal property burned or intended to be burned, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
B.  A person who uses, arranges, places, devises, or distributes an inflammable, combustible, or explosive material, liquid, or substance or any device in or near a building or property with intent to willfully and maliciously set fire to or burn the building or property or who aids, counsels, induces, persuades, or procures another to do so, and the property intended to be burned is personal or real property, or both, with a combined value less than two hundred dollars, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the combined value of the property intended to be burned, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
C.  "Burn" shall mean setting fire to or doing any act which results in the starting of a fire, or aiding, counseling, inducing, persuading or procuring another to do such act or acts. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.080 - Malicious destruction of building. 
    A person shall not willfully and maliciously destroy or injure another person's house, barn, or other building or its appurtenances. If the amount of the destruction or injury is less than two hundred dollars, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.090 - Malicious destruction of landscaping. 
    A person who willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, cuts down, destroys, or injures any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops, or soil of another that is standing, growing, or located on the land of another, and the value of the trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops, or soil cut down, destroyed, or injured is less than two hundred dollars, that person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value of the trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops, or soil, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.100 - Malicious destruction of personal property. 
    A person who willfully and maliciously destroys or injures the personal property of another person, and the amount of the destruction or injury is less than $200.00, that person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundreds or three times the amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.110 - Malicious destruction, miscellaneous. 
A.  Any person who shall maliciously break down, injure, mar or deface any fence belonging to or enclosing lands not his own, or shall maliciously throw down or open any gate, bars or fence, and leave the same down or open, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person who shall willfully or maliciously break down, injure, remove or destroy any monument erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of this state or any municipality thereof, or of any tract or lot of land, or any tree marked for that purpose, or shall so break down, injure, remove or destroy any milestone, mileboard, guidepost or guide board, lawfully erected upon any highway, or other public way or railroad, or shall willfully or maliciously deface, or alter the inscription on any such stone, post or board, or shall willfully or maliciously mar or deface any building or sign board, or extinguish any street lamp, or break, injure, destroy or remove any electric light globe or bulb, or any railing or lamp post, erected on any bridge, sidewalk, street, highway, court or passage, or shall willfully or maliciously injure, remove, deface or destroy any board or structure lawfully erected or used for the posting of bills, posters, or other notices, or shall willfully or maliciously mutilate, deface or destroy any bill, poster, or other printed or written notice lawfully posted on any board or structure used for that purpose, without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  A person, other than the burial right owner or his or her representative, heir at law, or a person having care, custody, or control of a cemetery pursuant to law, a contract, or other legal right, shall not willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or remove a tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure or thing placed or designed for a memorial of the dead, or a fence, railing, curb, or other thing intended for the protection or for the ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure described in this subsection or any other enclosure for the burial of the dead and shall not willfully destroy, mutilate, remove, cut, break, or injure any tree, shrub, or plant, placed or being within such an enclosure. Prosecution under subsection may commence upon complaint by the burial right owner or his or her representative, heir at law, or person having care, custody, or control of a cemetery, tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure or thing. If the total amount of damage is less than two hundred dollars, a person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the amount of damage, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.120 - Stolen or converted property. 
A.  Any person to whom any money, goods or other property, which may be the subject of larceny, shall have been delivered, who shall embezzle or fraudulently convert to his own use, or shall secrete with the intent to embezzle, or fraudulently use such goods, money or other property, or any part thereof, and the property stolen has a value of less than two hundred dollars, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value of the property stolen, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
B.  A person who obscures, defaces, alters, obliterates, removes, destroys, or otherwise conceals or disguises any registration, serial, or other identifying number embossed, engraved, carved, stamped, welded, or otherwise placed or situated in or upon goods or property held for sale in the ordinary course of business with the intent to render the goods or property unidentifiable shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  A person who is a dealer in or collector of any merchandise or personal property or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector and who possesses goods or property with the intent to sell the goods or property in the ordinary course of business knowing the registration, serial, or other identifying number has been obscured, defaced, altered, obliterated, removed, destroyed, or otherwise concealed or disguised shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  A person who is a dealer or collector of any merchandise or personal property or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector and who sells goods or property in the ordinary course of business knowing that the registration, serial, or other identifying number has been obscured, defaced, altered, obliterated, removed, destroyed, or otherwise concealed or disguised shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.16.130 - Trespassing. 
A.  A person shall not do any of the following, or that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
i.  Enter the lands or premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or occupant or the agent of the owner or occupant. 
ii.  Remain without lawful authority on the land or premises of another after being notified to depart by the owner or occupant or the agent of the owner or occupant. 
iii.  Enter or remain without lawful authority on fenced or posted farm property of another person without the consent of the owner or his or her lessee or agent. A request to leave the premises is not a necessary element for a violation of this subdivision. This subdivision does not apply to a person who is in the process of attempting, by the most direct route, to contact the owner or his or her lessee or agent to request consent. 
B.  Any person who shall willfully commit any trespass, by cutting down or destroying any timber or wood, standing or growing on the land of another, or by carrying away any kind of timber or wood, cut down or lying on such land, or by digging up or carrying away any stone, ore, gravel, clay, sand, turf or mould from such land, or any roots, fruit or plant there being, or by cutting down or carrying away any grass, hay, or any kind of grain standing, growing or being on such land, or by carrying away from any wharf or landing place, railroad depot or warehouse, any goods whatever in which he has no interest or property, without the license of the owner, of the value of five dollars or more, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Any person who shall willfully commit any trespass by entering upon the garden, orchard or other improved land of another, without permission of the owner thereof, and with intent to cut, take, carry away, destroy or injure the trees, grain, grass, hay, fruit or vegetables there growing or being, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Chapter 9.20 - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.20, §§ 9.20.010-9.20.100, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88, §§ 43-46, 48, 1972; Ord. of 8-10-99, §§ 1, 2. 

9.20.010 - Contributing to neglect or delinquency of minor. 
    Any person who shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of seventeen years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined in Section 2 of chapter 12a of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, as added by Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of the First Extra Session of 1944, and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.20.020 - Curfew. 
A.  No minor under the age of twelve years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park, public building, or any other area open to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
B.  A minor under the age of sixteen years, but twelve years of age or more, shall not loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park, public building, or any other area open to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., immediately following, except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or an adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
C.  Any person of the age of sixteen years or over assisting, aiding, abetting, allowing, permitting or encouraging any minor under the age of 16 years to violate the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.20.030 - Exhibition of obscene matter. 
    Any person who shall exhibit upon any public street or highway, or in any other place within the view of children passing on any public street or highway, any book, pamphlet or other printed paper or thing containing obscene language or obscene prints, figures, or descriptions, tending to the corruption of the morals of youth, or any newspapers, pamphlets, or other printed paper or thing devoted to the publication of criminal news, police reports or criminal deeds, shall on conviction thereof be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.20.040 - Furnishing obscene object or material to minors. 
    A person who sells, gives away or in any way furnishes to a person under the age of eighteen years any sexually obscene object or device, or any book, pamphlet, or other printed paper or other thing, containing obscene language, or obscene prints, pictures, figures or descriptions tending to corrupt the morals of youth, or any newspapers, pamphlets or other printed paper devoted to the publication of criminal news, police reports, or criminal deeds, and a person who shall in any manner hire, use or employ a person under the age of eighteen years to sell, give away, or in any manner distribute such sexually obscene objects or devices, or books, pamphlets or printed papers, and any person having the care, custody or control of a person under the age of eighteen years, who permits him or her to engage in any such employment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.20.050 - Leaving child unattended in vehicle. 
    A person who is responsible for the care or welfare of a child less than six (6) years of age and leaves that child unattended or alone or without the supervision of an individual 13 years of age or more in a vehicle for a period of time that poses an unreasonable risk of harm or injury to the child, or under circumstances that pose an unreasonable risk of harm or injury to the child, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.20.060 - Prohibited tobacco conduct by person under eighteen years old. 
    A person under 18 years-old who does any of the following is guilty of a misdemeanor: 
A.  Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco product. 
B.  Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco product. 
C.  Use a tobacco product in a public place. 
D.  Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of age that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or attempting to possess a tobacco product. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.20.070 - Selling, giving or furnishing tobacco products to person under eighteen years old. 
    A person who sells, gives, or furnishes a tobacco product to another person under eighteen years old is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.20.080 - Unlawful use of internet or computer system. 
    A person who uses the internet or a computer, computer program, computer network, or computer system to communicate with any person for the purpose of committing, attempting to commit, conspiring to commit, or soliciting another person to commit a crime, which is a misdemeanor or a felony with a maximum term of imprisonment of less than one year, and the victim or intended victim is a minor or is believed by that person to be a minor who is less than eighteen years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Chapter 9.24 - FRAUD AND RELATED OFFENSES[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, repealed former Ch. 9.24, §§ 9.24.010-9.24.150, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88, §§ 64-76, 1972; Ord. No. 88B, § 1, 1993; Ord. of 6-8-99, §§ 1-4; Ord. No. 99-25, §§ 1, 2, 1999. 

9.24.010 - Checks without sufficient funds. 
A.  A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud and knowing at the time of the making, drawing, uttering, or delivering that the maker or drawer does not have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository to pay the check, draft, or order in full upon its presentation. 
B.  A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud if the person does not have sufficient funds for the payment of the check, draft, or order when presentation for payment is made to the drawee. This subsection does not apply if the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause and that fact was not known to the person when the person made, drew, uttered, or delivered the check, draft, or order. 
C.  If the amount payable in the check, draft, or order stated in subsection (A) or (B) above is less than one hundred dollars, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
D.  A person shall not, with intent to defraud, make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money, to apply on an account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, if at the time of making, drawing, uttering, or delivering the check, draft, or order he or she does not have an account in or credit with the bank or other depository for the payment of the check, draft, or order upon presentation. 
E.  As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
F.  Where such check, draft or order is protested, on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, non-payment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
G.  "Credit" shall mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for payment. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.24.020 - Embezzlement. 
A.  A person who as the agent, servant, or employee of another person, governmental entity within this state, or other legal entity or who as the trustee, bailee, or custodian of the property of another person, governmental entity within this state, or other legal entity fraudulently disposes of or converts to his or her own use, or takes or secretes with the intent to convert to his or her own use without the consent of his or her principal, any money or other personal property of his or her principal that has come to that person's possession or that is under his or her charge or control by virtue of his or her being an agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, or custodian, and the money or personal property embezzled has a value of less than two hundred dollars, that person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value of the money or property embezzled, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
B.  A person shall not through fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, coercion, or unjust enrichment obtain or use or attempt to obtain or use a vulnerable adult's money or property to directly or indirectly benefit that person knowing or having reason to know the vulnerable adult is a vulnerable adult. If the money or property used or obtained, or attempted to be used or obtained, has a value of less than two hundred dollars, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value of the money or property used or obtained or attempted to be used or obtained, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
C.  An agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney-at-law, collector, or other person who receives or collects in any manner money or other personal property that is partly the property of another person, governmental entity within this state, or other legal entity and partly the property of the agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney-at-law, collector, or other person shall not embezzle, fraudulently dispose of, convert to his or her own use, or take or secrete with intent to embezzle or convert to his or her own use the money or personal property without the consent of the part owner of the money or personal property. If the money or personal property embezzled, disposed of, converted, taken, or secreted has a value of less than two hundred dollars, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value of the money or property embezzled, disposed of, converted, taken, or secreted, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.24.030 - False pretenses with intent to defraud. 
A.  Person who, with the intent to defraud or cheat makes or uses a false pretense to do one more of the following is guilty of a crime punishable as provided in this section: 
i.  Cause a person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease, or mortgage land or an interest in land. 
ii.  Obtain a person's signature on a forged written instrument. 
iii.  Obtain from a person any money or personal property or the use of any instrument, facility, article, or other valuable thing or service. 
iv.  By means of a false weight or measure obtain a larger amount or quantity of property than was bargained for. 
v.  By means of a false weight or measure sell or dispose of a smaller amount or quantity of property than was bargained for. 
B.  If he land, interest in land, money, personal property, use of the instrument, facility, article, or valuable thing, service, larger amount obtained, or smaller amount sold or disposed of has a value of less than two hundred dollars, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine 
C.  "False Pretense" includes, but is not limited to, a false or fraudulent representation, writing, communication, statement, or message, communicated by any means to another person, which the maker of the representation, writing, communication, statement, or message knows is false or fraudulent. The false pretense may be a representation regarding a past or existing fact or circumstance or a representation regarding the intention to perform a future event or to have a future event performed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.24.040 - Financial transaction device fraud. 
A.  A person who, for the purpose of obtaining goods, property, services, or anything of value, knowingly and with intent to defraud uses one or more financial transaction devices that have been revoked or canceled by the issuer of the device or devices, as distinguished from expired, and has received notice of the revocation or cancellation, and the value of the goods, property, services, or anything of value is less than one hundred dollars, that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
B.  A person who knowingly and with intent to defraud uses a financial transaction device to withdraw or transfer funds from a deposit account in violation of the contractual limitations imposed on the amount or frequency of withdrawals or transfers or in an amount exceeding the funds then on deposit in the account, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the amount of funds withdrawn or transferred, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine, if the amount of the funds withdrawn or transferred is less than two hundred dollars. 
C.  "Financial transaction device" means any of the following: 
i.  An electronic funds transfer card. 
ii.  A credit card. 
iii.  A debit card. 
iv.  A point-of-sale card. 
v.  Any instrument, device, card, plate, code, account number, personal identification number, or a record or copy of a code, account number, or personal identification number or other means of access to a credit account or deposit account, or a driver's license or state identification card used to access a proprietary account, other than access originated solely by a paper instrument, that can be used alone or in conjunction with another access device, for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Obtaining money, cash refund or credit account, credit, goods, services, or any other thing of value. 
2.  Certifying or guaranteeing to a person or business the availability to the deviceholder of funds on deposit to honor a draft or check payable to the order of that person or business. 
3.  Providing the deviceholder access to a deposit account for the purpose of making deposits, withdrawing funds, transferring funds between deposit accounts, obtaining information pertaining to a deposit account, or making an electronic funds transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.24.050 - Fraudulent procurement of food and lodging. 
A.  Any person who shall put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe as a guest and shall procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, except when credit is given therefor by express agreement, with intent to defraud such keeper thereof out of the pay for the same, or, who, with intent to defraud such keeper out of the pay therefor, shall obtain credit at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe for such food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. No conviction shall be had under the provisions of this section unless complaint is made within sixty days of the time of the violation. 
B.  Obtaining such food, lodging or accommodation by false pretense, or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying or offering to pay therefore, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage, shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.24.060 - Retail fraud. 
    A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of misdemeanor retail fraud punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninedty-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or three times the value of the difference in price, property stolen, or money or property obtained or attempted to be obtained, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine: 
i.  While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting difference in price is less than two hundred dollars. 
ii.  While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale at a price of less than two hundred dollars. 
iii.  With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than two hundred dollars. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Chapter 9.28 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR CONTROL REGULATIONS[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.28, § § 9.28.010-9.28.070, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an Ord. of Aug. 10, 1999, § 2, 

9.28.010 - Definitions. 
    "Act" means the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1998, as amended. 
    "Alcohol" means the product of distillation of fermented liquid, whether or not rectified or diluted with water, but does not mean ethyl or industrial alcohol, diluted or not, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes. 
    "Alcoholic liquor" means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes as defined and classified by the commission. 
    "Bar" means a barrier or counter at which alcoholic liquor is sold to, served to, or consumed by customers. 
    "Beer" means any beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other cereal in potable water. 
    "Cash" means money in hand, bank notes, demand deposits at a bank, or legal tender, which a creditor must accept according to law. Cash does not include call loans, postdated checks, or promissory notes. 
    "Commission" means the liquor control commission provided for and created in section 209. 
    "Church" means an entire house or structure set apart primarily for use for purposes of public worship, and which is tax exempt under the laws of this state, and in which religious services are held and with which a clergyman is associated, and the entire structure of which is kept for that use and not put to any other use inconsistent with that use. 
    "Hotel" means a building or group of buildings located on the same or adjoining pieces of real property, which provide lodging to travelers and temporary residents and which may also provide food service and other goods and services to registered guests and to the public. 
    "License" means a contract between the commission and the licensee granting authority to that licensee to manufacture and sell, or sell, or warehouse alcoholic liquor in the manner provided by this act. 
    "Minor" means a person less than twenty-one years of age. 
    "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation. 
    "Residence" means the premises in which a person resides permanently. 
    "Retailer" means a person licensed by the commission who sells to the consumer in accordance with rules promulgated by the commission. 
    "Sacramental wine" means wine containing not more than twenty-four percent of alcohol by volume which is used for sacramental purposes. 
    "Sale" includes the exchange, barter, traffic, furnishing, or giving away of alcoholic liquor. In the case of a sale in which a shipment or delivery of alcoholic liquor is made by a common or other carrier, the sale of the alcoholic liquor is considered to be made in the county within which the delivery of the alcoholic liquor is made by that carrier to the consignee or his or her agent or employee, and venue for the prosecution for that sale may be in the county or city where the seller resides or from which the shipment is made or at the place of delivery. 
    "School" includes buildings used for school purposes to provide instruction to children in grades kindergarten through twelve, when that instruction is provided by a public, private, denominational, or parochial school, except those buildings used primarily for adult education or college extension courses. School does not include a proprietary trade or occupational school. 
    "Spirits" means a beverage that contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with potable water or other substances, or both, in solution, and includes wine containing an alcoholic content of more than twenty-one percent by volume, except sacramental wine and mixed spirit drink. 
    "Tavern" means any place licensed to sell at retail beer and wine for consumption on the premises only. 
    "Vehicle" means any means of transportation by land, by water, or by air. 
    "Vendor" means a person licensed by the commission to sell alcoholic liquor. 
    "Wine" means the product made by the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe grapes, or any other fruit with the usual cellar treatment, and containing not more than twenty-one percent of alcohol by volume, including fermented fruit juices other than grapes and mixed wine drinks. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.28.020 - Prohibition of alcoholic liquor on school property. 
A.  A person shall not consume alcoholic liquor on school property or possess alcoholic liquor on school property with the intent to consume it on school property. 
B.  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: 
i.  If the person has no prior convictions, by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars, or both. 
ii.  If the person has one prior conviction, by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
C.  This section does not prohibit a person from consuming alcoholic liquor on school property or possessing alcoholic liquor on school property with the intent to consume it on school property under any of the following circumstances: 
i.  As part of a generally recognized religious service or religious ceremony. 
ii.  At a nonschool function or event on school property if the superintendent of the school district or, if the school is not operated by a school district, the administrator of the school, or his or her designee, has approved consuming alcoholic liquor on school property or possessing alcoholic liquor on school property with the intent to consume it on school property during that function or event. 
D.  This section does not prohibit an individual from being convicted of or found responsible for any other violation of law arising out of the same transaction as the violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.28.030 - Prohibition against transportation of alcoholic liquor in vehicles. 
A.  A person who is an operator or occupant shall not transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway, or within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle in any place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, in this state. 
B.  A person may transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles in this state, if the vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, the container is enclosed or encased, and the container is not readily accessible to the occupants of the vehicle. 
C.  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. As part of the sentence, the person may be ordered to perform community service and undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. 
D.  This section does not apply to a passenger in a chartered vehicle authorized to operate by the state transportation department. 
E.  A person less than twenty-one years of age shall not knowingly transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle as an operator or occupant unless the person is employed by a licensee, a common carrier designated by the liquor control commission under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, the liquor control commission, or an agent of the liquor control commission and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment. This section does not prevent a person less than twenty-one years of age from knowingly transporting alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle if a person at least twenty-one years of age is present inside the motor vehicle. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. As part of the sentence, the person may be ordered to perform community service and undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. 
F.  Within thirty days after the conviction for a violation by the operator of a motor vehicle, which conviction has become final, the arresting law enforcement officer or the officer's superior may make a complaint before the court from which the warrant was issued. The complaint shall be under oath and shall describe the motor vehicle in which alcoholic liquor was possessed or transported by the operator, who is less than twenty-one years of age, in committing the violation and requesting that the motor vehicle be impounded as provided in this section. Upon the filing of the complaint, the court shall issue to the owner of the motor vehicle an order to show cause why the motor vehicle should not be impounded. The order to show cause shall fix a date and time for a hearing, which shall not be less than ten days after the issuance of the order. The order shall be served by delivering a true copy to the owner not less than three full days before the date of hearing or, if the owner cannot be located, by sending a true copy by certified mail to the last known address of the owner. If the owner is a nonresident of the state, service may be made upon the Secretary of State. If the court determines upon the hearing of the order to show cause, from competent and relevant evidence, that at the time of the commission of the violation the motor vehicle was being driven by the person less than twenty-one years of age with the express or implied consent or knowledge of the owner, and that the use of the motor vehicle is not needed by the owner in the direct pursuit of the owner's employment or the actual operation of the owner's business, the court may authorize the impounding of the vehicle for a period of not less than fifteen days or more than thirty days. The court's order authorizing the impounding of the vehicle shall authorize a law enforcement officer to take possession without other process of the motor vehicle wherever located and to store the vehicle in a public or private garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the vehicle. The owner of the vehicle may appeal the order to the circuit court and the provisions governing the taking of appeals from judgments for damages apply to the appeal. This section does not prevent a bona fide lienholder from exercising rights under a lien. A person who knowingly transfers title to a motor vehicle for the purpose of avoiding this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
G.  A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age allegedly violated this section, shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than forty-eight hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated this section is less than eighteen years of age and may be made in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.28.040 - Purchase by minors prohibited. 
A.  A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, a person under the age of 21 is deemed a "minor." A minor who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions: 
i.  For the first violation of this section, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, the minor is responsible for a civil infraction, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars, and shall be subject to the court orders described in subsection (A)(iv) and (D). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection (A)(i), MCL 436.1703(1)(a), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute. 
ii.  If a violation of subsection (i), MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, occurs after one (1) prior judgment for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (A)(vi), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than thirty days if the court finds that the person violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction; a fine of not more than two hundred dollars, or both; and the court orders described in subsections (A)(iv) and (D). A minor who pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of this subsection (A)(ii), may request deferral of proceedings and placement on probation under subsection (C). 
iii.  If a violation of subsection (A) of this section, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, occurs after two or more prior judgments for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (A)(vi), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than sixty days if the court finds that the person violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction; a fine of not more than five hundred, or both, as applicable; and the court orders described in subsections (A)(iv) and (D). 
iv.  The court may order a minor that is responsible for or guilty of a violation under this subsection (A) to: (1) participate in substance use disorder services as defined in MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, (2) perform community service, and (3) undergo substance abuse screening and assessment as provided in MCL 436.1703(5) and subsection (D), all of which shall be at the minor's own expense. 
v.  A minor that is subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsections (A)(ii) or (iii), may be ordered by court to submit to random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis, which may be requested by the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
vi.  For purposes of subsections (A)(ii) and (iii), "prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, or finding or admission of responsibility for a violation of the statutes listed in this subsection, or any federal or state law or local ordinance that substantially corresponds to any of those listed statutes: 
a.  This subsection (A) or MCL 436.1703(1). 
b.  A misdemeanor violation that is dismissed under subsection (C), MCL 436.1703(3), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute. 
c.  Section 9.28.050 or MCL 436.1701 (Sale/furnish alcohol to minors.) 
d.  MCL 436.1707 (Sale/service/furnish alcohol to intoxicated persons.) 
e.  MCL 257.624a (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle.) 
f.  Section 9.28.030 or MCL 257.624b (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle by minor.) 
g.  MCL 257.625 (Operating motor vehicle while intoxicated/impaired.) 
h.  MCL 324.80176 (Operating boat while under influence.) 
i.  MCL 324.81134 (Operating off-road vehicle while under influence.) 
j.  MCL 324.82127 (Operating snowmobile while under influence.) 
k.  MCL 750.167a (Hunting with firearm/weapon while intoxicated.) 
l.  MCL 750.237 (Carry/possess/use/discharge firearm while under influence.) 
B.  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or both. 
C.  If a minor pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of subsection (A)(ii), the court may defer further proceedings and place the minor on probation under MCL 436.1703(3), which provides for dismissal of the proceedings upon the terms and conditions of probation being fulfilled. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation or upon a finding that the individual is utilizing this section in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a conviction for purposes of subsection (A) of this section or juvenile adjudication for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under MCL 436.1703(3) as to an individual. The court shall maintain a non-public record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The Secretary of State shall retain a non-public record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. 
D.  The court may order the person found responsible for or convicted of violating subsection (A) to undergo screening and assessment to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
E.  The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsections (A)(ii), (A)(iii), or (B) of this section as provided in section 319 of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.319. 
F.  A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a police officer may seek to obtain a court order. A police officer may initiate municipal civil infraction or misdemeanor charges for a violation of subsection (A) based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction or criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
G.  The police department, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content, shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this section shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated is less than eighteen years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than seventeen years of age is incarcerated for violating, his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
H.  This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, as amended, by the State Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of that Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
I.  This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of this act. 
J.  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
K.  The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this act. 
L.  This section does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
i.  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
ii.  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
M.  The state police, the commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation. 
N.  In a municipal civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution for the violation concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
O.  "Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
i.  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
ii.  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-2011; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 2-16-2013; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1, 10-10-2017 ) 
9.28.050 - Sales to minors prohibited. 
A.  Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a minor. A person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a minor, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A retail licensee or a retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who violates this subsection shall be is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 6 months or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both, unless the violation is the result of an undercover operation in which the minor received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action. 
B.  If a violation occurs in an establishment that is licensed by the commission for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a person who is a licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person less than twenty-one years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action. 
C.  If the enforcing agency involved in the violation is the state police or a local police agency, a licensee shall not be charged with a violation unless all of the following occur, if applicable: 
i.  Enforcement action is taken against the minor who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed or attempted to consume, or possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor, unless the violation is the result of an undercover operation in which the minor purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action. 
ii.  Enforcement action is taken under this section against the person twenty-one years of age or older who is not the retail licensee or the retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who sold or furnished the alcoholic liquor to the minor. 
iii.  Enforcement action under this section is taken against the clerk, agent, or employee who directly sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the minor. 
D.  In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a minor, a motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license, a military identification card, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action brought under this section 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.28.060 - Social gatherings. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C), an owner, tenant or other person having control over any premises, residence, or other real property shall not knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person less than twenty-one years of age to attend a house party or hall party while having knowledge that alcohol or controlled substances are being sold, offered for sale, or dispensed to, or are being possessed by, minors, unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
C.  This section does not apply to the use, consumption, or possession of a controlled substance by an individual pursuant to a lawful prescription, or to the use, consumption, or possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor for religious purposes. 
D.  Except as provided in subsection (E), a person who violates subsection (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than thirty days or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
E.  For a second or subsequent violation of subsection (A) the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
F.  Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the defendant allowed the consumption or possession of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance on or within a premises, residence, or other real property, in violation of this section: 
i.  The defendant had control over the premises, residence or other real property; 
ii.  The defendant knew that a minor was consuming or in possession of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property; 
iii.  The defendant failed to take corrective action. For purposes of this section, "corrective action" means any of the following: 
1.  Making a prompt demand that the minor or other individual depart from the premises, residence, or other real property, or refrain from the unlawful possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or controlled substance on or within that premises, residence or other real property, and taking additional action as described herein if the minor or other individual does not comply with the request; or 
2.  Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor or controlled substance to a law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the violation; or 
3.  Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor or controlled substance to another person having a greater degree of authority or control over the conduct of persons on or within the premises, residence or other real property. 
G.  This section does not authorize selling or furnishing an alcoholic beverage to a minor. 
H.  A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense arising from the same conduct 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.28.070 - Appearance tickets. 
    A peace officer or law enforcement officer, or an inspector of the commission who witnesses a violation of this ordinance, may stop and detain a person and obtain satisfactory identification, seize illegally possessed alcoholic liquor, and issue an appearance ticket as prescribed in section 9c of chapter IV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Chapter 9.32 - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND PARAPHERNALIA[7] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.32, §§ 9.32.010-9.32.080, in its entirety. Former Ch. 9.32 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 144, §§ 1-4, 1989; Ord. No. 145, §§ 1-4, 1989. 

Article I. - In General 

9.32.010 - Chemical agents. 
A.  "Chemical agent" means any substance containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the property of releasing toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited to, glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon derivatives. 
B.  Any person who, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical agent or intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any chemical agent into his respiratory or circulatory system, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or both. This shall not prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes 
C.  Any person who sells or otherwise distributes to another person any device that contains any quantity of nitrous oxide or sells or otherwise distributes a device to dispense nitrous oxide for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or nervous system, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or both. This subsection does not apply to nitrous oxide that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for human consumption or to any of the following: 
i.  A person licensed under the food processing act of 1977, 1978 PA 328, MCL 289.801 to 289.810, or chapter VII of the food law of 2000, 2000 PA 92, MCL 289.7101 to 289.7137, who sells or otherwise distributes the device as a grocery product. 
ii.  A person engaged in the business of selling or distributing catering supplies only or food processing equipment only, or selling or distributing compressed gases for industrial or medical use who sells or otherwise distributes the device in the course of that business. 
iii.  A pharmacist, pharmacist intern, or pharmacy as defined in section 17707 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17707, who dispenses the device in the course of his or her duties as a pharmacist or pharmacist intern or as a pharmacy. 
iv.  A health care professional. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.32.020 - Dispensing, selling, or giving product to individual less than eighteen years of age. 
A.  A person shall not dispense, sell, or otherwise give to an individual less than eighteen years of age a food product or a dietary supplement containing ephedrine, if the food product or dietary supplement meets all of the following criteria: 
i.  It contains, per dosage unit or serving, not more than the lesser of twenty-five milligrams of ephedrine alkaloids or the maximum amount of ephedrine alkaloids provided in applicable regulations adopted by the United States food and drug administration and contains no other controlled substance. 
ii.  It contains no hydrochloride or sulfate salts of ephedrine alkaloids. 
iii.  It is packaged with a prominent label securely affixed to each package that states the amount in milligrams of ephedrine in a serving or dosage unit; the amount of the food product or dietary supplement that constitutes a serving or dosage unit; that the maximum recommended dosage of ephedrine for a healthy adult human is the lesser of one hundred milligrams in a twenty-four-hour period or the maximum recommended dosage or period of use provided in applicable regulations adopted by the United States food and drug administration; and that improper use of the product may be hazardous to a person's health. 
B.  This section does not apply to a physician or pharmacist who prescribes, dispenses, administers, or delivers a product described in Subsection (A) to an individual less than eighteen years of age, to a parent or guardian of an individual less than eighteen years of age who delivers the product to the individual, or to a person authorized by the individual's parent or legal guardian who dispenses or delivers the product to the individual. 
C.  In the course of selling, offering for sale, or otherwise distributing a product described in Subsection (A), a person shall not advertise or represent in any manner that the product causes euphoria, ecstasy, a "buzz" or "high", or an altered mental state, heightens sexual performance, or, because it contains ephedrine alkaloids, increases muscle mass. 
D.  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.32.030 - Drug paraphernalia. 
A.  "Drug paraphernalia" means any equipment, product, material, or combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting; manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing; testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing; injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the following: 
i.  An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance. 
ii.  Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance. 
iii.  A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance. 
iv.  A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed for use with a controlled substance. 
v.  A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana. 
vi.  An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body. 
vii.  A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
viii.  A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances. 
ix.  A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade and a mirror. 
x.  A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user. 
xi.  A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose. 
xii.  A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled substances. 
xiii.  A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body. 
B.  Subject to subsection (C), a person who sells or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, knowing that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance, shall be is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to: 
i.  An object sold or offered for sale to a person licensed under the Public Health Code of Michigan, or the Occupational Code, 1980 PA 299, MCL 339.101 to 339.2721, or any intern, trainee, apprentice, or assistant in a profession licensed under the Public Health Code or the Occupational Code for use in that profession. 
ii.  An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital, sanitarium, clinical laboratory, or other health care institution including a penal, correctional, or juvenile detention facility for use in that institution. 
iii.  An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in medical, dental, surgical, or pharmaceutical supplies. 
iv.  A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device not specifically designed for a prohibited use. 
v.  A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale for the purpose of injecting or otherwise treating livestock or other animals. 
vi.  An object sold, offered for sale, or given away by a state or local governmental agency or by a person specifically authorized by a state or local governmental agency to prevent the transmission of infectious agents. 
C.  Before a person is arrested for a violation of Subsection (B), the prosecuting attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less than two business days before the person is to be arrested, that the person is in possession of specific, defined material that has been determined by the attorney general or prosecuting attorney to be drug paraphernalia. The notice also shall request that the person refrain from selling or offering for sale the material and shall state that if the person complies with the notice, no arrest will be made. If the person complies with that notice, the compliance is a complete defense for the person against a prosecution, as long as the compliance continues. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Article II. - Synthetic Marijuana and Dangerous Products 

9.32.040 - Findings, intent and purpose. 
A.  The city finds that synthetic marijuana, consisting of plant or other material treated with chemicals or other substances that have not been approved for human consumption, is being marketed and sold as herbal incense and is being used in the same manner and for the same purposes as marijuana, with that use having become increasingly popular, particularly among teens and young adults. 
B.  The city further finds based on information and reports from poison control centers, hospitals, emergency room doctors, and police agencies, that individuals who use synthetic marijuana experience dangerous side effects including convulsions, tremors, seizures, hallucinations, unconsciousness, anxiety attacks, dangerously elevated heart rates, increased blood pressure, vomiting, and disorientation, evidencing that these herbal incense products are harmful if consumed and present an imminent and significant public health danger to persons consuming such products and other persons coming in contact with them. 
C.  The city further finds that, notwithstanding the high potential for abuse, and lack of any accepted medical use, the ability of the state to prohibit all forms of synthetic marijuana as a controlled substance has been frustrated due to the changing nature of the chemicals used in the manufacturing process. 
D.  The city further finds that in addition to synthetic marijuana, there may be other products or materials containing chemicals or substances, that while not approved for human consumption, are or may be marketed and sold in a form that allows for such consumption and which, upon consumption, may result in the same serious side effects and public health dangers as synthetic marijuana. 
E.  Based on these findings, this ordinance is adopted for the purpose and with the intent to protect the public health and safety of the city and it residents from the threat posed by the availability and use of synthetic marijuana and other dangerous products by prohibiting persons from trafficking in, possessing, and using them in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
9.32.041 - Definitions and adoption by reference. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings indicated. 
    "Act" means the controlled substances provisions in Article 7 of the Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7101 to MCL 333.7545, as amended, which is hereby adopted by reference as a part of this division. 
    "Chemical agent" means any chemical or organic compound, substance, or agent that is not made, intended and approved for consumption by humans. 
    "Consumable product or material" means a product or material, that regardless of packaging disclaimers or disclosures that it is not for human consumption or use, is in a form that readily allows for human consumption by inhalation, ingestion, injection, or application, through means including but not limited to smoking, or ingestion by mouth with or without mixing with food or drink. 
    "Controlled substance" means a substance included as a controlled substance in schedules 1 through 5 of the Act or a substance temporarily scheduled or rescheduled as a controlled substance as provided in the Act. 
    "Controlled substance analogue" has the same meaning as defined in the Act, which is a substance, the chemical structure of which is substantially similar to that of a controlled substance in schedules 1 and 2 of the Act. 
    "Dangerous product" means a consumable product or material containing a dangerous substance. 
    "Dangerous substance" means: (i) a chemical agent that under section 2451 of the Act, MCL 333.2451, has been determined by the local health officer to be or present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans when present in a consumable product or material; and, (ii) a chemical agent in a consumable product or material unless that chemical agent is conspicuously identified and described in writing on the packaging of the product, and has not been previously determined by the city or other governmental authority to be or present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans when present in that type of consumable product or material. 
    "Synthetic cannabinoid" means a chemical compound, substance or agent identified in the Synthetic Cannabinoid Appendix that is part of this division, as amended from time to time by Resolution of the City Council. 
    "Synthetic marijuana" means a consumable product or material that contains a synthetic cannabinoid or other dangerous substance, which on the date this division was added to the Code, included herb and herbal incense products marketed and most commonly known as K-2 and Spice. 
    "Traffic" and "trafficking" means to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, transfer, or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, or transfer. 
    "Transfer" means to dispose of a controlled substance to another person without consideration and not in furtherance of commercial distribution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
9.32.042 - Trafficking prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to traffic, or knowingly allow trafficking on property owned or controlled by that person, in any of the following: 
A.  A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance or controlled substance analogue. 
B.  A dangerous product. 
C.  Synthetic marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
9.32.043 - Possession and use prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use, or knowingly allow the possession and use on property owned or controlled by that person, of any of the following: 
A.  A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance or controlled substance analogue. 
B.  A dangerous product. 
C.  Synthetic marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
9.32.044 - Probable cause evidentiary presumption. 
    In recognition that the presence of a controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, synthetic cannabinoid, or dangerous substance in a consumable product or material may require laboratory testing that can not be done at the time a violation of this article is believed to have occurred, for purposes of determining the existence of probable cause, it shall be presumed that a consumable product or material contains one or more of those substances if it is being or has been marketed or sold for a price that is substantially higher than the price at which the same quantity of a similar and comparable product or material that is known to not contain such substances can be purchased. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
9.32.045 - Penalties. 
    The sanction for a violation of this article shall be as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars and/or imprisonment for not more than ninety days as provided in Section 7.5 of the Wixom City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
9.32.046 - Synthetic cannabinoid appendix. 
    Synthetic cannabinoids include all of the following chemical compounds, substances and agents. 
    "AM Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents created by Alexandros Makriyannis or his research group and identified as AM-087; AM-251; AM-281; AM-356; AM-374; AM-381; AM-404; AM-411; AM-630; AM-661; AM-678; AM-679; AM-694; AM-855; AM-881; AM-883; AM-905; AM-906; AM-919; AM-926; AM-938; AM-1116; AM-1172; AM-1220; AM-1221; AM-1235; AM-1241; AM-1248; AM-2201; AM-2212; AM-2213; AM-2232; AM-2233; AM-2102; AM-4030; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
    "CP Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents identified as CP-47, 497; (C6)-CP-47, 497; (C7)-CP-47, 497; (C8)-CP-47, 497; (C9)-CP-47, 497; CP-50, 556-1; CP-55, 244; CP-55, 940; CP-945, 598; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
    "HU Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents synthesized at the Hebrew University and identified as HU-210; HU-211; HU-243; HU-308; HU-320; HU-331; HU-336; HU-345; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
    "JWH Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents created by John W. Huffman or his research group and identified as JWH-007; JWH-015; JWH-018; JWH-019; JWH-030; JWH-047; JWH-048; JWH-051; JWH-057; JWH-073; JWH-081; JWH-098; JWH-116; JWH-120; JWH-122; JWH-133; JWH-139; JWH-147; JWH-148; JWH-149; JWH-161; JWH-164; JWH-166; JWH-167; JWH-171; JWH-175; JWH-176; JWH-181; JWH-182; JWH-184; JWH-185; JWH-192; JWH-193; JWH-194; JWH-195; JWH-196; JWH-197; JWH-198; JWH-199; JWH-200; JWH-203; JWH-205; JWH-210; JWH-213; JWH-229; JWH-234; JWH-249; JWH 250; JWH-251; JWH-253; JWH-258; JWH-300; JWH-302; JWH-307; JWH-336; JWH-350; JWH-359; JWH-387; JWH-398; JWH-424; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
Article III. - Possession of Marijuana 

9.32.050 - Possession of marijuana. 
A.  Except as authorized by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess marijuana. 
B.  When a person who has not been previously convicted of an offense under Section 9.32.050 or any law of the United States or any other state, or any ordinance relating to controlled substances, pleads guilty to use or possession of marijuana, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation upon terms and conditions that shall include, but are not limited to, payment of a probation supervision program, community service, fines and costs and all other conditions determined by the court. Upon violation of a term or condition, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without an adjudication of guilt and except as provided in Subsection (C)2 is not a conviction for purposes of this section. A person is not eligible for adjudication under this section if the person has previously received a dismissal under this section, MCL 333.7411, or any other statute or ordinance for a controlled substance offense. 
C.  The Records and Identifications Division of the Department of State Police shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge of dismissal under this section. This record shall be published to any or all of the following: 
1.  To a court, police agency, or prosecuting attorney upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action involving possession or use of a controlled substance has already utilized this section for a dismissal of a controlled substance offense. 
2.  To a court, police agency, or prosecuting attorney upon request for the purpose of determining whether the defendant in a subsequent criminal action is eligible for discharge of dismissal of proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
Chapter 9.36 - GLUE SALES AND USE RESTRICTIONS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-18, § 1, adopted March 22, 2011, repealed former Ch. 36, §§ 9.36.010-9.36.060, in its entirety which pertained to model glue sales and derived from Ord. No. 66, §§ 1-6, adopted in 1968. 

Chapter 9.40 - FIREARMS[9] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.40, §§ 9.40.010-9.40.100, in its entirety and enacted new provisions a herein set out. Former Ch. 9.40 derived from Ord. No. 58,, §§ 2-5, 1965; Ord. No. 88, §§ 31-34, 91; 1972; Ord. No. 58A-2, § 3, 1984. 

9.40.010 - Prohibition of discharge. 
    Unless otherwise permitted by law or stated herein, there shall be no discharge of any rim-fire hand-gun, rifle, or other weapon, or center-fire rifle or hand-gun allowed within the City's limits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the activities of organizations operating in accordance with Public Act 269 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1989, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.020 - Careless, reckless or negligent use of firearms. 
    Any person who, because of carelessness, recklessness or negligence, but not wilfully or wantonly, shall cause or allow any firearm under his control to be discharged so as to destroy or injure the property of another, real or personal, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.030 - Reckless, wanton use or negligent discharge of firearm. 
    Any person who shall recklessly or heedlessly or wilfully or wantonly use, carry, handle or discharge any firearm without due caution and circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.040 - Pointing or aiming firearm at another person. 
A.  A person who intentionally but without malice points or aims a firearm at or toward another person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
B.  This section does not apply to a peace officer of this state or another state, or of a local unit of government of this state or another state, or of the United States, performing his or her duties as a peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.050 - Brandishing firearm in public. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (B), a person who knowingly brandishes a firearm in public, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
B.  Subsection (A) does not apply to any of the following: 
i.  A peace officer lawfully performing his or her duties as a peace officer. 
ii.  A person lawfully engaged in hunting. 
iii.  A person lawfully engaged in target practice. 
iv.  A person lawfully engaged in the sale, purchase, repair, or transfer of that firearm. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.060 - Hunting and trapping. 
A.  Shotguns may be discharged for the purpose of hunting, and bow-hunting is permitted on land parcels of fifteen (15) acres or more. 
B.  Trapping is permitted on parcels of ten (10) acres or more. 
C.  Persons hunting or trapping must have written permission of the property owner on her/his person while hunting or trapping unless he/she is the property owner. Evidence of written property owner permission must be signed and dated by the property owner of record and have a date within three months of when a person is hunting or trapping. 
D.  No hunting, trapping or discharge of a shotgun or bow for any reason shall occur within four hundred fifty feet of any building or adjoining land without the written permission of the owner and occupant of this safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.070 - Transporting or possessing firearms. 
A.  Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person who transports or possesses in or upon a sailboat or a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, or any other vehicle propelled by mechanical means, a firearm, other than a hand-gun, which is loaded, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person who transports or possess in or upon a motor vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle designed for land travel a firearm, other than a hand-gun, is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the firearm is unloaded and is 1 or more of the following: 
i.  Taken down. 
ii.  Enclosed in a case. 
iii.  Carried in the trunk of the vehicle. 
iv.  Inaccessible from the interior of the vehicle. 
C.  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
i.  A peace officer of an authorized police agency of the United States, of this state, or of a political subdivision of this state, who is regularly employed and paid by the United States, this state, or a political subdivision of this state. 
ii.  A person who is regularly employed by the state department of corrections and who is authorized in writing by the director of the department of corrections to carry a concealed weapon while in the official performance of his or her duties or while going to or returning from those duties. 
iii.  A person employed by a private vendor that operates a youth correctional facility authorized under section 20g of 1953 PA 232, MCL 791.220g, who meets the same criteria established by the director of the state department of corrections for departmental employees described in subdivision (b) and who is authorized in writing by the director of the department of corrections to carry a concealed weapon while in the official performance of his or her duties or while going to or returning from those duties. 
iv.  A member of the United States Army, Air Force, Navy, or Marine Corps or the United States Coast Guard while carrying weapons in the line of or incidental to duty. 
v.  An organization authorized by law to purchase or receive weapons from the United States or from this state. 
vi.  A member of the national guard, armed forces reserve, the United States coast guard reserve, or any other authorized military organization while on duty or drill, or in going to or returning from a place of assembly or practice, while carrying weapons used for a purpose of the national guard, armed forces reserve, United States coast guard reserve, or other duly authorized military organization. 
vii.  A security employee employed by the state and granted limited arrest powers under section 6c of 1935 PA 59, MCL 28.6c. 
viii.  A motor carrier officer appointed under section 6d of 1935 PA 59, MCL 28.6d. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.080 - Selling firearms and ammunition. 
A.  A person who knowingly sells a hand-gun without complying with section 2 of Act No. 372 of the Public Acts of 1927, as amended, being section 28.422 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninetydays, or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or both. 
B.  A person who knowingly sells a firearm more than thirty inches in length to a person under eighteen years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
9.40.090 - Use by police. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent regular policemen, special policemen and auxiliary policemen from using an open-air range in the city or elsewhere for the purpose of target practice. Such activity shall be subject to the control and discretion of the chief of police as to scheduling the time and determining the location for such target practice and in all other respects 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Chapter 9.44 - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-10, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 9.44, §§ 9.44.010-9.44.080, in its enitrety which pertained to housing discrimination and derived from Ord.No. 107, parts I-III, adopted in 1978. 

Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE AND UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 10.04, §§ 10.04.010-10.04.060, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 10.004 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 05-02, § 2, adopted in 2005. 

10.04.010 - Michigan Vehicle Code, amendments and revisions adopted. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective in this State are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
10.04.020 - References in Michigan Vehicle Code. 
    References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Wixom. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
10.04.030 - Michigan Vehicle Code penalties. 
    Violations of any code or regulation adopted in this chapter for which the maximum period of imprisonment exceeds ninety-three days shall not be enforced by the city as an ordinance violation; except for a violation of MCL 257.625(1)(c), which the city adopts by reference in Section 10.04.030 of the City Code of Ordinances in conformity with the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended, and which shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: community service for not more than three hundred sixty hours, imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty days, and a fine of not less than two hundred dollars or more than seven hundred dollars. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-8-2011; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-16-2013) 
10.04.040 - Uniform Traffic Code, amendments and revisions adopted. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, 1956 PA 62, MCL 257.951 to 257.955, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. The Uniform Traffic Code has been promulgated by the Director of the Department of State Police in compliance with the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
10.04.050 - References in Uniform Traffic Code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Wixom. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
10.04.060 - Uniform Traffic Code penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 3-8-2011) 
Chapter 10.16 - SNOWMOBILES[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-14, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 10.16, §§ 10.16.010-10.16.120, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 10.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 86, §§ 2-8, 10, 1972. 

10.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the operation and use of snowmobiles within the City of Wixom for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents, property owners, visitors and others within the city, and is adopted under the authority of Part 821 of Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, as amended to the date of the adoption of the within ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, § 1, 3-8-11) 
10.16.020 - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in the within ordinance, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Operator" means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
B.  "Owner" means any of the following: 
1.  A person who holds the legal title of a snowmobile. 
2.  A vendee or lessee of the snowmobile which is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and within an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee. 
3.  A person renting a snowmobile or having the exclusive use of a snowmobile for more than thirty days. 
C.  "Operate" means to ride in or on and to be in actual physical control of the operation of the snowmobile. 
D.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, the state or any of its agencies or subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not. 
E.  "Snowmobile" means any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice or a type which utilizes sled-type runners or skis, or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated. It is not a vehicle that must be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code, PA 300 of 1949, as amended, (MCL 257.1, et seq.) 
F.  "Dealer" means any person engaged in the sale, lease or rental of snowmobiles as a regular business. 
G.  "Highway or street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained where any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
H.  "Roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designated or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term roadway refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
I.  "Right-of-way" means that portion of a highway less the roadway and any shoulder. 
J.  "Shoulder" means that portion of a highway on either side of the roadway that is normally snowplowed for the safety and convenience of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, § 1, 3-8-11) 
10.16.030 - Regulations. 
    No person shall operate and no owner or dealer shall permit the operation of any snowmobile under the following conditions, circumstances or at the following locations: 
A.  Upon a public highway, land used as a street, or on a public or private parking lot not specifically designed for the use of snowmobiles, except under the following conditions and circumstances, pursuant to MCL 324.82119: 
1.  A snowmobile may be operated on the right-of-way of a public highway, except a limited access highway, if it is operated at the extreme right of the open portion of the right-of-way and with the flow of traffic on the highway. However, a snowmobile may be operated on the right-of-way of a public highway against the flow of traffic if the right-of-way is a snowmobile trail designated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources pursuant to MCL 324.82106(2). Snowmobiles operated on the right-of-way of a public highway, as provided in this subdivision, shall travel single file and shall not be operated abreast except when overtaking and passing another snowmobile. In the absence of a posted snowmobile speed limit, a snowmobile operated on the right-of-way of a public highway, as provided in this subdivision, shall be limited to the speed limit posted on the public highway. 
2.  A snowmobile may be operated on the roadway or shoulder when necessary to cross a bridge or culvert if the snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before entering onto the roadway or shoulder and the driver yields the right-of-way to an approaching vehicle on the highway. 
3.  A snowmobile may be operated across a public highway other than a limited access highway, at right angles to the highway, for the purpose of getting from one area to another when the operation can be done in safety and another vehicle is not crossing the highway at the same time in the same general area. An operator shall bring his/her snowmobile to a complete stop before proceeding across the public highway and shall yield the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic. 
4.  Snowmobiles may be operated on a highway in a county road system that is not normally snowplowed for vehicular traffic and on the plowed right-of-way or shoulder when no right-of-way exists on a snowplowed highway in the county road system, outside the corporate limits of a city or village, that is designated and marked for snowmobile use by the County Road Commission having jurisdiction. 
5.  A duly constituted law enforcement officer of a local unit of government or the state may authorize use of a snowmobile on a public highway or street within his/her jurisdiction when an emergency occurs and conventional motor vehicles cannot be used for transportation due to snow or other extreme highway conditions. 
6.  A snowmobile may be operated on a highway or street for a special event of limited duration conducted according to a prearranged schedule only under permit from the city. The event may be conducted on the frozen surface of public waters only under permit from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
B.  On private property not owned, leased or under the control of the operator unless the operator has the express consent of the owner, lessee, or other person in control of said property, except in case of an emergency when other means of travel are not feasible or possible. 
C.  On public school grounds, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, golf courses and other public lands (other than state-owned lands where such operation is authorized by statute) without the express consent of the public authority in charge of such lands or premises, except where such operation is absolutely necessary in an emergency when other means of travel are not feasible or possible. 
D.  At a speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard for conditions then existing. 
E.  While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or both. 
F.  During the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise without displaying a lighted head light and a lighted tail light. 
G.  In any forest nursery, planting area, or public lands posted or reasonably identifiable as an area of forest reproduction when growing stock may be damaged or as a natural dedicated area. 
H.  On the frozen surface of public waters within one hundred feet of a person, including but not limited to a skater, not in or upon a snowmobile, or within one hundred feet of a fishing shanty or shelter, except at the minimum speed required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile or on an area which has been cleared of snow for skating purposes unless the area is necessary for access to the frozen public water. 
I.  Unless the snowmobile is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation from which noise emission at fifty feet at right angles from the vehicle path under full throttle does not exceed eighty-six DBA (decibels on the "A" scale) on a sound meter having characteristics defined by American Standards Association S1, 4-1966 "General Purpose Sound Meter." 
J.  Within one hundred feet of a dwelling between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., at a speed greater than minimum required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile. 
K.  In or upon premises which are fenced, otherwise enclosed in a manner to exclude intruders, posted in a conspicuous manner or when notice against trespass is personally communicated to the operator by the owner of the premises or other authorized persons. 
L.  In any area on which public hunting is permitted during the season open to the taking of deer with firearms from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except during an emergency, for lawful enforcement purposes, to go to and from a permanent residence or a hunting camp otherwise inaccessible by a conventional wheeled vehicle or for the conduct of necessary work functions involving land and timber survey, communication and transmission line patrol and timber harvest operations, or on the operator's own property or as an invited guest of an owner or person in control of said property. 
M.  While transporting thereon a bow, unless unstrung or encased, or a firearm, unless unloaded in both barrel and magazine and securely encased. 
N.  On or across a cemetery or burial ground. 
O.  Within one hundred feet of a slide, ski, or skating area except when traveling on a county road right-of-way pursuant to MCL 324.82119 or a snowmobile trail that is designated and funded by the department. A snowmobile may enter such an area for the purpose of servicing the area or for medical emergencies. 
P.  On a railroad or railroad right-of-way, except for railroad, public utility or law enforcement personnel while in the performance of their duties. 
Q.  Unless it has at least one head light, one tail light and adequate brakes capable of stopping the snowmobile on packed snow, carrying an operator weighing one hundred and seventy-five pounds or more in not more than forty feet from an initial steady speed of twenty miles per hour or unless it has operable mechanisms capable of locking the snowmobile's traction belt or belts. 
R.  At any time for use in hunting, pursuing, worrying or killing a wild bird or animal. 
S.  Operators of a snowmobile shall comply with the following conditions, limitations and restrictions with respect to age: 
1.  No person under the age of twelve shall operate a snowmobile except under the direct supervision of an adult and when on land owned or under the control of such adult. 
2.  No person between the ages of twelve and sixteen may operate a snowmobile unless such operator is under the direct supervision of a person who is twenty-one years of age or older; or the operator has in his/her immediate possession a snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to MCL 324.82107, or the operator possesses a snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to a law of another state or province of Canada; or the operator is operating the same upon land owned or under the control of the operator's parent or legal guardian. 
3.  No person between the ages of twelve and sixteen years shall operate a snowmobile across a highway or street unless the operator has in his/her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued to the operator. 
4.  Any person who operates a snowmobile who is less than sixteen years of age in violation of the within ordinance may, upon reporting of such violation to the Director of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources by any judge of a juvenile court (after trial or acceptance of plea of guilty), have his/her snowmobile safety certificate forthwith suspended by said director. 
5.  No owner of a snowmobile nor parent or legal guardian of a person under the age of sixteen shall permit the use of a snowmobile by such person in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, § 1, 3-8-11) 
10.16.040 - Enforcement. 
    Any police officer, peace officer or ordinance enforcement officer of the city is authorized to issue appearance tickets for violations of the within ordinance pursuant to the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, PA 175 of 1927, as amended, (MCL 764.9c). In any proceedings involving a violation of this act, the registration number displayed on a snowmobile shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the said snowmobile was the person operating the same at the time of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, § 1, 3-8-11) 
Chapter 10.20 - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-15, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, repealed former Ch. 10.20, §§ 10.20.010-10.20.190, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 10.20 pertained to vehicle size and weight limits and derived from Ord. No. 143, §§ 1.01-16.01, adopted in 1989. 

10.20.010 - Motor Carrier Safety Act, amendments and revisions adopted. 
    The Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to 480.25, and all future amendments and revisions to the Motor Carrier Safety Act when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2011-15, § 1, 3-8-11) 
10.20.020 - References in Motor Carrier Safety Act. 
    References in the Motor Carrier Safety Act to township, city, village, county, or another state agency shall mean the City of Wixom. 
(Ord. No. 2011-15, § 1, 3-8-11) 
10.20.030 - Motor Carrier Safety Act penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Motor Carrier Safety Act are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2011-15, § 1, 3-8-11) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
  
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.00 - GENERAL 
Sections: 

12.00.005 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this title is to control and provide a sound but reasonable basis for public improvements and private improvements affecting the public within the city by requiring proper provisions for the use and access of public and private facilities in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and general welfare of the city. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.00.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    "Department" means the city department of public services. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as director, the city manager or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Street" means all the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alley and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefore where the same are not yet constructed. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.00.020 - Authority of department of public services director re additional regulations. 
    In addition to the regulations set forth herein, the director may from time to time make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in public rights-of-way, streets, curbcuts, street obstructions and house moving, all of which shall be subject to city council approval. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.00.030 - Removal of encroachments- 
    Recovery of expenses. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street or road right-of-way may be removed by the city and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting landowner when made or permitted by or suffered to remain by such landowner otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this title. Unpaid charges incurred pursuant to this section shall be a lien against the subject property. Enforcement of this lien shall be made pursuant to city ordinances or under any applicable statute. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.00.040 - Temporary street closings. 
    The director shall have the authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when the director deems such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. The director shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on such street indicating that the same is closed to public travel. No person shall drive any vehicle upon or over such street except as may be necessary incidental to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier pursuant to this title without authority from the director. The director shall notify the city manager of all temporary street closures prior to same. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.00.050 - Vacating streets. 
A.  Whenever the city council shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any right-of-way, road, street or alley, or any part thereof, it shall so declare by resolution. In the same resolution the council shall appoint a time when it will meet and hear objections thereto. 
B.  Notice of such meeting shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than thirty days before the time appointed for such meeting. Notice shall be given by first class mail to owners of all property abutting such right-of-way, road, street or alley, or any part thereof, as shown upon the assessment rolls of the city. 
C.  If after such hearing the council shall determine to vacate, discontinue or abolish such right-of-way, road, street or alley, or any part thereof, it shall do so by resolution. The council may reserve an easement for public or private utility purposes within the right-of-way of any road, street or alley vacated, discontinued or abolished, and may by resolution extinguish any such easement whenever such easement ceases to be used for such utility purposes. Passage of a resolution to vacate shall require the affirmative vote of at least four members of council. 
D.  The application and permit forms shall be obtained upon application to the department upon such forms as the director shall prescribe. An application fee shall be paid by petitioner in an amount as established by resolution by the city council. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.00.060 - Enforcement. 
    Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The City Council, in addition to other remedies may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.00.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Chapter 12.02 - STREETS 
Sections: 

12.02.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    "Department" means the city department of public service. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as director, the city manager or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Street" means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.020 - Damage, obstructions prohibited-Exceptions. 
    No person shall make an excavation in or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in the chapter. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this chapter, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit the following: 
A.  Such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises; 
B.  The lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic; 
C.  The planting of trees and shrubs, or placing any other installation therein when and as specifically authorized by any provision of this code. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.030 - Permits, bonds and deposits. 
A.  Where permits are authorized in this chapter, they shall be obtained upon application to the department upon such forms as the director shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge provided by resolution of the council. Such permit shall be revocable by the director for failure to comply with this chapter, rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, and the lawful orders of the director or the director's duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. 
B.  Liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit and shall be in not less than the amounts as provided by resolution of the council. A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy shall be filed with the department. 
C.  Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit under this chapter, such deposit shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the council, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.040 - Inspection. 
    Either full- or part-time inspection will be required by the director pursuant to this chapter. Fees for these inspections shall be paid by the permittee in such amounts as established by resolution of the council. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.050 - Street options generally-Permit. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the department. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by this chapter. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.060 - Emergency openings. 
    The director may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this chapter shall be complied with. The director shall notify the city manager of all street openings prior to same. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.070 - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public right-of-way, public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulation adopted pursuant to the city engineering design standards. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.080 - Placement of utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the director shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the director. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the director shall from time to time direct. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.090 - Maintenance of installations in street. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any property hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation, or post, pole, sign, awning, wire, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon any right-of-way, street or other public place which is adjacent to or part of the property shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on such person's part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during such person's ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the City against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the right-of-way, street or other public place, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.100 - Enforcement. 
    Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city council, in addition to other remedies may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.02.110 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Chapter 12.03 - CURBCUTS 
Sections: 

12.03.010 - Permit required. 
    No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the department of public services. Curbcuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and the city engineering design standards. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.03.020 - Width of driveways. 
    The minimum width of a driveway approach at the sidewalk line shall be per the City engineering design standards. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.03.030 - Distance from crosswalks. 
    The minimum distance between any curbcut and a public crosswalk shall be per the city engineering design standards. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.03.040 - Distance between curbcuts. 
    The minimum distance between curbcuts, except those serving residential property, shall be determined on an individual basis by the department. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.03.050 - Size of sidewalk driveway crossings. 
    The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway crossing permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise shall be per the city engineering design standards. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.03.060 - Adjustments to public improvements and installations. 
    The adjustments made necessary by curbcuts to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.03.070 - Enforcement. 
    Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city council, in addition to other remedies may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.03.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(§ 3 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Chapter 12.04 - SIDEWALKS AND BIKE PATHS 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    "Department" means the city department of public services. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as director, the city manager or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Major roads" means roadways defined as city major streets, county primary roads, and state trunk lines in accordance with Act 51 of the Public Acts of 1951, as amended. 
    "Owner" means any of the following: 
1.  The person to whom the real property is assessed on the city tax roll; 
2.  The person in the process of developing property for use and constructing sidewalks as a part of common improvements to the development and who has not released the responsibility of maintenance of those improvements to an established homeowner or association; 
3.  The association of homeowners or owners having the responsibility for the maintenance and repair of common areas of a residential development. 
    "Sidewalk" means the portion of the street right-of-way designed and improved for pedestrian and nonmotorized travel. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.020 - Adherence to specifications- Permit required. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established by the director nor without first obtaining a written permit from the department, except that sidewalk repairs on less than fifty square feet of sidewalk may be made without a permit. The written permit shall be prominently displayed on the construction site. The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the council. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.030 - Line and grade stakes. 
    The permittee shall provide to the department approved line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of work under this chapter. This shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the line and grade approved by the director. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.040 - Construction and maintenance specifications. 
    Sidewalks shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and specifications as established by the director and approved by the city council. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.050 - Permit revocation. 
    Sidewalks shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and specifications as established by the director and approved by the city council. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.060 - Obstructions. 
    The owner and/or occupant of every lot or premises adjoining any street, or the owner of such lot or premises, if same are not occupied, shall clear and keep clear all sidewalks adjoining such lot or premises from any obstructions including, but not limited to, structures, vehicles, materials, debris, vegetation, snow, ice or other similar items. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.070 - Maintenance. 
    No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by such person to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.080 - Sidewalks needing repair-Notice to property owner-Repair by city. 
A.  Whenever the city determines that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon such sidewalk of the city's determination. Such notice shall be given in accordance with subsection C of this section. Thereafter, is shall be the duty of the owner to place the sidewalk in a safe condition. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than ten days, within which such work shall be completed. 
B.  If the owner of such lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to repair the sidewalk within the time limit therefor, or in a manner otherwise than in accordance with this chapter, the city shall have the sidewalk repaired. If the city determines that the condition of the sidewalk is such that immediate repair is necessary to protect the public, the city may dispense with the notice and institute the repairs immediately. In any event, the cost of repairs under this chapter shall be charged against the premises which adjoins the sidewalk and shall be paid by the owner of the premises. Unpaid charges incurred pursuant to this section shall be a lien against the subject property. Enforcement of this lien shall be made pursuant to city ordinances or under any applicable statute. 
C.  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs shall be served in the following manner: 
1.  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at the owner's residence, office or place of business; 
2.  By mailing the notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his or her last known address; or 
3.  If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least fifteen days before the required work shall be completed. No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city official, unless permission is given by such officer to remove the notice. (§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.090 - Sidewalks located on major roads. 
    The chapter shall not apply to sidewalks located along major roads. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.091 - Sidewalks required. 
A.  Concrete paved sidewalks not less than five feet wide shall be required in all subdivisions, site condominium subdivisions, cluster housing developments, and planned residential developments within the city. 
B.  Concrete paved sidewalks shall be required along all access drives in multiple family developments. 
C.  Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the engineering design standards of the city. (§ 2 of Ord. dated 10-28-97) 
12.04.092 - Bike paths required. 
A.  Concrete paved bike paths shall be required in all subdivisions, site condominium subdivisions, cluster housing developments, planned residential developments, commercial, industrial, and residential sites within the city in accordance with the Wixom master bike path plan. 
B.  Bike paths shall be constructed in accordance with the engineering design standards of the city and shall not be less than six feet wide except as follows: 
1.  Concrete paved bike paths not less than eight feet wide shall be required where mandated by a superseding public agency or governmental entity. 
2.  Concrete paved bike paths with a minimum width of five feet may be allowed where an appeal is brought to the department of public services citing the specific reasons and supporting documentation therefore. 
C.  Where the master bike path plan anticipates a proposed bike path, the owner and/or the developer of the property shall dedicate an easement to the city for bike path purposes as required by the engineering design standards of the city and shall prepare the area for the future bike path in a manner approved by the director of public services. For purposes of this chapter, "prepare" means removing obstructions, grading and clearing the location, and placing topsoil, seed and mulch or otherwise providing for soil stabilization in the proposed area. 
    The owner and/or developer who is preparing the area shall landscape the prepared area, but in no instance shall obstructions of a permanent nature be placed upon the prepared location. 
(§ 3 of Ord. dated 10-28-97) 
12.04.100 - Appeals. 
A.  Any owner who believes the actions of the city pursuant to this chapter are improper may appeal the decision of the city to the city council, provided such appeal is filed with the city clerk's office within ten days of receipt or posting of a notice under this chapter. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state in clear and concise language the reasons for the appeal. 
B.  The timely filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings related thereto pending the outcome of the appeal. 
C.  The city clerk shall immediately deliver a copy of the appeal to the city manager and shall place the appeal hearing on the agenda of the next available city council meeting. 
D.  At the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the city council may affirm, modify or rescind the decision of the city. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.110 - Damaging public ways. 
    No person shall use any mechanically driven vehicle for removal of snow from sidewalks, other pedestrian easements, streets or alleys in the city which will, by virtue of its use for such purpose, damage or tend to damage any sidewalk, improvement easement, street or alley in the city. The use of mechanically driven vehicles for such purpose shall be lawful only where such mechanically driven vehicles do not cause such prohibited damage. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.120 - Enforcement. 
    Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city council, in addition to other remedies may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.04.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Chapter 12.05 - SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 

12.05.010 - Barricades and warning lights. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with prescribed warning lights as required per the Michigan Uniform Traffic Control Manual. Additional barricades shall be provided as required by the director of the department of public services. 
(§ 4 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.05.020 - Sheeting and bracing. 
    All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to the public and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(§ 5 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Chapter 12.06 - DRAINAGE COURSES 
Sections: 
Article II. - Building Operations 
Article III. - Obstructions 
Article IV. - Roadside Drainage Ditches 
Article V. - Enforcement and Violation 
Article II. - Building Operations 

12.06.110 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Building contractor" means any person holding a general contract for the construction of a building or structure. If no such person is employed by an owner, then in such cases the owner of the property affected shall be the building contractor. 
    "Department" means the city department of public services. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as director, the city manager, or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Street" means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and indicates lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefore where the same are not yet constructed. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.120 - Applicability. 
    The operation of this chapter shall be restricted to the time extending from the date of issuance of a building permit to the date of issuance of an occupancy permit by the city. This chapter shall not be interpreted to refer to the depositing of any soil or debris in roadside ditches cause by the elements or by acts of nature. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.130 - Depositing materials in drainage way. 
    Dirt, sand, gravel, clay or any other type of soil shall not be moved into or deposited in any roadside ditch, drain or gutter in the city after the time such ditch, drain or gutter is cut. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.140 - Depositing materials in right-of-way. 
    No building materials of any sort may be unloaded or deposited or stored on any lands previously dedicated to the public use for right-of-way for a street. Building materials shall only be unloaded onto, deposited or stored on the private land adjoining such publicly dedicated right-of-way for street purposes to be served by such building materials. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.150 - Culvert installation. 
    After the cutting of a roadside drainage ditch, and before any building operations are continued or carried on upon private lands adjoining such roadside ditch, the building contractor shall provide and install a ditch culvert of material as approved by the director and of a diameter approved by the highway authority having jurisdiction, and cover the same across the roadside drainage ditch with sufficient material as approved by the director to prevent damage to the culvert by vehicular traffic passing over the same. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.160 - Ditch installation. 
    The building contractor shall provide a roadside ditch across the entire frontage of the site, except where culverts are necessary for access or utility or tree interference. The requirements for this ditch shall be in accordance with the standards and specification of the highway authority having jurisdiction over such road. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.170 - Contractor responsible for violations. 
    The building contractor shall be held prima facie responsible for the existence of any prohibited materials in roadside ditches, after the same are cut, within the area of the roadside ditch in front of the lot upon which the building contractor is conducting his or her operation. Such area shall be determined by the continuation of the side lot lines in their same direction until they will cross the roadside ditch, and the areas between such extended lines will be the roadside ditch area of such adjoining lot. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.180 - Notice to correct violation-Stop- work order. 
    Upon the discovery by the director of the existence of any prohibited materials in such roadside ditches, the director shall thereupon notify the building contractor of such violation by posting a notice on or in the house or structure being built upon the adjoining land, or by nailing such notice to a stake placed in the ground in a conspicuous position on the premises. At the same time such notice is posted, the director shall, in a like manner, post a stop-work order on the building, which will prohibit any further building operations being carried on. If within twenty-four hours after the posting of the first notice as provided above the building contractor shall have removed all prohibited materials from roadside ditches, and deposited the same on private lands adjoining, and shall have replaced the roadside ditch to the same condition as before, then the director shall authorize the withdrawal of the notice of violation, and shall authorize the withdrawal of the stop-work order as provided above. If such prohibited material is not removed from the roadside ditch and deposited on adjoining private lands, and the roadside ditch is not replaced to its previous condition with twenty-four hours after the posting of such notice, the building contractor shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. In such event, the stop-work order shall continue in effect and all building operations shall be prohibited until the violation is cured. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.190 - Security deposit. 
    Upon application for a building permit, the applicant shall deposit with the application a sum established by resolution of the council to guarantee that after completion of the building, the applicant shall remove or cause to be removed all debris, rubbish and trash from the building site and to establish ditches and culverts to properly drain the building area, and to reopen and reestablish any drainage that may have been interrupted by the building operation. All drains and culverts shall be established in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the highway authority having jurisdiction. The deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon demand after the final inspection and approval by the director. If, after approval by the director, demand for the return of the deposit is not made by the applicant within one year after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the sum shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Article III. - Obstructions 

12.06.210 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Department" means the city department of public services. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as director, the city manager, or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Drain" means every ditch, stream, watercourse, swale, sewer, pipe or other conduit of any kind whether natural or artificial, whether or not established by any public authority, over or through which surface water normally passes within the city. 
    "Street" means all the land lying between property lines on either side of the streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefore where the same are not yet constructed. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.220 - Prohibited. 
    No person shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed any drain by any means whatsoever, so as to prevent or retard the free flow of surface water thereon or therein. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.230 - Permitted obstruction. 
    No owner, lessee or other person in possession of any property over which a drain exists shall suffer or permit such drain to be obstructed by any means whatsoever so as to prevent or retard the free flow of surface waters thereon or therein, or suffer or permit such an existing obstruction to continue. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.240 - Increasing and diverting flow. 
    No person, other than a governmental agency authorized by law to manage drains or stormwater easements, shall divert, enclose, reconstruct or relocate any drain so as to cause such drain to discharge upon any property within the city, with increased force, in an increased amount or at a different location without the express written consent of all parties in interest in the property upon which the drain is to discharge. Such consent shall be in recordable form and shall be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.250 - Report of violation- Determination re-drainage area. 
    Any owner of property over which a drain is alleged to exist, or of property within the drainage area served by an alleged drain, who claims that such alleged drain has been or is being obstructed or diverted in the location thereof and the properties drained thereby. Upon receipt of such a petition, the city council may direct the department to report to the council with respect to the location of the alleged drain, its history, the area drained thereby and any other pertinent facts concerning the drain. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.260 - Hearing-Council determination. 
    Upon receipt of a petition submitted pursuant to this chapter and the report of the director, the council shall hold a hearing thereon and shall give notice thereof by first class mail to the property owners affected. Following such hearing the council may adopt a resolution defining the location of the drain and the property drained thereby. Such resolution shall be prima facie evidence thereof in any prosecution for violation of this chapter; provided, however, that the procedures described in this chapter shall not be deemed to be conditions precedent of a prosecution for violation of this chapter. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Article IV. - Roadside Drainage Ditches 

12.06.310 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Department" means the city department of public services. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as the director, the city manager or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Driveway" means every parking lot, private road, common driveway or similar feature, whether or not open for open use. 
    "Gutter" means the gutter area of a paved and curbed street. 
    "Roadside ditch" means every ditch, culvert, swale or other watercourse permitting the normal flow of water which drains off public streets and highways. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.320 - Permit to construct driveway and install culvert across-Required. 
    No person shall cause the construction or connection of any driveway which crosses a roadside ditch nor install a culvert as may be required in this chapter, nor change the flow of water in any such roadside ditch, without first obtaining a permit from the department. All connection or construction shall require the installation of a proper culvert as required by the department. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.330 - Same-Application-Fee. 
    Application for a permit to connect or construct a driveway across or through a roadside ditch, or to install a culvert as directed by authority of this article shall be made in writing to the department on a form supplied by the director. Such application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the council. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.340 - Performance bond. 
    No permit shall be issued under this article until a cash performance bond has been filed with the department in an amount sufficient to insure performance of the work in conformity with the permit and rules, regulations and specifications of the department. The amount of the cash bond shall be established by resolution of the council. Such bond shall be forfeited where the permitted construction, connection or installation is not in conformance with the rules, regulations and specifications of the department, or when the permitted construction, connection or installation is not completed for final inspection and approval on or before the expiration date of the permit. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.350 - Inspection. 
A.  Upon notification of completion of work permitted under this chapter to the department, the director shall make an on-site inspection of the construction to determine whether the specification requirements have been met. 
B.  If the construction is satisfactory, the permit holder will be refunded the bond upon application therefor to the department. 
C.  If the construction is not satisfactory, the permit holder shall be notified of all defects. Notification of deficiency may be given to the applicant. 
D.  The permit holder may correct such defects and request a second inspection upon payment of an additional inspection fee to the department, prior to the expiration date of the permit. The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the council. (§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.360 - Existing driveways blocking. 
    When an owner of an existing driveway fails to maintain such driveway in accordance with the specifications and rules of the department of this code by allowing the driveway, due to its particular construction or disrepair, partially or completely block a roadside ditch, written notice of such defective condition shall be served upon the owner. Such notice shall require that the condition be corrected by a date certain, which date shall be not less than fifteen days from the date of service of such notice. Within fifteen days following service of such notice, the owner shall advise the city in writing of his or her intention to install the necessary culvert or perform the necessary repairs, and shall proceed with the required work in accordance with this article. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.370 - Plans, specifications and work subject to approval. 
    The size, quality, kind, grade and number of culverts to be installed and the kind, grade, quality and amount of all the material to be installed, placed, used or deposited under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the prior approval of the department, and all work and labor performed under the provisions hereof shall be performed under the control and supervision and subject to the approval of the department. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.380 - Construction by city-Recovery of costs. 
    Whenever the owner of real property notified pursuant to this chapter fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the chapter or any notices given by authority of this chapter within the time provided, the department may cause the material, work and labor set forth in such notice to be furnished by or on behalf of the city, and proceed to perform such work. Upon completion thereof, the cost of the work shall be charged against the premises. Unpaid charges incurred pursuant to this section shall be a lien against the subject property. Enforcement of this lien shall be made pursuant to city ordinances or under any applicable statute. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Article V. - Enforcement and Violation 

12.06.400 - Enforcement. 
    Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city council, in addition to other remedies may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
12.06.410 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(§ 6 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
Chapter 12.08 - SNOW REMOVAL 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Short title. 
    The short title of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be the Snow Removal Ordinance and it may be referred to and cited by reference thereto. 
(Ord. 110 § 1, 1979) 
12.08.020 - Definitions. 
    The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in this section: 
    "Person" shall not include the state or a political subdivision of the state or an employee of the state or a political subdivision of the state operating within the scope of his duties. 
    "Safety vision" means an unobstructed line of sight enabling a driver to travel upon, enter or exit a roadway in a safe manner. 
    "Street or highway" means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used in this chapter refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
(Ord. 110 § 2, 1979) 
12.08.030 - Removal regulated. 
    It is unlawful at any time for any person or persons within the city to: 
A.  Remove or cause to be removed, snow, ice or slush onto or across streets, highways or roadways or the shoulder of streets, highways or roadways in a manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other than off-road vehicles; 
B.  Deposit or cause to be deposited, snow, ice or slush onto or across streets, highways or roadways or the shoulders of streets, highways or roadways in a manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver or a motor vehicle; 
C.  Deposit or cause to be deposited, snow, ice or slush on any street, highway or roadway. 
(Ord. 110 § 3, 1979) 
12.08.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for a period of not more than ninety days, or to both fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 110 § 4, 1979) 
Chapter 12.12 - CITY PARK AND RECREATION AREA USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use of and conduct in the parks and recreation areas of the city. 
(Ord. 127 § 1, 1983) 
12.12.020 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply in all parks and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the city, unless expressly exempted. For the issuance of permits, temporary designations, authorizations, granting of approval and other actions the approving governing agency shall be the Parks and Recreation Commission or its designee. 
(Ord. 127 § 2, 1983) 
12.12.030 - Construction. 
    In the interpretation of this and all succeeding park and recreation area ordinances, the provisions shall be construed as follows: 
A.  Any requirement or prohibitions of any act, shall respectively extend to and include the causing and procuring, directly or indirectly, of such act. 
B.  No provision of this chapter shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed by any officer or employee of the commission or city in line of duty or work as such, or by any person, his agent or employees, in the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with the commission or city. 
C.  Any act otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance shall be lawful, if performed, under, by virtue of, and strictly within the provisions of a permit so to do, and to the extent authorized thereby. 
(Ord. 127 § 3, 1983) 
12.12.040 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    "Animals" includes cats, dogs, horses, any fowl or birds and any living creatures within the jurisdiction of the park or recreation area. 
    "Approving government agency" means the Parks and Recreation Commission or its designee. 
    "Crossing" means any crossing whether marked by a pavement or otherwise; the extension to any sidewalk space across any intersecting drive, street, highway. 
    "Curb" means any boundary of any street, road, avenue, boulevard, or drive, whether or not marked by a curb. 
    "Director" means the chairman of the Parks and Recreation Commission unless an employee position of recreation director is established by the city council. In the absence of said employee or a vacancy in the position, the chairman shall serve as director. 
    "Park attendant" means any person employed by the commission as a parks attendant to perform duties or tasks within the park and recreation areas. 
    "Path" means any footpath, walk, or any path maintained for pedestrians. 
    "Pedestrian" means a person afoot. 
    "Permit" means any written license issued by or under the authority of the approving governing agency permitting a special event or activity on park facilities. 
    "Person" means any natural person, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, firm or copartnership. 
    "Soliciting" means persons selling goods or services by sample or taking orders for future delivery with or without accepting advance payment for the goods. Persons seeking any form of contributions. 
    "Stopping or standing" when prohibited means any cessation of movement of a vehicle occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with pedestrians or other traffic including horses and bicycles. 
    "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals and vehicles, either singly or together. 
    "Vehicle" means any conveyance (except baby carriages) including motor vehicles, trailers of all types, campers, tricycles, bicycles, motorized or not, snowmobiles, sleds, sleighs, pushcarts, or vehicles propelled by other than muscular power. Also any horse or horse-drawn conveyance. 
    "Vending" means selling or trading any item or service. 
(Ord. 127 § 4, 1983) 
12.12.050 - Structures, flora and fauna. 
    It is unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to: 
A.  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, pavings or paving materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
B.  Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex; 
C.  Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
D.  Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder; 
E.  Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area; 
F.  Climb any tree or walk, climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes; 
G.  Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench, or other structure; 
H.  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountains, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters; 
I.  Bring into any park refuse or litter originating outside any park for the purpose of depositing such in park receptacles. Take into, carry through, or put into any park, any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material. Such refuse and rubbish shall be deposited in receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
J.  Bring any glass beverage container into any park or recreation area; 
K.  Cause or permit to run loose any animal; 
L.  Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant; 
M.  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous may be killed on sight; 
N.  Walk a dog or other domestic animal without a leash, said leash to be no longer than six feet. Further, the owner or person having custody of said domestic animal shall be responsible for removal of any animal solid waste. Further, said responsible person shall not allow the animal to disturb or annoy park visitors. 
(Ord. 127 § 5, 1983) 
12.12.060 - Vehicles. 
    It is unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to: 
A.  Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas; 
B.  Park a vehicle anywhere except on a designated parking area; 
C.  Leave a vehicle standing or parked in established parking areas or elsewhere in the park and recreation areas during the hours when the park and recreation area is closed. During a snow storm and for the three days thereafter established parking areas in parks and recreation areas may be utilized for parking, but not by trailers of any kind; 
D.  Leave a bicycle in a place others than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is space available; 
E.  Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others; 
F.  Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by them; 
G.  Operate any vehicle in excess of posted signs or traffic control devices; 
H.  Drive or operate within the parks any bus or vehicle adapted for more than twelve passengers; any hearse, truck or tractor, or vehicle used for advertising; provided that taxis, buses, and trucks may be used to carry visitors to the parks and recreation areas; 
I.  Use the parks, park drives, parking places, or parkways for the purpose of demonstrating any vehicles, or for the purpose of instructing another to drive or operate any vehicle, nor shall any person use any park area, including parking places, for the repairing or cleaning of any vehicle, except in an emergency; 
J.  Cause or permit a vehicle in tow of another vehicle to enter the parks or proceed therein, except that in case of a breakdown a disabled vehicle may be towed to the nearest exit; or operate or drive a vehicle containing any person or object projecting or hanging outside of or beyond the site or the rear thereof. 
(Ord. 127 § 6, 1983) 
12.12.070 - Firearms, weapons, tools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to bring into or have in his possession in any park or recreation area: 
A.  Any pistol or revolver or objects upon which loaded or blank cartridges may be used. Official starters, at authorized track and field events, are excepted from this restriction; 
B.  Any burglar tools; 
C.  Any rifle, shotgun, BB gun, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow, or other weapon in which propelling force is gunpowder, a spring, string, or air. 
(Ord. 127 § 7, 1983) 
12.12.080 - Explosives and fireworks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession or set off any fireworks. Permits may be given for conducting properly supervised fireworks in designated park areas. 
(Ord. 127 § 8, 1983) 
12.12.090 - Advertising, assemblages, entertainment. 
A.  No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, deliver, place, cast or leave about, any bill, billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular, or advertisement. 
B.  No person shall do any of the following without a permit, provided that no permit shall be required for any action or event sponsored by the city or the Parks and Recreation Commission: 
1.  Display any advertising signs or other advertising matter, provided that a sign attached to a vehicle to identify the vehicle, or a sign lawfully on a taxi or bus, is not prohibited; 
2.  Operate for advertising purposes any musical instrument, soundtrack or drum; 
3.  Hold public assemblages; 
4.  Conduct exhibitions; 
5.  Hold a parade; 
6.  Expose or offer for sale any article in any park or recreation area. 
(Ord. 127 § 9, 1983) 
12.12.100 - Ignitable and combustible material. 
    No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places provided for such purposes. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper or other material within or against any building, boat or vehicle, or under any tree or in underbrush. 
(Ord. 127 § 10, 1983) 
12.12.110 - Controlled dangerous substances, alms, gambling. 
    While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular, no person shall: 
A.  Bring a controlled dangerous substance, or use the same at any time nor shall any person be under the influence of a controlled dangerous substance in a park or recreation area; 
B.  Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private; 
C.  Play any game of chance or have possession of any instrument or device for gambling; 
D.  Play, engage or take part in any game or competitive sport for money, or other valuable thing, without a written permit. 
(Ord. 127 § 11, 1983) 
12.12.120 - Miscellaneous conduct. 
    It is unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to: 
A.  Take part in the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects except in those areas designated for such forms of recreation; 
B.  Play football, baseball, basketball, soccer or lacrosse, except in areas designated for such games; 
C.  Roller skate or use skateboards except in those areas specifically designed for such pastimes; 
D.  Enter an area posted as "closed to the public"; 
E.  Engage in violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace; 
F.  Fail to produce and exhibit any permit he claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule; 
G.  Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit; 
H.  Erect or occupy any tent, stand or other structure in any park or playground, or sell or give away from any such tent, stand or other structure any food, drink, or other thing, without a permit; 
I.  No person shall use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television or other machine or device that produces or reproduces sound in such a manner that produces excessive noise. The use of such a machine or device such that the sound produced therefrom is audible in any direction at a distance in excess of one hundred feet, shall be deemed a prima facie violation of this section, unless written permission has been obtained from the Parks and Recreation Commission or their designated representatives. 
(Ord. 127 § 12, 1983) 
12.12.130 - Picnic areas. 
    It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold a picnic in any park, except in areas set aside or specifically designated as picnic areas. A permit must be secured for any picnic with more than one hundred participants. 
(Ord. 127 § 13, 1983) 
12.12.140 - Swimming pools. 
    The ordinances relating to the use of public swimming pools shall govern the use of any swimming pool in any park. 
(Ord. 127 § 14, 1983) 
12.12.150 - Boating. 
    Any person desiring to use any kind of a boat in parks shall abide by the ordinances relating to boating in public places. 
(Ord. 127 § 15, 1983) 
12.12.160 - Hours of operation. 
    Hours of operation for city parks shall be from seven a.m. until ten p.m. unless changed for a special event by resolution of the city council. Persons in city parks during the hours they are closed will be subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 127-A-1 §2, 1992: Ord. 127 § 16, 1983) 
12.12.170 - Regulated activities. 
    The following activities are permitted only at times and in area so designated for that purpose and are prohibited elsewhere in the parks: 
A.  Swimming, bathing, wading, fishing; 
B.  Ice skating, sledding, skiing; 
C.  Model airplane flying; 
D.  Boating on ponds-without motors; 
E.  Baseball; 
F.  Police pistol range; 
G.  Archery; 
H.  Horseshoe pitching; 
I.  Tennis; 
J.  Picnicking; 
K.  Camping; 
L.  Football and track; 
M.  Basketball; 
N.  Soccer; 
O.  Bicycle riding; 
P.  Throwing or propelling any objects; 
Q.  Roller skating. 
(Ord. 127 § 17, 1983) 
12.12.180 - Permits. 
A.  Issuance. Permits for park facility use shall be obtained by application to the approving commission or their designee in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  A person seeking issuance of a permit under this chapter shall file an application stating: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any; 
c.  The day and hours for which the permit is desired; 
d.  The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired; 
e.  Any other information reasonably necessary to a determination as to whether a permit should be issued under this chapter; 
f.  Variances required from park rules and regulations. 
2.  Standards for issuance of a use permit shall include the following findings: 
a.  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the park; 
b.  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
c.  That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
d.  That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary burdensome expense or police operation by the city; 
e.  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the date and hour requested in the application; 
B.  Appeal. Within ten days after the receipt of an application the commission shall tell an applicant in writing of its decision to grant or deny a permit; in the event of a denial the notification shall include the reason for the denial. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the city council byserving written notice thereof on the city clerk within five working days of said refusal. A copy of the notice shall also be served on the Recreation Commission within the same time and said commission shall immediately forward the application and the reasons for its refusal to the city council. The city council shall decide within ten days from the receipt of the appeal by the city clerk, or at its first meeting after the appeal, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
C.  Conformance. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said permits. 
D.  Insurance. An applicant for a permit may be required to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined prior to the commencement of any activity or issuance of any permit. 
E.  Revocation. The city council shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. 127 § 18, 1983) 
12.12.190 - Enforcement. 
A.  The city police department shall in connection with its duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  The city police department shall have the authority to order any person or persons acting in violation of this chapter to leave the park or recreation area. 
(Ord. 127 § 19, 1983) 
12.12.200 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of the foregoing rules, except provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code incorporated herein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or work in a park clean-up program as an alternative to the imprisonment, or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or both. Any person violating the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in that Code. 
(Ord. 127 § 20, 1983) 
Chapter 12.16 - BOAT USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Meaning, construction. 
    All words and phrases used in this chapter shall be construed and have the same meanings as those words and phrases defined in Act 303 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, M.S.A. 18.1287(8). 
(Ord. 95 § 1, 1974) 
12.16.020 - Regulations. 
    On the waters of Loon Lake, Section 29, Town 2 North, Range 8 East, City of Wixom, Oakland County, it is unlawful, between the hours of six-thirty p.m. and ten a.m. of the following day, to: 
A.  Operate a vessel at high speed; or 
B.  Have a tow or otherwise assist in the propulsion of a person on water skis, water sled, kite, surfboard or other similar contrivance. 
(Ord. 95 § 2, 1974) 
12.16.030 - Motorboat operators-Age restrictions-Exemptions. 
    Children less than twelve years of age may be permitted to operate motorboats on the waters of the city only when accompanied by at least one person sixteen years of age or older. Children between the ages of twelve and sixteen may be permitted to operate motorboats on the waters of the city only when accompanied by at least one person sixteen years of age or older, or without such adult supervision when in possession of a boating safety certificate issued subsequent to satisfactorily completing a department-approved course in boating safety. When so operating, the boating safety certificate shall be in the possession of the minor operator and shall be presented upon demand of any peace officer. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any motorboat powered by less than six horsepower motors. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 2, 1991) 
12.16.040 - Operation of vessels-Passing and right of way rules-Duty of due regard for others. 
A.  When vessels are being operated in such a manner so as to make collision imminent or likely, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  When two vessels are approaching each other head-on, or nearly so, the operator of each shall cause his vessel to pass on the port side of the other. 
2.  When overtaking a vessel proceeding in the same direction, the operator of the overtaking vessel, unless it is not feasible to do so, shall pass on the port side of the vessel ahead. 
3.  When two vessels are approaching each other at right angles or obliquely so as to involve risk of collision, other than when one vessel is overtaking another, the operator of the vessel which has the other on his own port side shall hold his course and speed; and the operator of the vessel which has the other on his own starboard side shall give way to the other by directing his course to starboard so as to cross the stern of the other vessel or, if necessary to do so, shall slacken his speed, stop or reverse. 
4.  When a motorboat and a vessel under sail are proceeding in such a manner so as to involve risk of collision, the operator of the motorboat shall give way to the vessel under sail. 
5.  When a motorboat and a vessel not propelled by sail or mechanical means are proceeding in such a manner as to involve risk of collision, the operator of the motorboat shall give way to the other vessel. 
6.  When, by any of the rules provided in this section, the operator of a vessel is required to give way to the other, the operator of the other vessel shall maintain his direction and speed. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall relieve the operator of a vessel otherwise privileged by the provisions of this section from the duty to operate with due regard for the safety of all persons using the waters of the city. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 4, 1991) 
12.16.050 - Care in operating vessel-Speed. 
    A person operating or propelling a vessel upon the waters of the city shall operate it in a careful and prudent manner and at such a rate of speed so as not to endanger unreasonably the life or property of any person. A person shall not operate any vessel at a rate of speed greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the vessel to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. A person shall not operate a vessel in a manner so as to interfere unreasonably with the lawful use by others of any waters. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 6, 1991) 
12.16.060 - Operating vessel while under influence of intoxicants or controlled substances-Arrest- Penalty. 
A.  A person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, as defined by Section 7104 of the Public health Code, Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, being Section 333.7104 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, shall not operate, propel, or be in actual physical control of a vessel upon the waters of the city. The owner of a vessel, or a person having charge of or in control of a vessel, shall not knowingly authorize or knowingly permit the vessel to be propelled or operated by a person who is under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. A violation of this section is punishable as provided in subsection (C) of this section. 
B.  A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant when the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a vessel involved in the accident and was operating the vessel upon the waters of the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or was operating vessel on the waters of the city while the person's ability to operate a vessel was visibly impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
C.  A person who is convicted of a violation of subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars, or both, together with costs of the prosecution. 
D.  Upon conviction of a person under this section, the court, in addition to the penalty imposed under subsection (C) and as part of the sentence, may order that the person not operate a vessel upon the waters of the city for a period of not more than two years. The court may also order the person to participate in an alcohol training program. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 8, 1991) 
12.16.070 - Admissibility of evidence of intoxication-Test procedure. 
A.  In a criminal prosecution for operating a vessel while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, for operating a vessel while visibly impaired, or in a criminal prosecution pertaining to manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vessel while the operator is alleged to have been under the influence of intoxicating liquor, the amount of alcohol in the operator's blood at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the persons' blood, urine or breath shall be admissible into evidence. If a test is given, the results of the test shall be made available to the person charged or the person's attorney upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the report at least two days before the day of the trial, and the results shall be offered as evidence by the prosecution in a criminal proceeding. Failure to comply with the request shall bar the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution. The amount of alcohol in the operator's blood at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, or breath shall give rise to the following presumptions: 
1.  If there was at the time 0.07 percent or less by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
2.  If there was at the time in excess of 0.07 but less than 0.10 percent of weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a vessel was impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor. 
3.  If there was at the time 0.10 percent or more by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
B.  A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or licensed nurse or medical technician under the direction of a licensed physician and qualified to withdraw blood acting in a medical environment, at the request of a peace officer, may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of the blood under this act. Liability for a crime or civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing blood and related procedures shall not attach to a qualified person who withdraws blood or assists in the withdrawal in accordance with this act unless the withdrawal is performed in a negligent manner. 
C.  A person charged with a crime enumerated in subsection (A) who takes a chemical test administered at the request of a peace officer, as provided in subsections (A) and (B), shall be informed that the person will be given a reasonable opportunity to have a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the chemical tests, as provided in this section, within a reasonable time after his or her detention and the results of the test shall be admissible and shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant. A person charged with a crime enumerated in subsection (A) who is requested by the peace officer to take a chemical test as provided in subsections (A) and (B) shall be informed that he or she has the right to demand that one of the tests provided for in subsection (A) shall be given him or her, and the results of the test shall be admissible and shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant. 
D.  The person charged shall be advised that the person may refuse to take a test as provided in this section and that the refusal is admissible in evidence. 
E.  This section shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of whether or not the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, a person requested to take a test shall be advised that he or she has the option to demand that only a breath test shall be given, in which case his or her refusal to submit to another test shall not constitute a refusal. 
G.  If a jury instruction regarding a defendant's refusal to submit to a chemical test under this section is requested by the prosecution or the defendant, the jury instruction shall be given as follows: 
    "Evidence was admitted in this case which, if believed by the jury, could prove that the defendant had exercised his or her right to refuse a chemical test. You are instructed that such a refusal is within the statutory rights of the defendant and is not evidence of the defendant's guilt or innocence of the defendant." 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 9, 1991) 
12.16.080 - Operating vessel while ability to operate visibly impaired- Penalty. 
A.  A person shall not operate a vessel upon the waters of the city when, due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the person has visibly impaired his or her ability to operate the vessel. If a person is charged with violating Section 12.16.060, a finding of guilty is permissible under this section. 
B.  A person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or both, together with costs of the prosecution. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 10, 1991) 
12.16.090 - Request from peace officer to submit to chemical tests-Medical conditions requiring refusal to submit-Blood samples of deceased vessel operators. 
A.  A person who operates a vessel upon the waters of the city may be required by a peace officer to submit to chemical tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of his or her blood if: 
1.  The person is arrested for a violation of Section 12.16.060 or 12.16.080; 
2.  The person is arrested for manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vessel and the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person was operating the vessel while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or while his or her ability to operate the vessel was impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor. 
B.  A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes, or a condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a physician and who refuses a chemical test shall not be considered to have refused a chemical test if the test requires the withdrawal of blood. This refusal is not admissible in evidence under Section 12.16.070. 
C.  If after an accident the operator of a vessel involved in the accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent's blood shall be withdrawn in a manner directed by the medical examiner for the purpose of determining blood alcohol content. The results of an examination of the blood of a deceased operator shall be used for statistical purposes only. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 11, 1991) 
12.16.100 - Advice of right to refuse chemical tests-Court order. 
    A person who is requested pursuant to Section 12.16.090 to take a chemical test shall be advised of the right to refuse to submit to chemical tests; and if the person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to chemical tests, a test shall not be given without a court order. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 12, 1991) 
12.16.110 - Divers-Point of submergence, buoys or boats, flags-Operating distance for other vessels. 
    Any person diving or submerging in any of the waters of the city with the aid of a diving suit or other mechanical diving device shall place a buoy or boat in the water at or near the point of submergence. The buoy or boat shall bear a red flag not less than fourteen inches by sixteen inches with and three-and-one-half-inch white stripe running from one upper corner to a diagonal lower corner. The flag shall be in place only while actual diving operations are in progress. A vessel shall not be operated within two hundred feet of a buoyed diver's flag unless it is involved in tendering the diving operation. A person diving shall stay within a surface area of one hundred feet of the diver's flag. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 13, 1991) 
12.16.120 - Peace officers-Stopping or coming alongside vessel- Information, inspection and equipment test-Arrests without warrant. 
A.  The operator or person in charge of any vessel being used or operated on the waters of the city, upon being hailed by any peace officer empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter, shall immediately bring the vessel to a stop or maneuver it in such manner as will permit the officer to come alongside. The operator or person in charge of the vessel and any other person on board shall give his correct name and address, exhibit the certificate of number awarded for the vessel, submit to a reasonable inspection of the vessel and to a reasonable inspection and test of the equipment of the vessel. 
B.  A peace officer who observes any violation by any person of any of the provisions of this chapter may forthwith arrest the person without a warrant. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 14, 1991) 
12.16.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, any person or persons who violate any section of this chapter shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 95-A-1 § 15, 1991) 
Chapter 12.17 - VILLAGE CENTER AREA IMPROVEMENT AND UNDERGROUND RELOCATION OF OVERHEAD LINES 
Sections: 

12.17.010 - Amendment and title. 
    Chapter 12.17, Village Center Area Improvement and Underground Relocation of Overhead Lines, shall be added to Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places, and shall be known and may be cited as the village center area improvement and underground relocation of overhead lines ordinance. 
(Ord. 05-01 § 1, 2005) 
12.17.020 - Legislative findings and purpose. 
A.  The city of Wixom ("city") has, by Ordinance No. 2000-02, created the VCA village center area district in order to allow for the development of a fully integrated, mixed used, pedestrian-oriented village center area ("VCA"), as designated on the Village Center Area District Zoning Map and the city master plan. 
B.  The intent of the VCA district is to minimize traffic congestion, infrastructure costs and environmental degradation. Provisions for the VCA district support traditional neighborhood design principles, which are historically based on urban development from the early colonial times to the 1940s, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Residential neighborhoods, which are interconnected to all development by roadways and pedestrian ways, with an emphasis on making the entire area a more walkable community; 
2.  Housing types and uses that are mixed and developed in close proximity to one another; 
3.  Civic buildings and civic squares, which provide places of assembly for social activities, in prominent locations that act as landmarks, symbols and focal points for community identity; 
4.  Recreation space, which is provided throughout the VCA district, with neighborhood greens, landscaped streets, boulevards and parkways woven into roadway and block patterns for the purpose of providing adequate space for social activity, parks and visual enjoyment; 
5.  The location of dwellings, shops and workplaces in close proximity to each other, the scale of which accommodates and promotes pedestrian travel for traffic within the community; and 
6.  Preservation of open space and natural areas. 
C.  Pontiac Trial and Wixom Road will provide the major ingress and egress routes to the VCA and infrastructure improvements to these routes are integral to the design, construction and successful implementation of the VCA, fulfillment of the governmental functions, and purposes herein set forth and to achieve consistency with the West Oakland Corridor Study. 
D.  The VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) will include substantial infrastructure improvements, including sidewalks, water mains, sewers, parking spaces, streets, roadways, pedestrian ways, boulevards, street lights and parkways, all with an emphasis on making the entire area a more walkable community. 
E.  As part of the process of constructing and improving the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) and its related infrastructure, the city has determined that it is a necessary public improvement to relocate underground all overhead electric utility, cable television, telephone, telecommunications and other lines and wires currently running along, across, adjacent to, within and/or over the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road), its intersections and to private property adjacent thereto. In connection with this line and wire relocation, the city has determined that all poles and related overhead facilities equipment to the overhead lines should also be removed to the maximum extent possible. 
F.  The governmental functions and purposes of this relocation of overhead lines and wires and removal of poles and related overhead facilities equipment in the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) include, but are not limited to, the following public health, safety and welfare concerns of the city: 
1.  To allow for the public improvement of the construction of the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) in the city, which is planned to become a heavily congested central business district, and construction and improvement of related infrastructure including sidewalks, parking spaces, water mains, sewers, streets, roadways, pedestrian ways, boulevards, parkways and street lighting; 
2.  To relieve the utility, transportation and infrastructural burden in the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) to achieve the purpose of minimizing traffic congestion and environmental degradation; 
3.  Improvement of the city's aesthetic environment through removal of unsightly poles, lines, wires and related overhead facilities equipment out of view of the public; 
4.  Enhancement of traffic operational safety in the city by the removal of utility poles and overhead lines, wires and related overhead facilities equipment in order to improve visibility, sight lines and eliminate vehicular accident impacts on poles, overhead lines and wires and other overhead facilities equipment; 
5.  To better protect electrical, cable television, telephone, telecommunications and other service lines, wires, poles and related overhead facilities equipment from weather damage, vehicle accident damage and other causes, in order to reduce service interruptions to residents of and businesses located in the city; 
6.  Enhancement of the safety of city residents and persons traveling in the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) from falling or down lines, wires, poles and overhead facilities equipment; 
7.  Improvement of operational reliability of electrical utility, cable television, telephone, telecommunications and other services currently provided by overhead lines and wires; and 
8.  Enhancement of existing and potential business development and other land use in the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) recognizing the unique features of the proposed mixed uses. 
G.  The city has the power and authority to enact this chapter pursuant to, among other sources, the Michigan Constitution (Art. 7, Sec. 29), the Home Rule Act (MCL 117.4h), Wixom City Charter (Chapter 2, Sections 2.1 and 2.2 and Chapter 14, Section 14.3), Chapter 5.08, Chapter 5.09, various other ordinances and agreements, existing legal precedent, applicable MPSC rules and the city's general police power to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 05-01 § 2, 2005) 
12.17.030 - Relocation directed. 
    Upon the adoption of this chapter and upon written notice from the city, all public utilities, telephone and telecommunications providers, electricity suppliers, cable television providers (collectively the "companies"), state and county agencies ("agencies") and all other individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, companies, corporations or entities ("persons") who own, lease, operate and/or maintain overhead lines and wires, poles and/or related overhead facilities equipment located in, along, across, over and/or adjacent to the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road), its intersections and to private property adjacent thereto, are directed and ordered to begin immediately to relocate underground all of their overhead lines and wires and remove all poles and related overhead facilities equipment at their sole cost and expense and at no cost or expense to the city. In complying with this section, the companies, agencies and persons shall also fully comply with all other applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 05-01 § 3, 2005) 
12.17.040 - Cooperation directed. 
    In connection with compliance with the requirements of Section 12.17.030, all companies, agencies, persons and representatives of the city shall cooperate fully and in good faith with each other in the timely coordination and implementation of the planning, design, construction and completion of the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) and infrastructure improvements, including the underground relocation of overhead lines and wires, and the removal of poles and related overhead facilities equipment. 
(Ord. 05-01 § 4, 2005) 
12.17.050 - City contribution. 
    To assist the companies, agencies and persons in carrying out the work required in Sections 12.17.030 and 12.17.040 and in order to contribute to the timely success of the VCA (including along Pontiac Trail and Wixom Road) construction and infrastructure improvements, the relocation of overhead lines and wires and the removal of poles and related overhead facilities equipment, the city may, at its sole cost and expense, and in its sole discretion, make contributions to the work required in Sections 12.17.030 and 12.17.040, for which it may or may not seek reimbursement, including advancing the design cost and acquiring all necessary easements and rights-of-way. In order to facilitate this property acquisition, the city may, in its discretion, exercise its powers of eminent domain. 
(Ord. 05-01 § 5, 2005) 
12.17.060 - Retention of control of public places. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to alienate the title of the public in and to any public rights-of-way or any portion thereof, nor shall anything in this chapter be construed in any manner as constituting a surrender by the city of its general powers with respect to the subject matter hereof, or with respect to any matter whatsoever, or in any manner be construed as limiting the right of the city to regulate the use of and access to any public rights-of-way within its exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction and to otherwise exercise its police powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 05-01 § 6, 2005) 
12.17.070 - Sanctions and penalties. 
    Violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of a continuing violation, as determined by the city upon prior written notice to the violator, may be charged and punished as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 05-01 § 7, 2005) 
Chapter 12.18 - MICHIGAN AIR LINE TRAILWAY 
Sections: 

12.18.010 - General rules and jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply in and to all the grounds, buildings, facilities, and territory from time to time under the management, jurisdiction, and control of the Commerce, Walled Lake, and Wixom Trailway Management Council hereinafter referred to as the "CW2 Council" and which are used for or occupied by the "Michigan Air Line Trail" within the boundaries of the City of Wixom, hereinafter referred to as the "trailway" or the "trail." 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.020 - Trail hours. 
    The trail shall be open for public use during the hours of one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset, subject to restrictions on or permission for certain activities as established by the CW2 Council more specifically set forth in Section 12.18.060. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.030 - Protection of trailway property. 
A.  Natural Features. No person shall move, remove, damage, deface, prune, or in any way disturb, construct, or alter any structure, fixture, tree, plant, shrub, rock, soil, turf, or any other natural or artificial thing or object in the trailway without first obtaining written approval from the CW2 Council. 
B.  All Plantings Prohibited. No person shall bring into or plant in or upon the trailway any tree, shrub, plant or any other kind of flora or any part or seed thereof without first obtaining written approval from the CW2 Council. 
C.  Monuments and Memorials. No person shall bring into, leave, erect or install any rock, plaque, monument, sign, symbol or object of any kind in or upon the trailway without first obtaining written approval from the CW2 Council. 
D.  Snow Removal. No person shall deposit snow on the trail surface or disturb the surface in such a way that it makes it unsafe for its intended purpose. 
E.  Dumping Prohibited. No person shall drop, throw, place, or otherwise scatter any material, object, or substance on the trailway and not pick up and remove such material, object or substance. No commercial or household waste or hazardous or dangerous material may be deposited in the trash receptacles or upon the trail or in its waters, including, but not limited to paint, petroleum products, chemicals, cleaning supplies, flammable liquids, or construction debris. 
F.  Trash Disposal. Trail user shall carry out, or dispose of in trash receptacles, their personal trash, including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, styrofoam, or paper beverage or food containers, wraps, lids or bags. Pet waste and soiled diapers shall be bagged and also may be deposited in trash receptacles. 
G.  Fires. No person shall intentionally or unintentionally prepare, light or make use of any fire in the trailway, except as may from time to time be permitted by written order of the CW2 Council, and except as required for the regular furnaces, fireplaces, and other heating equipment installed in the trailway buildings. 
H.  Restricted areas and activities. No person shall be in, occupy, or enter upon any portion of the trailway that has been designated closed to public use or entry by order of the CW2 Council. No person operating, directing, or responsible for any airplane, helicopter, glider, balloon, dirigible, parachute or other aerial apparatus will take off or land in or on any trail section or waterway, except when human life is endangered or written permission has been first obtained from the CW2 Council. No remote-controlled aircraft, drone, quadcopter, vessel, or car may be operated on the trail unless operating in a properly designated area, and with prior written approval of the CW2 council. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.040 - Protection of birds and animals. 
A.  Hunting and Trapping. All hunting and/or trapping is expressly prohibited. 
B.  Control and Custody of Pets. Persons owning or having the right to immediate custody or control of any animal shall not permit or allow such animal to enter into or remain in the trailway unless at all times it is within the trailway and such animal is, by means or a leash or other physical equipment, entirely and continuously under and subject to the direction and control of a person. Owner shall immediately remove their animal feces from the trail and/or encase and deposit in appropriate waste containers. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.050 - Vehicles and traffic. 
A.  Vehicles, Trailers or Other Objects. No vehicle, bicycle, equipment, material, trailer or other object may be parked or stored on the Trailway. 
B.  Motor Driven Vehicles. No person shall have or operate any motor driven vehicle in the trailway, except on roadways, trail crossings and designated parking areas from time to time designated by the CW2 Council excepting the following: 
1.  Law enforcement, first responders, and emergency vehicles. 
2.  Maintenance personnel. 
3.  Visitors that are mobility-disabled. 
C.  Operating Vehicles. The operator of any vehicle or bicycle must obey all signs in regard to speed limits, danger, direction of traffic, and other traffic rules specifically applicable in designated trailway areas. 
D.  Vehicle Speed. No person shall drive a vehicle or bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent, having due regard for the surface, width, and condition of paving and traffic thereon. All vehicles, including bicycles, shall give right of way to pedestrians and announce their presence when approaching and passing. 
E.  Horseback Riding. The trail is not open for horseback riding. 
F.  Traffic on Trail. All persons on the trail shall comply with all rules and regulations relating to traffic on the trail as may from time to time be promulgated by the CW2 Council. 
G.  Trail Signs. Signs may be placed by the CW2 Council along the trail in accordance with proper standards and guidelines for enhancement of Trail use and the protection of adjacent property owners. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.060 - Personal conduct. 
A.  Games and Sports. No person shall engage in any sport, game or amusement in the trailway except in areas specifically designated for such activity by the CW2 Council, and then only under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the CW2 Council. 
B.  Public Assemblies, Meetings, Contests. No person or group of persons shall call or hold any public meeting, exhibition, contest, tournament or public entertainment of any kind in the trailway without first obtaining the written permission of the CW2 Council. 
C.  Weapons, Missiles, Explosives, Fireworks. Except for persons with a valid permit to carry a weapon, no person shall bring into, carry or use in any way in the Trailway any knife, firearm, air gun, pellet gun, or other weapon of any kind, or any instrument or device designed for or capable of hurling projectiles or missiles, or any fireworks or explosives of any kind. No person shall throw, cast or shoot stones, arrows or other missiles of any kind on, in, above, or into the trailway. No explosives or any substance, compound, mixture, or article that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound may explode, discharge or burn, will be permitted. 
D.  Advertisements. No person shall display any placard or advertisement of any kind in the trailway, nor shall any person distribute, cast, throw or place any hand bill, pamphlet, circular, advertisement, or notice of any kind, nor post, stencil, draw, paint, spray or otherwise affix or create any notice, bills, advertisement or other papers or things upon any structure or thing in on or above the trailway. No person shall drive, park, or station on any road, parkway, or parking lot any vehicle displaying a sign or notice that it is for sale or exchange, or otherwise display advertising within the trailway without a written permit from the CW2 Council. Nothing in this section 12.08.060 shall be construed to prohibit, or is intended to prohibit, the expression of speech protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
E.  Drunkenness-Alcoholic Beverages and Illegal Drugs. No drunk or intoxicated person or individual under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or narcotics will be permitted entry to trailway areas and if discovered therein will be subject to arrest and/or immediate expulsion. The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages including liquors, beer, wine or illegal drugs or narcotics is prohibited. 
F.  Improper speech and conduct. No person in the trailway system shall use or engage in any abusive, threatening, insulting, indecent, lewd, profane or obscene language, signs, symbols, postures, or acts, or employ any such language or acts in such a way as to be conducive to a breach of peace in the trailway. Nothing in this Section 12.18.060 shall be construed to prohibit, or is intended to prohibit, the expression of speech protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
G.  Breach of Peace and Disorderly Conduct. No person shall make, countenance, or assist in making any improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace, or diversion tending to a breach of the peace, in the trailway system, or be guilty of any disorderly conduct as described by state statute or local ordinance, or collect with any other person, in bodies or crowds, for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose to the annoyance or obstruction or disturbance of others there present. No person shall stand, sit or recline on any fence, rail or on any picnic table or any structure not intended for such use. 
H.  Public Demonstrations, Gatherings, Performances, and Speeches. No person or persons or representatives of any political party, religious sect, musical group, or other public exhibition, shall hold or attempt to hold any meeting, any parade or drill in the trailway without written approval from the CW2 council. No public address or electrical amplification will be permitted. 
I.  Resisting or Interfering with Officer. No person shall resist any law enforcement officer serving in the trailway in the discharge of his/her duty, or fail or refuse to obey any lawful command of any such officer or in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent any such officer from discharging his/her duty, or in any manner assist or give aid to any person in custody to escape or to attempt to rescue any person held in such custody. 
J.  Camping. No person shall set up, occupy or use tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelters, or any special vehicle to be used for such purpose; such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon, or the like, for the purpose of overnight camping. Camping is expressly prohibited. 
K.  Trespass to Adjacent Lands. No person shall go onto land adjacent to Trailway land which is in private ownership, without the express permission of the landowner. 
L.  Damage to Property. No person shall injure, deface, disturb, befoul, change or remove any portion of any marker, structure, equipment, fence or any other property within the trailway. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.070 - Special permits. 
    Other recreational activities may be allowed by special permit if authorized by the CW2 Council. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.080 - Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. Unauthorized use of vehicles on the trailway may be subject to impoundment of the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
12.18.090 - Emergency powers. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the CW2 Council or their designee(s) from establishing emergency rules designed to protect the health, welfare, and safety of trail visitors, to protect the Trailway, and to maintain order. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
Article I. - Generally 

13.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Benefitted properties" means all properties which will derive benefit from the construction of the improvement. 
    "Charge" or "charges" means the amount charge at the time and in the amount hereinafter provided to each premises in the water supply system for connecting hereinafter provided, to each premises in the water supply system for connecting directly or indirectly for water use and availability, for debt service and for permits and installation. 
    "City water distribution system" means all mains, connections, pipes, meters, hydrants and appurtenances connected with or served by the city water system, including water supplying wells and well houses. 
    "Department" means the city department of public services and/or the city operating agent. 
    "DWSD" means the Detroit water and sewerage department. 
    "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    "Off-site water mains" means water mains constructed off the premises of the owner to be served, which are necessary to afford service to the premises from transmission water mains not adjacent to the premises. 
    "Owner" means fee title holder, contract holder or anyone else having a beneficial interest in a benefitted property. 
    "Premises" means the lands included within the boundaries of a single description as set forth from time to time on the general tax rolls of the city as a single taxable item in the name of a taxpayer or taxpayers at one address but in the case of platted lots shall be limited to a single platted lot unless an existing building or structure is so located on more than one lot as to make the same a single description for purposes of assessment or conveyance, now or hereafter. 
    "Service connection" means a connection serving a single water customer consisting of one water connection, one curb stop and one meter. 
    "Unit" means any premises or portion of premises to which there is available or delivered that quality of water ordinarily used in or needed for the occupancy of a residence building by a single family of ordinary size or which is occupied by such a single family. 
    "Water connection" means that part of the city water distribution system connecting the watermain with the premises served. 
    "Watermain" means that part of the city water distribution system located with easement lines or streets designed to supply more than one water connection. 
    "Water meter" means the meter itself, the remote dial and the wire connecting them where pertinent. 
    "Water supply services" means the transportation, metering, pumping and delivery of the city water to the premises now or hereafter connected directly or indirectly to the water supply system. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.020 - Systems owned by city. 
    All public water systems located in the city shall be owned, operated and maintained by the city or its agent. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.030 - Connection specifications. 
    All water connections made directly or indirectly to the water system shall be made only after a permit therefor has been obtained and shall be in compliance with the requirements and regulations of the department, the county, DWSD and MDEQ and constructed only with such workmanship and of such materials as are approved by the city. Such requirements and regulations and the rules for approval by the city shall be available at all times in the office of the city clerk and at the offices of the department and shall be summarized on any water connection permit issued by the city or the department. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.040 - Right of entry. 
    By connecting premises to the water system the owner thereof irrevocably grants to the city and the department the right to enter at all reasonable times onto or in such premises for the purpose of reading meters and installation, inspection, repair and maintenance of water supply and water use facilities on or in the premises. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.050 - Service connections-Application-Installation. 
    Application for water connections shall be made to the department on forms prescribed and furnished by it. The department may refuse to authorize a larger service pipe than reasonably required by the premises served. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in accordance with rules and regulations of the department and upon payment of the required connection fee and meter installation fee. All meter and water connections shall be the property of the city. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.060 - Turning on water service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the department, shall turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing such plumber's work (then it must be immediately turned off) or upon receiving a written order from the department. Upon written permit from the department, water may be turned on for construction purposes only, prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the premises, and upon payment of the charges applicable thereto, which shall include the connection fee, meter installation fee and deposit. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.070 - Disruption of service-City not liable. 
    The city shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting off the water to make necessary repairs or connections or for any other reason. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.080 - Water emergency regulations. 
A.  Whenever the city manager, or his designee, receives notification from the DWSD, in conjunction with the Water and Radiological Protection Division of the MDEQ, that the supply or pressure demand for water cannot be accommodated and general welfare is likely to be endangered, or conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city, the city manager, or his designee, shall determine whether a state of emergency exists based upon current storage levels and back up system capacity and flowage capabilities. If it is determined that a state of emergency exists, it shall be prescribed that, for all properties connected to the city water system, the sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall only be allowed for properties with odd-numbered addresses on odd-numbered dates within a month and for properties with even-numbered addresses on even-numbered dates within a month. Within twenty-four hours of such determination, the city and the DWSD shall cause these regulations to be posted at the city offices and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and may cause such announcement to be further declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become effective immediately after posting at the city offices. 
B.  Whenever the city manager, or his designee, receives notification from the DWSD, in conjunction with the Water and Radiological Protection Division of the MDEQ, that the provisions in subsection A above are not sufficient, the city manager or his designee shall reexamine current storage levels and back up system capacity and flowage capabilities. If the city manager, or his designee, determines that conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city, all outdoor water use shall be prohibited, including the sprinkling of lawns and landscaping. Within twenty-four hours of such determination, the city and the DWSD shall cause these regulations to be posted at the city offices and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and may cause such announcement to be further declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become effective immediately after posting at the city offices. 
C.  Whenever the city manager, or his designee, received notification from the DWSD, in conjunction with the Water and Radiological Protection Division of the MDEQ, that the emergency regulations are no longer necessary, the city shall cause a public announcement lifting the water restrictions if the city manager, or his designee, determines that the general welfare of the city is not endangered by the lifting of the water restrictions. 
D.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions contained in Section 13.04.080, if, for any reason, the available supply of water is insufficient, or threatens to be insufficient, to supply the total demand of the water distribution system, the city manager and/or the director of public services, may regulate, limit or prohibit the use of water for any purpose. Such regulations shall restrict less essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to assure an adequate supply for essential domestic and commercial needs for fire fighting. Within twenty-four hours of such determination, the city shall cause the regulations to be posted at the city offices and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and may cause such announcement to be further declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become effective immediately after posting at the city offices. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.090 - Issuance of additional regulations. 
    The director of the department may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning the water distribution system, connections, thereto, meter installations and maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants and water mains and the appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent herewith. Such rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the council. The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until changed in accordance with this section. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.100 - Tampering with, injuring facilities. 
    No person, except an authorized person of the city in the performance of such employee's duties, shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the city water distribution system. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.110 - Cross-connections. 
A.  The water supply cross-connection rules of the MDEQ being R325.11401-R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code, are adopted by reference. 
B.  The inspections shall be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city. 
C.  Representatives of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections. On request the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
D.  Water service shall be discontinued after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system shall be taken. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
E.  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
F.  No cross-connections shall be permitted, made, maintained or continued hereafter between any part of the water system and any other water supply facilities nor shall any other source of water, private or public, be cross-connected or interconnected with any facilities of the system or with any water mains, lines, pipes, plumbing or appliances which are connected to the system or in which water supplied by the system flows or can flow. 
G.  This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code but is supplementary to them. 
H.  All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of assemblies shall be conducted on an annual basis and as required by the city and in accordance with the MDEQ requirements. Only individuals that are state of Michigan certified shall be qualified to perform such testing. 
(Ord. 07-05 § 1, 2007: § 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.120 - Fire hydrants. 
    Fire hydrants are provided for the use of the department and the city fire department. Other persons may be authorized to make use of such hydrants when a permit has been granted for such use. No person shall open or cause to be opened any fire hydrant without first securing a nontransferable hydrant permit from the department. The cost of such permit shall be in an amount established by resolution of the council plus an amount to be determined by an estimate of water to be consumed (including sewage disposal charges for same). Such person issued a permit shall report to the department when such hydrant use is terminated, at which time a hydrant inspection shall be made. Any cost of repairing a hydrant shall be deducted from the security deposit. The difference shall be refunded to the depositor, but if the deposit is insufficient to cover the cost of repair the permit holder shall pay the deficit. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.130-13.04.190 - Reserved. 
Article II. - Meters 

13.04.200 - Use required-Exception-Tampering with. 
    All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise provided in this code. No person except a department employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any meter. The director of public services, with the approval of the city manager, may authorize service on flat rate changes where it is not practical to install a meter. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.201 - Secondary (dual) water meters. 
    At the option of a property owner, an additional water meter, referred to as a secondary water meter, may be installed. The secondary water meter shall allow for the metering of water that is directed exclusively to a sprinkler system or outside spigot or connection such as, but not limited, to a swimming pool, which water would not enter a sanitary sewer system and will not be applied to the calculation of the sewage disposal bill for the property. The installation, use and other provisions of this code which apply to a single water meter shall also apply to the secondary water meter. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.210 - Location. 
    Water meters shall be set in an accessible location and in a manner satisfactory to the director of public services. Where the premises contains no basement or other place suitable for meter installation, the meter shall be installed outside in a meter pit or box, the location of which shall be approved by the director of public services. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit or box, such pit or box shall be built at the expense of the owner of the premises served as directed by the director of public services. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.220 - Access. 
    The department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the department shall at all reasonable hours have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing or inspecting same. No person shall hinder, obstruct or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of such employee's duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such water meter. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.230 - Reimbursement for damage. 
    Any damage which a water meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent or tenant or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water or steam backing from a boiler shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city on presentation of a bill which shall be based on time and materials, and shall be collected as specified in Article V of this chapter, rates and charges, for the collection of service charges. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.240 - Accuracy. 
    A water meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested, it registers not to exceed five percent more or five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of five percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered fast to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered slow to that extent. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.250 - Inaccurate meters. 
    A consumer may require that the water meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge in an amount established by resolution of the council will be made. If the meter is found defective it shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.260 - Bill adjustment. 
    If a water meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been determined to register fast, the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent fast multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by such consumer, within the three months prior to the test, and if a meter so tested is determined to register slow, the department may collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent slow multiplied by the amount of all the bills incurred by the consumer for the prior three months. When the department on its own initiative makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than the consumer paying the amount due the city for water used by the consumer as above provided, if the meter is found to be slow. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.270-13.04.290 - Reserved. 
Article III. - Water Main Construction 

13.04.300 - Permit-Required. 
    No water main which shall serve or be designed to serve more than one premises shall be constructed, reconstructed or altered in the city unless a permit for such construction, reconstruction or alteration is first procured from the city. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.310 - Permit-Application. 
    Application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by complete plans, specifications and cost estimate which shall be submitted to the department for review and approval before such permit is issued. Such review will include: 
A.  Checking water main plans for size of mains and adequacy of gates and fire hydrants; 
B.  Determining protection of pipe, width of trench and strength of pipe by depth of main and type of soil to be encountered; 
C.  General review of cost estimate for payment of fees; 
D.  Review for compliance to the city standards and specifications. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.320 - Permit-Issuance of denial-Appeals. 
    If the plans and specifications are approved by the department, the department shall forward the plans and specs to DWSD for approval. If DWSD issues its permit, DWSD shall forward the plans specifications to MDEQ for approval. If MDEQ issues its permit, a water main construction permit shall be issued upon payment of the fees as hereinafter provided. If the department does not approve the plans and specifications, they shall give recommendations in writing to the applicant. The applicant may amend the plans and specifications in accordance with such recommendations or may appeal the decision of the department to the council in writing. In such event the applicant shall be given a hearing before the council at a regular meeting within thirty days after notice of appeal is received by the city clerk. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.330 - Inspections during progress-Departure from approved plans-Notice of violation. 
    The department shall make or cause to be made all such inspections of projects under this article including the receipt of material tests and the requests for compaction tests by an approved independent testing laboratory, costs therefor chargeable to the owner, as the work progresses as the department shall deem necessary to ensure that the water main will be built in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in accordance with all provisions of this code and ordinances and regulations of the city, DWSD and MDEQ. The department shall have the right to authorize departures from the approved plans and specifications where necessary because of unforeseen circumstances, but no departures from the approved plans and specifications shall be made without the prior knowledge and resultant changes made by the consulting engineers preparing the original plans with subsequent authorization therefor by the department. If the department shall find that the improvements are not being installed or constructed in accordance with the aforementioned standards, the department shall issue a written notice of violation requiring the installation or construction to be so corrected. In such notice the department shall specify a time limit for the correction of the violations. If the violations are not corrected within the specified time, the department or the department's representative may order all work stopped. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.340 - Review fee. 
    A review fee as established by resolution of the city council of the estimated cost of the project as determined by the owner's engineer shall be paid to the city at the time an application for permit is filed under this article. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.350 - Permit fee-Final field inspection. 
A.  A permit fee in an amount as established by resolution of the council shall be deposited with the city to reimburse the ordinary costs incurred by the city for inspection during water main construction. The amount of all fees shall be adjusted to meet the actual cost of inspection of the project after work is completed at which time an additional inspection fee may be required and become payable to the city or a refund made to the owner. 
B.  Upon completion of the project the department shall make a final field inspection accompanied by the owner's consulting engineer who shall furnish thereto copies of gate valve and well hydrant, and water main locations and sizes to the department. The owner's engineer shall then prepare as-built drawings of the project furnishing the department with one set of reproducible sealed mylar plans thereof. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.360-13.04.390 - Reserved. 
Article IV. - Appointment of Cost of Water Mains 

13.04.400 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide the means for the equitable appointment of offsite water mains installed at the cost of certain benefited property owners, the existence of which will benefit other property owners not joining in the cost of construction. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.410 - Application. 
    If at the time any property owner desires to construct or have constructed any necessary offsite water main to serve such person's property and other benefited properties, such property owner may make application to the council to have such improvement constructed at such person's expense, subject to reimbursement in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.420 - Approval by council. 
    If it shall appear to the satisfaction of the council that it is not possible or practical to obtain contributions toward the cost of the improvement from all benefited property owners, and that it is not possible or practical for the city to construct the improvement by special assessment or otherwise, the council may approve such request and instruct the department to submit plans and specifications for such improvement together with an estimate of the cost thereof, and a description of all benefited properties. After receiving such report the council may approve same and by resolution authorize the construction of the improvement, in accordance with all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city or of other appropriate public bodies. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.430 - Deposit paid by property owners. 
    Upon approval by the council, the property owners making application under this article shall pay to the city clerk the full amount of the cost of the improvement as estimated by the department. The city will thereupon proceed with the necessary engineering, advertising for bids, awarding construction contracts and constructing the improvement. When all actual costs of construction of the improvement are known, if such cost is in excess of the funds deposited, the applicant will pay such excess to the city, of if less than such funds advanced the city will return the surplus to the applicant. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.440 - Payment of proportionate share. 
    No connection shall be permitted to be made to any off-site water main constructed at the expense of any one or more benefited property owners in accordance with this article by any benefited property which has not contributed toward the cost thereof, until as a condition precedent thereto the owner of such benefited property shall have paid to the city, in addition to all other costs, charges, fees or other payments required by any ordinance or resolution of the city, its proportionate share of the cost of such improvement as established by the council. All such sums collected, less such reasonable charge as shall be imposed by the city for the cost of collection and handling, shall be returned to the property owners at whose cost the improvement was constructed in order to reimburse them for moneys advanced in excess of their proportionate share of the cost of the improvement. . 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.450 - City not responsible for uncollected charge. 
    Nothing contained in this article or in any action of the council hereunder shall be construed as requiring the city to make any reimbursement to any property owner except out of the charges provided for in the previous section, and the city shall not be responsible for any failure to collect such charges regardless of the reason therefor. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.460-13.04.490 - Reserved. 
Article V. - Rates and Charges 
Division 1. - Generally 

13.04.500-13.04.590 - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Administration 

13.04.600 - Billing-Due date-Delinquent accounts. 
    No free water service shall be furnished to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. Charges for water services shall be billed and collected quarterly or more often, as shall be determined by the council. Such charges shall become due thirty days after the mailing of the water bills, and if such charges are not paid on or before such due date, then a penalty of ten percent shall be added thereto. If the charges for any such services furnished to any premises are not paid within thirty days after the due date thereof, all services furnished by the system to such premises may be discontinued. Services so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing, including penalties, shall be paid, plus a shutoff charge and a turn-on charge in an amount to be established by resolution of the council. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.610 - Creation of lien. 
    Charges for services furnished by the water systems to any premises shall be a lien thereon upon the distribution of water to the premises, and on June 1st of each year the person or agency charged with the management of such systems shall certify any such charges which have been delinquent six months or more to the finance director/treasurer who shall enter the same upon the next roll against the premises to which such services shall have been rendered. An administrative fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars shall also be added to delinquent accounts in the event a lien becomes necessary and collected in connection with the lien against the property. The administrative fee shall be charged by the city in order to cover its costs associated with respect to unpaid water bills. Delinquent water charges and related fees, penalties and interest shall be collected and shall be enforced as a lien upon the property in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll; provided, that when a tenant is responsible for the payment of any such charge against any premises, and the city is notified in writing, with a true copy of the lease of the affected premises (if there is one) attached, then no such charge shall become a lien against such premises from and after the date of such notice. However, in event of the filing of such notice, no further service shall be rendered by the system to such premises until a cash deposit equal to three times the average quarterly charges to such premises shall have been made as security for the payment of charges thereto. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 6-28-2011) 
13.04.620 - Fiscal year. 
    The water service systems shall be operated upon the basis of a fiscal year beginning on July 1st of each year and ending on June 30th of the following year. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.630 - Operating agent. 
    The operation, maintenance and management of the water supply system located in the city shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the department or agent for the city. The agent acting through the department shall bill on behalf of and as agent for the city all charges payable thereto. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.640-13.04.690 - Reserved. 
Division 3. - Water Charges 

13.04.700 - Use of system. 
    The system shall be used for the transportation and delivery of city water only. Connections to the system, directly or indirectly, and the use of water therefrom for all purposes shall be only in compliance with this code and with the standards and regulations of the city, DWSD and MDEQ applicable thereto. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.710 - Use measured by meter-Rates for city use-Payment of connection costs. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, water to be furnished by the water supply system to each premises shall be measured by a meter installed and controlled by the city. Charges shall be made to the respective premises as provided by resolution adopted and amended from time to time by the city council. The charges established by city council resolution adopted July 13, 1999 shall continue in effect until amended by future resolution. Charges shall be billed at least one month before their due date. 
B.  The city shall establish appropriate standards for determining the number of units to be assigned to premises of different character or occupancy. 
C.  The cost of water service connections from the water mains of the water supply system to private premises shall not be paid by the city or from the revenues of the water supply system. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.720 - Assignment of units. 
    The number of units to be assigned to any particular premises used for any purpose shall be determined by the city in accordance with schedule and materials prepared, assembled and used by the city for water supply systems under its jurisdiction and its decision shall be final. The city, if the circumstances justify, may assign more than one unit to a single-family dwelling. No less than one unit shall be assigned to each premises but units in excess of one may be computed and assigned to the nearest tenth. If subsequent changes in use of premises increase or decrease the unit classification of any premises the city may increase or decrease the number of units assigned to such premises. No change in subsequent use of any premises shall result in a decrease of unit assignment to less than one. Capital charges and/or debt service charges which have been collected are not returnable. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.730-13.04.790 - Reserved. 
Article VI. - Enforcement and Violation 

13.04.800 - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable as prescribed in the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus or otherwise, in any court having jurisdiction. Any violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.04.810 - Violations and Penalties. 
A.  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter of the city of Wixom shall be deemed to be a civil infraction. In the event a determination of responsibility for a civil infraction under this chapter is made, a maximum fine of one hundred dollars may be imposed. 
B.  In addition to ordering the defendant responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, the court shall also impose any other costs, damages, and expenses as provided by law. 
C.  In addition to civil infraction enforcement, the court shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ, order or equitable relief necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this chapter. 
D.  Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 07-05 § 4, 2007: § 2 (part) of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
Chapter 13.08 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
Article I. - General-Operation and Maintenance 

13.08.010 - Public utility established. 
    It is determined to be desirable and necessary for the public health, safety and welfare of the city to place the sewage disposal system on a public utility basis in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and Act 185, Public Acts of 1957, as amended. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of certain terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "Available public sanitary sewer" means a public sanitary sewer system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon the property and passing not more than two hundred feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
    "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drain pipes inside the wall of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    "Charges for sewage disposal services" or "charges" means the amount charged to each premises in the city for sewage disposal services. 
    "City" means the council of the city, the legislative and governing body thereof. 
    "Commercial users" means those users located on commercial real property as defined in the General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.34c(2)(b). 
    "Connection" means the attaching of one public sewer to another public sewer and also the attaching of a building sewer to a public sewer, as the context of this article may require. 
    "Department" means the department of public services and/or the operating agent of the city. 
    "Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce. 
    "Inspection and approval fee" means the amount charged to each applicant by the city at the time an application is made to the city to connect said premises to the system to cover the cost of inspecting and approving the physical connection to the system. 
    "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of water, either surface water or groundwater. 
    "Premises" means the lands included within the boundaries of a single description as set forth from time to time on the general tax rolls of the city as a single taxable item in the name of a taxpayer or taxpayers at one address, but in the case of platted lots shall be limited to a single platted lot unless an existing building or structure is located on more than one lot as to make the same a single description for purposes of assessment or conveyance now or hereafter. "Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes, solids or semisolids from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the cooking, preparation and dispensing of food that has been cut or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half in any dimension. 
    "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    "Revenues" and "net revenues" are understood to have the meanings as defined in Section 3, Act 94, Public Acts of 1933, as amended. 
    "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentially admitted. 
    "Sewage" means any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business and commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
    "Sewage disposal services" refer to the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage emanating from properties now or hereafter connected directly or indirectly to the sewage disposal system. 
    "Sewage disposal system" means the Wixom sewage disposal system. 
    "Sewer" means any pipe, tile tubes or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    "Storm sewer" or "storm drain" means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    "Structure in which sanitary sewage originates" or "structure" means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate water-carried sanitary sewage, are used or are available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. 
    "The system" means the complete sanitary sewage disposal system of the city, including all sewers, pumps, lift stations, treatment facilities and all other facilities used or useful in the collection, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial or industrial wastes, including all appurtenances thereto and including all extensions and improvements thereto, which may hereafter be acquired, including all such facilities in the city, or serving premises in the city, as the Wixom disposal system pursuant to Act 185, and all extensions, enlargements and improvements thereof. 
    "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. This shall include the gutter section of a paved street with curb and gutter. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
( Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-9-2016 ) 
13.08.030 - Supervision and control. 
    The operation, maintenance and management of the system shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the council or the agent thereof, if it is so designated. The city may by appropriate legislative action designate an operating agent in which case the agent shall comply with all requirements in this article. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.031 - Policy. 
    City Policy Relative to Construction and Financing of Sewers. All sewage disposal facilities now or hereafter located in or serving areas in the city and in adopting the several ordinances of the city pertaining to sewage disposal are all in furtherance of the policy expressed in this chapter to provide sewage disposal services to all improved premises in the city from which sanitary sewage emanates as of July 1st, 1967, as a general ad valorem charge and expense against all taxable property in the city and to provide sewage disposal services to all premises thereafter improved in the city by connection charge, special assessment or at the expense of the owner or developer as the owner or owners may require or request by proper petition, application or permit in compliance with the said ordinances and contracts. 
(§ 1 of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
13.08.040 - Charges, billing. 
A.  Charges. 
    Charges for sewage disposal services to each premises within the city connected to the sewage disposal system shall be fixed by resolution adopted and amended from time to time by the city council. The charges established by city council resolution adopted July 13, 1999 shall continue in effect until amended by future resolution. Charges shall be based on use factor units, or if the premises are served by the city water distribution system, charges shall be based on the quantity of water used as measured by meter. Charges for service furnished by the system shall be billed and collected quarterly at the same time as the water bill is rendered, and shall represent charges for the quarterly period immediately preceding the date of rendering the bill. Bills shall become due and payable within thirty days from the date thereof. 
B.  Units Assigned. 
    There has be assigned to each premises connected to the system a number of sanitary use factor units determined in accordance with the schedule of unit factors adopted by resolution of the city council and made effective from time to time as set forth on the official schedule on file in the office of the city clerk. Unit assignments shall be made initially by the director of public services, whose decision may be appealed to the city council, whose decision shall be final. More than one unit may be assigned to a single family dwelling if circumstances justify. No less than one unit shall be assigned to each premises but, for purpose of computing sewage disposal service charges, units in excess of one may be computed and assigned to the nearest tenth. Once any premises has been connected to the system and has been assigned one or more units, subsequent changes in the character of the use of the premises shall not abate the obligation to continue the payment of service charges in the amount hereinabove provided for the number of units assigned at the time of connection or for such less or greater number of units as the changed character of the use of the premises justify, but in no event for less than one unit. If subsequent changes in use increase the amount of sanitary sewage emanating from the premises, the director of public service may increase the number of units assigned the premises, whose decision may be appealed to the city council, whose decision shall be final. 
C.  Special Rates. 
    For miscellaneous services or facilities furnished by the system for which a special rate is established, such rates shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Late Payment Charges, Discontinuance of Service. 
    If any charges are not paid on or before the due date than a penalty of ten percent shall be added thereto. In the event that the charges for any such services furnished to any premises shall not be paid within sixty days after the due date thereof, then all services furnished by the sewage disposal system shall be discontinued. Service so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing, including penalties, are paid, plus a shut-off charge and a turn-on charge as established by resolution of the city council. 
E.  Lien. 
    Delinquent sewer charges and related fees, penalties and interest shall be collected and shall be enforced as a lien upon the property as of the due date thereof. An administrative fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars shall also be added to delinquent accounts in the event a lien becomes necessary and collected in connection with the lien against the property. The administrative fee shall be charged by the city in order to cover its costs associated with respect to unpaid sewer bills. On June 1st of each year the city clerk shall certify any such charges which have been delinquent six months or more, plus fees, penalties and interest accrued thereon, to the director of finance/treasurer who shall enter the same on the next tax roll against the premises to which such services have been rendered and against which the charges, with fees, penalties and interest accrued thereon, shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon the roll. 
F.  No Free Service. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
G.  Charges Revised When Necessary. 
    The charges fixed in this article are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of all sewage disposal system operation and maintenance obligations of the city as the same become due, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as this article may require or permit. Such charges shall be fixed and revised from time to time by resolution of the city council, as may be necessary to produce these amounts. The charges established by city council resolution adopted July 13, 1999 shall continue in effect until amended by future resolution. 
(§ 5 of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, § 1, 6-28-2011) 
13.08.070 - Operating year. 
    The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on July 1st and ending June 30th next following. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.080 - Receiving fund established. 
    The revenues of the system shall be set aside as collected and deposited in a separate depository account in such bank or banks as may be authorized from time to time by the city council for the deposit of city funds in an account to be designated "sewage disposal system receiving fund" (hereinafter, for brevity, referred to as the "receiving fund"), and said revenues so deposited shall be transferred from the receiving fund periodically in the manner and at the times specified in this article. 
A.  Operation and Maintenance Fund. Out of the revenues in the receiving fund there shall be first set aside semi-annually into a depository account designated "operation and maintenance fund" a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the next quarter's current expenses of administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. 
B.  Replacement Fund. There shall next be established and maintained a depository account designated "replacement fund" which shall be used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacements to the system if needed. There shall be set aside into said fund, after provision has been made for the operation and maintenance fund, such sum as the city council shall deem necessary for this purpose. 
C.  Improvement Fund. There shall next be established and maintained an improvement fund for the purpose of making improvements, extensions and enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited into the fund, after providing for the foregoing funds, such sum as the city council shall determine. 
D.  Surplus Moneys. Moneys remaining in the receiving fund at the end of any operating year, after full satisfaction of the requirements of the foregoing funds, may, at the option of the city council, be transferred to the improvement fund or used for any other lawful purpose relating to sewage disposal specified by the city council. 
E.  Bank Accounts. All moneys belonging to any of the foregoing funds or accounts may be kept in one bank account, in which event the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the city within this single bank account, in the manner above set forth. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.090 - Transfer of funds. 
A.  All funds derived from the collection of rates for services furnished by the system on hand in any account of the effective date of this article shall be transferred to the receiving fund and be distributed therefrom in accordance with the terms of this article. 
B.  In the event the moneys in the receiving fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the operation and maintenance fund, any moneys and/or securities in other funds of the system shall be transferred to the operation and maintenance fund to the extent of any deficit therein. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.100 - Investments-Securities. 
    Moneys in any fund or account established by the provisions of this article may be invested in obligations of the United States of America or in interest-bearing bank accounts or certificates of deposit in the manner and subject to the limitations provided in Act 94, Public Acts of 1933, as amended. In the event such investments are made, the securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds from which such purchase was made. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the fund from which said investments were made. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.130-13.08.190 - Reserved 
Article II. - Construction of Sewers 

13.08.200 - Prohibited uses. 
    The system shall be used for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage only. Downspouts, footing drains, weep tile, or any conduit that carries stormwater or groundwater alone or in a combination with sanitary sewage shall not be connected to the system, directly or indirectly. Industrial and commercial waste shall be discharged into the system only in compliance with the standards and regulations of the city. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.230 - Permits required. 
A.  Only authorized persons shall uncover and make any connections with or openings into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, and then only after written permit from the city. 
B.  Any person desiring to do business as a sewer builder in connection with the system must be licensed by the state and be registered with the department. Fee for said registration shall be provided for by resolution of the city council. This shall not prevent any homeowner from constructing a building sewer on his own property provided he signs an affidavit to that effect at the time of obtaining a permit. 
C.  This further shall not prevent any commercial or industrial contractor from constructing sewers on commercial or industrial property. 
D.  No sanitary sewer which shall serve or be designed to serve more than one premises shall be constructed, reconstructed or altered in the city unless a permit for such construction, reconstruction or alteration is first procured from the city. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.235 - Permit-Application. 
    Application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by complete plans, specifications and cost estimate which shall be submitted to the director of public services for review and approval before such permit is issued. Such review will include: 
A.  Checking sanitary sewer to determine proper grades with resultant self-cleaning velocities; 
B.  Determining types of joints on the basis of the characteristics of the particular area; 
C.  Determining protection of pipe, width of trench and strength of pipe by depth of sewer and type of soil to be encountered; 
D.  Checking sizes to determine needs for sanitary sewers; 
E.  General review of cost estimate for payment of fees; 
F.  Review for compliance to the city standards and specifications as may be from time to time amended by resolution by the city council. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.240 - Permit-Issuance or denial- Appeals. 
    If the plans and specifications are approved by the director of public services, the sewer construction permit shall be issued upon payment of the fees as hereinafter provided. If the director of public services does not approve the plans and specifications, the director shall give recommendations in writing to the city with a copy to the applicant. The applicant may amend the plans and specifications in accordance with such recommendations or may appeal the decision of the director to the council in writing. In such event the applicant shall be given a hearing before the council at a regular meeting within thirty days after notice of appeal is received by the city clerk. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.245 - Installation of sewers-Compliance with state recommendations. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of all sewers shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Natural Resources, and shall be constructed and connected in accordance with regulations of the city. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.250 - Connection permit. 
    No house connection sewer shall be installed without a permit having been issued for the same by the city. The fee for such permit shall be established by resolution of the city council. Opportunity for such city inspection shall be provided after all pipe is in place and before the backfilling of any trench or the covering of such pipe. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.255 - Installation of building sewer. 
    All building sewer construction and the installation of pipes, fittings and appurtenances shall be done in accordance with the building regulations of the city and such supplementary rules and regulations as the director of public services may prescribe, which shall be effective upon approval by the city council. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.260 - Control manholes. 
    When required by the director of public services, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, shall be accessible at all times to the director of public services and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.265 - Damaging, tampering with sewage works. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage system. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.270 - Right of entry for inspection, etc. 
    The director of public services and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.275 - Private ownership. 
    All building sewers except as hereinafter provided shall be privately owned, operated and maintained. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.280 - Inspections during progress- Departure from approved plans-Notice of violation. 
    The director of public services shall make or cause to be made all such inspections of projects under this article including the receipt of material tests and the requests for compaction tests by an approved independent testing laboratory, costs therefor chargeable to the owner, as the work progresses as the director shall deem necessary to ensure that the sanitary sewer will be built in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in accordance with all provisions of this code and ordinances and regulations of the city. The director of public services shall have the right to authorize departures from the approved plans and specifications where necessary because of unforeseen circumstances, but no departures from the approved plans and specifications shall be made without the prior knowledge and resultant charges made by the consulting engineers preparing the original plans with subsequent authorization therefor by the director. If the director of public services shall find that the improvements are not being installed or constructed in accordance with the aforementioned standards, the director shall issue a written notice of violation requiring the installation or construction to be so corrected. In such notice the director of public services shall specify a time limit for the correction of the violations. If the violations are not corrected within the specified time, the director of public services or the director's representative may order all work stopped. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.285 - Permit fee-Final field inspection. 
A.  A permit fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be deposited with the city to reimburse the ordinary costs incurred by the city for inspection during sewer construction. The amount of all fees shall be adjusted to meet the actual cost of inspection of the project after work is completed at which time an additional inspection fee may be required and become payable to the city or a refund made to the owner. 
B.  Upon completion of the project the director of public services shall make a final field inspection accompanied by the owner's consulting engineer and shall furnish thereto copies of wye locations of other predetermined buried outlets. The owner's engineer shall then prepare as-built drawings of the project furnishing the department with one set of reproducible mylar plans thereof. (§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.295 - Tap-in fees-Installment agreements. 
A.  Sewer Permit Fee. Unless modified by the process described in subsection (C) or (D) of this section, prior to the start of constructing a public and/or private sanitary sewer in the city, the contractor must possess a sewer permit for the project issued by the city. A fee as set by resolution of the city council per unit as determined by the unit factors in effect on the date of application for a sewer connection permit shall be charged by the city for each connection to an existing public sewer or private sewer connecting to a public sewer. No such connections shall be allowed until the fee is paid. The contractor shall notify the city at least forty-eight hours prior to the start of sewer construction and request inspections of all connections to any public sewers. 
B.  Tap-in Fees. Unless modified by the process described in subsection (C) or (D) of this section, in the case of an expansion of an existing private or public sewer system or an addition in excess of one thousand square feet to a commercial structure whether or not such structural addition contains plumbing facilities, before a sewer permit can be issued, additional tap-in fees must be paid in accord with the unit fee schedule adopted herein. 
C.  Review by Building Official. In those instances where a commercial user or the city believes that the unit factor assigned does not adequately reflect actual use, said parties may request a review by the building official. In such review process the building official shall consider data presented by the petitioner and may present to the city council a recommendation suggesting an alternate unit factor based upon the formula of one unit per one hundred fifteen thousand gallons per year. Should the city council choose to accept the recommendation of the building official, the parties shall enter into the agreement entitled Exhibit A, on file in the office of the city clerk, which understanding calls for immediate payment of the adjusted unit factor fee and an annual review by the city of actual water or effluent flow for a period of five years. The Exhibit A contract, the form of which may from time to time be modified by resolution of city council, shall empower the city to increase the adjusted unit factor fee should the monitoring process indicate water or effluent flows in excess of levels anticipated on the date of the execution of the agreement. 
D.  Installment Agreements. Under limited circumstances, a commercial user wishing to pay a tap-in fee in installments may petition the city council for an installment agreement, subject to the following: 
1.  Applications for installment agreements are only available for tap-in fees with a total amount in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars. 
2.  Any outstanding tap-in fees previously incurred by the commercial user must be paid in full prior to requesting an installment agreement for another piece of property. 
3.  The petition must include a copy of the existing lease between the commercial user and the property owner, if the property is not owned by the commercial user. 
4.  The installment agreement will be prepared and/or reviewed by the city attorney prior to presentation of the petition to city council, with all attorney fees to be paid by petitioner. 
5.  Any installment agreement would be subject to the initial payment of twenty-five percent of the total tap-in fee ("initial payment") prior to the execution of an installment agreement. 
6.  The installment agreement shall be signed by both the commercial user and property owner, if different. 
7.  The term of any installment agreement shall be no more than five years. However, the final payment due under the installment agreement will be no later than twelve months prior to the end of an existing lease if the commercial user does not own the property. 
8.  Installment payments shall be made twice per year. All installment payments shall be due on April 1 and October 1 of each year. However, in the event the initial payment required in subsection (5) above falls within thirty days prior to April 1, then the first installment payment shall be due on October 1; if the initial payment falls within thirty days prior to October 1, the first installment payment shall be due the following April 1. 
9.  An installment fee of one percent of the total tap-in fee will also be assessed and payable along with the initial payment. 
10.  Installment payments will include accrued interest at the rate of interest determined and approved by the city. 
11.  The city council may grant the petition, in its sole discretion, if the city council determines that there are unique circumstances to justify the extension of time to pay the tap-in fees. 
12.  In the event that the petition is granted based on misrepresentation, the city may recalculate the amounts owing under the installment agreement. In addition if the city should discover during the term of the installment agreement that the use of the premises has been expanded, or other circumstances which would require that the number of tap-in fees should be increased, the city shall notify the commercial user of the increase, and the payments due and owing under the installment agreement shall be automatically recalculated and all fees shall be paid within the term periods contained in the installment agreement. 
13.  All installment agreements shall be executed in recordable form, signed by the owner and the user (if not the same) of the property in question, and shall be recorded. All installment agreements will subject both the property owner and the petitioning user (if not the same) to personal liability for any and all amounts owed under the terms of the agreement. Should a delinquency in any installment due under the agreement continue for a period of time in excess of ninety (90) days, or should the final payment be delinquent to any extent, the city at its sole option may add any and all amounts due under the agreement to the tax rolls concerning the subject property or in the alternative, seek legal action against the petitioner user. In the event of legal action, the property owner and/or petitioning user shall be responsible for not only all amounts due under the installment agreement but for all litigation, attorney fees, and other expenses incurred by the city in any necessary collection process. 
14.  There will be no refunds of any amounts paid under a tap-in fee installment agreement. If, prior to actual tap-in, a project which is the subject of a fee installment agreement is canceled, upon written notice to the city by the user, the cessation of construction will be verified by the city. Upon receipt of a confirming report by the city from the department of public services of construction termination, the installment agreement shall be deemed nullified. All interest and fees set forth in the agreement will continue to accrue until submission to the city of the confirming report. Upon termination of the agreement, prior to actual tap-in, all administration fees, attorney fees, penalties and interest due shall be subtracted from previously paid principal amounts and the remaining net amount shall be available to the user or the user's assigns for the same property as a future credit toward tap-in fees at whatever tap-in rate might be in effect when a future tap-in permit is requested for the subject property. No interest shall be credited to any future user on any principal amounts left on deposit with the city. Any interest earned on such deposits shall become the sole property of the city. Once a tap-in is actually made to the property, all the terms of the installment agreement concerning a particular piece of property shall remain in full force and effect and shall be paid in accordance with the conditions set forth therein. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
( Ord. No. 2016-04, § 2, 2-9-2016 ) 
13.08.300 - Air and infiltration testing. 
A.  All public sanitary sewers constructed in the city shall be tested for groundwater infiltration. All testing shall be performed or caused to be performed by the parties causing the sewer to be constructed. All tests shall be witnessed by the department. The department shall be notified at least twenty-four hours prior to such test. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other ordinance of the city, infiltration rate shall not exceed two hundred fifty gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per twenty-four hours of an overall project nor shall the infiltration exceed five hundred gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per twenty-four hours for any individual run between manholes. In event of infiltration in excess of these amounts, joints shall be recaulked or remade or, if necessary, pipe shall be relaid. The test shall be repeated until results show that seepage has been reduced below the above maximum. 
C.  If, in the opinion of the city, groundwater conditions at the time of test would not provide for a conclusive test of the extent of infiltration, then an exfiltration test shall be required. If an exfiltration test is determined to be necessary, the maximum exfiltration rate shall be the same as that permitted from infiltration. (§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.305 - Abandonment of existing sewage treatment facilities. 
    At such time as a premises connects to the system, all existing septic tanks, cesspool or any similar sewage treatment facility serving the premises shall be abandoned in the following manner: 
A.  The sludge held in the facility, solid and liquid, shall be pumped out and disposed of in a legal manner. The sludge shall not be disposed of into the sanitary sewer system. 
B.  The facility shall be filled with sand and its top broken out. (§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.310 - Costs borne by owner. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and the connection to a public sewer of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city against any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from the installation of the building sewer. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.315 - Separate sewers required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each premises connected to the system at the time of connection for existing building thereon or for buildings hereafter constructed thereon. At any time hereafter that a habitable or operable building is constructed on any premises, construction plans shall be submitted to the city for approval and conditions of connection, operation, maintenance and use of such buildings as to sewage disposal may be thereon imposed. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.320 - Permit required-Inspection and approval fee. 
    Prior to the start of constructing a building sewer, the owner shall obtain a permit from the city and pay an inspection and approval fee for an amount as set by resolution of the city council. The department shall be notified at least twenty-four hours prior to start of construction. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.325 - Surety bond-Cash deposit. 
A.  Prior to construction and during the life of permits obtained in accordance with Sections 13.08.260 and 13.08.310 of this article, all owners or contractors shall: 
1.  Yearly furnish to the city a satisfactory surety bond in the amount as set by resolution of the city council as security for the faithful performance of the work in accordance with the plans and specifications and the city's standards; and 
2.  Yearly furnish to the city a cash deposit as set by resolution of the city council. Such deposit shall provide funds for emergency work and/or such other work as may be deemed necessary by the city, arising as a result of construction by the owner or contractor. Such bonds shall not be canceled by the owner, the contractor or the surety without first having given ten days' written notice to the city. Cash deposits may be returned to the owner or contractor within ten days' receipt or written request therefor, except that no deposits will be returned until such time as all outstanding permits have received final inspection and approval. In the event that it becomes necessary for the city to expend funds for work arising as a result of construction by the owner or the contractor, then the cost of such work shall be deducted from the aforementioned cash deposit. 
B.  The owner or contractor shall have the right and opportunity to correct any deficiencies promptly before any deposit funds will be spent by the city. The owner or contractor shall, within thirty days of the mailing of written notice thereof, pay to the city or its agent the entire amount of such costs. Failure to comply with this regulation and the standards of the city may result in the immediate termination, by the city council, of the surety and cash bonds. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.330 - Nuisance declared. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus or otherwise, in any court having jurisdiction. Any violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.335 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation convicted of disposing of sewage in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article, or failing to connect with an available public sewer as provided in this article, or in any other way violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subjected to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety days or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of the prosecution for each day of violation. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.340-13.08.370 - Reserved 
Article III. - Connection to System 

13.08.380 - Connection necessary for public health. 
    Public sanitary sewer systems are essential to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the state and the city. Septic tank disposal systems are subject to failure due to soil conditions or other reasons. Failure or potential failure of septic tank disposal systems poses a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, presents a potential for ill health, transmission of disease, mortality and potential economic blight and constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of the state and the city. The connection of available public sanitary sewer systems at the earliest reasonable date is a matter for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and necessary in the public interest which is declared as a matter of legislative determination. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.390 - Connection to system required. 
    Structures in which sanitary sewage originates located in the city in the area served by the system for which there is an available public sanitary sewer of the system shall not be used or occupied, after the effective date hereof, unless the structures are connected to the sewage disposal system. Provided, that structures within the city in which sanitary sewage is originating on the effective date of this article or in which sanitary sewage originates before availability of the system or any part thereof to serve the structures shall be connected to the system within seven months after publication of a notice by the city in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of the availability of the system. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.400 - Notice of required connection. 
    When the structure in which sanitary sewage originates has not been connected to an available public sanitary sewer system before use and occupancy or within the seven-month period provided in Section 13.08.390, the city shall require the connection to be made forthwith after notice which may be by first class or certified mail or posting on the property, to the owner of the property on which the structure is located. The notice shall give the approximate location of the public sanitary sewer of the system which is available for connection of the structure involved and shall advise the owner of the requirements and of the enforcement provisions of this article. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.410 - Nuisance declared. 
    Where any structure in which sanitary sewage originates is not connected to an available public sanitary sewer system within ninety days after the date of mailing or posting of the written notice, the provision of this article shall be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus, or otherwise, in any court having jurisdiction. Any violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
13.08.420 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation convicted of disposing of sewage in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article, or failing to connect with an available public sanitary sewer as provided in this article, or in any other way violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subjected to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed ninety days or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court, together with costs of the prosecution. 
(§ 2 (part), of Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 
Article IV. - Wastewater Disposal Standards[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
* Prior history: Ord. 136. 

13.08.430 - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
A.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
B.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
C.  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
D.  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
E.  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
F.  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
    This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(§ 1.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.440 - Administration and enforcement. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(§ 1.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.450 - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
    BOD - biochemical oxygen demand. 
    CFR - Code of Federal Regulations. 
    COD - chemical oxygen demand. 
    EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
    FOG - Fats, wax, grease or oil concentrations of animal or vegetable origin. 
    gpd - gallons per day. 
    mg/l - milligrams per liter. 
    NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    POTW - publicly owned treatment works. 
    RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
    SIC - Standard Industrial Classification. 
    TSS - total suspended solids. 
    U.S.C. - United States Code. 
(Ord. 03-03 § 1, 2003; § 1.3 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.460 - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    "Accidental discharge or slug load" means any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    "Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
    "Approval authority" means the Chief of the Surface Water Quality Division, Michigan Department of Natural Resources or delegated representative. 
    "Authorized representative of the user" means 
1.  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
2.  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
3.  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
4.  The individuals described in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    "Biochemical oxygen demand" or "BOD" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at twenty degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    "Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    "City" means the city of Wixom, the city manager of Wixom and those city personnel designated by the city manager, or the city of Wixom's authorized representative who is contracted by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities identified in this article by a written contract. 
    "Composite sample" means a collection of individual grab samples obtained at regular intervals, either on a time proportional or flow proportional basis, over a specified period which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. For categorical process samples, this is required to be a minimum of four samples per twenty-four hours (403.12(b)). 
    "Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    "Existing source" means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    "FOG" means fats, wax, grease or oil concentrations of animal or vegetable origin (living sources) of more than 100mg/1, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees and sixty-five degrees Celsius) at the point of discharge into the collection system or in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
    "Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen minutes. 
    "Hazardous waste" means anything determined to be a hazardous waste under RCRA or Michigan's Act 64, PA 1979. 
    "Indirect discharge" or "discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    "Industrial user" means a source of industrial waste. Single- and multiple-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics are specifically excluded. 
    "Industrial waste" means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    "Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit" means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    "Interference" means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    "Medical waste" means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the national system for the issuance of permits under Section 402 of the Act and includes any state or interstate program which has been approved by the administrator, in whole or in part, pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
    "New source" means: 
1.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located, or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source, or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered; 
2.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subdivision (1)(b) or (c) of this subsection but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment; 
3.  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
i.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment, or 
ii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment, or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    "Noncontact cooling water" means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    "Pass through" means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
    "pH" means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
    "Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
    "Pretreatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except as prohibited under Section 13.08.510. 
    "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    "Pretreatment standards" or "standards" means and includes all national categorical pretreatment standards, the general and specific prohibitions specified in 40 CFR 403.5, all state standards as well as the prohibitions or limits specified in this article. 
    "Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges" means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 13.08.470. 
    "Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" means a "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    "Septic tank waste" means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
    "Sewage" means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Shall vs. May. "Shall" means mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    "Significant industrial user" means: 
1.  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
2.  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater), 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
3.  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subdivision (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    "Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code" means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    "Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    "Suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    "Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in 40 CRF 401.15 as toxic under the provisions of the Clean Water Act or listed in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
    "User" or "industrial user" means a source of indirect discharge. 
    "Wastewater" means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    "Wastewater treatment plant" or "treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003; § 1.4 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.470 - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A.  General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
B.  Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
1.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-up flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
2.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
3.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch; 
4.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
5.  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (forty degrees Celsius); 
6.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
7.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
8.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with Section 13.08.550; 
9.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
10.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
11.  Stormwater, surface water, clean ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage or any unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city; 
12.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city in a wastewater discharge permit; 
13.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to either cause in-stream toxicity or exhibit effluent toxicity prohibited by law; 
14.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances in amounts which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
15.  Wastewater causing two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter; 
16.  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as ash residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation process. 
C.  Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section, or any material identified by the city, shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(§ 2.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.480 - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are incorporated. A list of federal categories is included in Appendix B attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
A.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
B.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard prior to treatment, the city may impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
C.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
D.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
E.  Categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the EPA, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be adopted and incorporated by amendments to this article. 
(§ 2.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.490 - Local limits. 
A.  The pollutant limits identified in Appendix A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits identified in said Appendix A, except as provided for in subsection B of this section. 
    The limits identified in said Appendix A, apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW, or as otherwise identified in the user's discharge permit. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The city may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations listed in said Appendix A. 
B.  The limits of phosphorus, BOD and suspended solids as stated above, may be exceeded, if approved by the city. Users exceeding the above-stated limits of phosphorus, BOD and suspended solids shall be surcharged for the amount of pollutant exceeding the limits. The surcharge shall be established by the city from time to time and shall be included as part of the Wixom schedule of rates and charges. 
C.  The limits for FOG concentration from industrial and commercial dischargers shall not exceed one hundred mg/l. The city may establish a sampling and inspection program, or require self-monitoring techniques, as established by the city of Wixom department of public services, be implemented by industrial and commercial dischargers, in order to ensure that the local FOG concentration limitations are not being exceeded. In the event the city does establish a sampling and inspection program, the city shall have the authority to recoup the costs of such monitoring. 
Local Limits Local Limits Surcharge Maximum Local Limits Surcharge Maximum Local Limits Parameter (lbs/day) (mg/L) (lbs/day) (mg/L) Arsenic 0.19 0.03 Barium 7.89 1.10 Cadmium 0.29 0.04 Calcium 38,387.00 5,332.58 Chromium (total) 7.73 1.07 Hex. Chrome. 3.15 0.44 Copper 3.74 0.52 Cyanide (A) 3.31 0.46 Iron 79.87 11.09 Lead 2.95 0.41 Magnesium 542.15 75.31 Manganese 158.17 21.97 Mercury 0.00 0.00 Molybdenum (**) 7.71 1.00 Nickel (*) 1.05 0.15 Selenium 0.28 0.04 Silver 0.73 0.10 Zinc (*) 9.03 1.25 PCB's 0.02 0.02 Ammonia (as N) 440.49 61 BOD (Carbonaceous) 21,304.02 2,959.41 TSS 38,871.11 5,399.72 Phosphorus 101.17 14.05 Phenol (all Phenolic compounds) 6.38 0.5 Sulfides 127.60 10 Thallium 1.28 0.10 H 2 S, SO 2 , NO 2 127.60 10 Polychlorinated Biphenyl NONE ALLOWED NONE ALLOWED Radioactive Waste 100 yc/L  
*  Should the industrial user exceed the local limits for Molybdenum, Nickel or Zinc, alternative waste disposal methods at the POTW will be necessary. The industrial user shall be responsible for the removal of all contaminated Biosolids at the POTW subject to the sampling and volumes determined for removals. 
**  Should the concentration of molybdenum in the POTW's sewage sludge exceed 75 mg/kg, alternative waste disposal methods are therefore necessary. The industrial user(s) whose effluent concentration of molybdenum exceeded 0.2 mg/l during the period of sludge accumulation will be surcharged to cover any additional alternative waste disposal costs. If the city is unable to identify any industrial user whose effluent exceeded 0.2 mg/l during that period, all the industrial users previously identified as potential sources of molybdenum will be surcharged. The surcharge will be pro-rated based on the flow contributed by the user. If the influent concentration of molybdenum at the city's waste water treatment plant exceeds 0.2 mg/l, the city may establish a sampling and inspection program, or require self-monitoring programs, as established by the city of Wixom's department of public services, to be implemented by industrial dischargers, in order to ensure that the sludge is suitable for land application. In the event the city does establish a sampling and inspection program, the city shall have the authority to recover any additional costs of such monitoring from users whose effluent is determined to have exceeded 0.2 mg/l. 
(Ord. 03-14 § 1, 2003; Ord. 03-06 § 1, 2003; Ord. 03-03 § 3, 2003; § 2.3 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.500 - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(§ 2.4 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.510 - Dilution of discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(§ 2.5 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.520 - Pretreatment of wastewater-Facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in Section 13.08.470 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the city, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city building department for review, and shall acceptable to the city before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(§ 3.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.530 - Additional pretreatment measures. 
    The city shall require all SIU's to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable flow monitoring and composite sampling facility as determined by the city to ensure proper POTW treatment plant operation. 
(§ 3.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.535 - FOG interceptors. 
A.  All new restaurants and commercial and industrial facilities, which have the potential to discharge FOG into the sanitary sewer system, shall install a FOG interceptor at a minimum of seven hundred fifty gallons, or similar FOG removal system, necessary to achieve and maintain compliance with the limit stated in Section 13.08.490(C). 
B.  Upon six months notification from the city of Wixom department of public services, or in conjunction with any significant alteration to the structure or use of any existing restaurant or commercial and industrial facility which has the potential to discharge FOG into the sanitary sewer system, such restaurant or commercial and industrial facility shall install a FOG interceptor at a minimum of seven hundred fifty gallons, or similar FOG removal system, necessary to achieve and maintain compliance with the limit stated in Section 13.08.490(C). 
C.  Only kitchen wastewater, or other FOG bearing lines, shall be connected to the FOG interceptor. No domestic wastewater or restroom wastewater should enter the FOG interceptor. 
D.  All FOG interceptors, or similar FOG removal systems, shall be cleaned and maintained as necessary to insure FOG discharges of less than the limit stated in Section 13.08.490(C). The interceptors shall be pumped when the FOG concentration exceeds twelve inches in thickness or is within two inches of the discharge pipe in the first chamber. "Jetting out" the FOG removal system is not permitted. 
E.  All FOG interceptors, or similar FOG removal systems, shall be placed in a location that is accessible for cleaning, removal of grease, and acceptable for sampling. The location of the grease interceptor shall meet the approval of the city for sampling and inspection purposes. The sampling box and manhole shall connect directly to the interceptor prior to any domestic wastewater connections. Sampling stations may be used to monitor the efficiency of any interceptor maintenance program. Upon approval from the city of Wixom department of public services, the location of each interceptor shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Ready access shall be provided to each interceptor for service and maintenance. Furthermore, each business establishment for which an interceptor is required shall have an interceptor which shall serve only that establishment. 
F.  City sampling and inspections of FOG removal systems that result in noncompliance with these aforementioned standards shall receive written notification that the facility(s) has seven days to pump out the FOG removal system and will be reinspected. If after reinspection, the FOG removal system is still in noncompliance, the discharger must clean out the FOG removal system immediately. The city will reinspect the FOG removal system; if the removal system is still in noncompliance the city can issue its Administrative Enforcement Remedies as stated in Section 10 of the ordinance and can have the removal system cleaned at the discharger's expense and bill them any associated noncompliance fees. Documentation of cleaning the FOG removal system is to be maintained onsite and shall be given to the city for proof of compliance. If a discharger's FOG removal system is in noncompliance three times after the initial seven-day reinspection in a consecutive twenty-four-month period, the city shall take immediate action against the discharger, issuing its Administrative Enforcement Remedies as stated in Section 10 of the ordinance. 
(Ord. 03-03 § 4, 2003) 
13.08.540 - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    The city may require any user to develop, submit for approval and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
A.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
B.  Description of stored chemicals; 
C.  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 13.08.730; and 
D.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building or containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents and/or measures and equipment for emergency response; 
E.  A map of the user's sewer system; 
F.  A list of names of after hour contact people and their phone numbers. 
(§ 3.3 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.550 - Hauled wastewater-Discharge. 
    Wastewater haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the city. No load may be discharged without prior written approval of the city. The city may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The city may require the waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. The city shall require waste haulers to obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this article. 
(§ 3.4 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.560 - Wastewater analysis. 
    When requested by the city, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty days of the request. The city may periodically require users to update this information in a nondomestic user survey form. 
(§ 4.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.570 - Wastewater discharge permit- Required. 
A.  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city. 
B.  The city may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
C.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections 13.08.840 through 13.08.920. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards for requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(§ 4.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.580 - Wastewater discharge permit- Application contents. 
    All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application to the city. The city may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
A.  All information required by Section 13.08.680(B) of this article; 
B.  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials, process tank volumes and concentrations, and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
C.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
D.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
E.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
F.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
G.  Time and duration of discharges; and 
H.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
    Incomplete or inaccurate application will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(§ 4.3 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.590 - Application signatories and certification. 
    All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
    "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designated to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(§ 4.4 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.600 - Wastewater discharge permit- Decisions. 
    The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within ninety days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the city will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The city may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(§ 4.5 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.610 - Wastewater discharge permit- Duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period not less than five years, at the discretion of the city. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(§ 5.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.620 - Wastewater discharge permit- Contents. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the city to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
A.  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
1.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
2.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with Section 13.08.650, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
3.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
4.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law; and 
5.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
B.  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
1.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
2.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
3.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges; 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
7.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
8.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(§ 5.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.630 - Wastewater discharge permit- Appeals. 
    Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty days of its issuance. 
A.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
B.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
C.  The provisions of the wastewater discharge permit not objected to shall not be stayed pending the appeal. Provisions objected to shall be stayed until a final decision is rendered by the city. 
D.  If the city fails to act within sixty days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
E.  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Circuit Court for Oakland County within fourteen days pursuant to the Administrative Procedural Act 306, PA 1969, as amended. 
(§ 5.3 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.640 - Wastewater discharge permit- Modification. 
    The city may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
B.  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
C.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
D.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters; 
E.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
F.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
G.  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
H.  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
I.  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
    Modified conditions of the permit will become effective sixty days after notice of the modification to the user unless appealed pursuant to Section 13.08.630. 
(§ 5.4 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.650 - Wastewater discharge permit- Transfer. 
    Wastewater discharge permits may not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner or operator without prior approval from the city. The notice to the city must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
A.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
B.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
C.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(§ 5.5 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.660 - Wastewater discharge permit- Revocation. 
    The city may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
B.  Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed conditions pursuant to Section 13.08.720; 
C.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
D.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
E.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
F.  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records; 
G.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
H.  Failure to pay fines; 
I.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
J.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
K.  Failure to complete a nondomestic user survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
L.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
M.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user, unless appealed timely, pursuant to Section 13.08.630, in which case, stayed to provisions of the new permit will be subject to the requirements of the old permit. 
(§ 5.6 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.670 - Wastewater discharge permit- Reissuance. 
    A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 13.08.580, a minimum of one hundred eighty days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. Upon timely application for reissuance of a permit in accordance with this paragraph, the expired permit shall be automatically extended until a final decision regarding the application is made by the city. 
(§ 5.7 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.680 - Baseline monitoring reports. 
A.  Within either one hundred eighty days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. At least ninety days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
B.  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
1.  Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
2.  Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
3.  Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
4.  Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
5.  Measurement of Pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the categorical standard or by the city, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.08.770. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.08.780. 
6.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
7.  Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 13.08.690. 
8.  Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.08.610. 
(§ 6.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.690 - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 13.08.680(B)(7): 
A.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
B.  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
C.  The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
D.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(§ 6.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.700 - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in Section 13.08.680(B)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.08.610. 
(§ 6.3 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.710 - Periodic compliance reports. 
A.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.08.610. 
B.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
C.  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the procedures prescribed in Section 13.08.780, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(§ 6.4 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.720 - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the city of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty days before the change. 
A.  The city may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 13.08.600. 
B.  The city may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.08.600 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.08.640 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
C.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(§ 6.5 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.730 - Reports of potential problems. 
A.  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
B.  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
C.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection A of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(§ 6.6 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.740 - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city may require. 
(§ 6.7 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.750 - Notice of violation-Repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(§ 6.8 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.760 - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
A.  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the city and the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CRF Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section 13.08.720. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 13.08.680, 13.08.700 and 13.08.710. 
B.  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
C.  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of each substance within ninety days of the effective date of such regulations. 
D.  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
E.  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(§ 6.9 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.770 - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(§ 6.10 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.780 - Sample collection. 
A.  Except as indicated in subsection B of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
B.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(§ 6.11 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.790 - Written reports-Submission date. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(§ 6.12 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.800 - Recordkeeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user of the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. 
(§ 6.13 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.810 - Compliance monitoring-Right of entry-Inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
A.  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
B.  The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
C.  The city may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. 
D.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
E.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises may be a violation of this article. Unless unusual circumstances are demonstrated by the user, it will be considered unreasonable to delay allowing the city access to the premises for more than thirty minutes after presentation of suitable identification. 
(§ 7.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.820 - Compliance monitoring-Search warrants. 
    If the city has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant. 
(§ 7.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.830 - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be made available for inspection by the public pursuant to the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, Act 442, Public Acts of 1976, as amended, unless the user specifically requests that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable federal or state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data and clearly marked on the document or attached to the document. Confidential portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(§ 8 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.840 - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
A.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the instantaneous maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
B.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of wastewater measurements taken from each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the instantaneous maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
C.  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
D.  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
E.  Failure to meet, within ninety days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
F.  Failure to provide within thirty days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
G.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
H.  Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(§ 9 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.850 - Notification of violation. 
    When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within thirty days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(§ 10.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.860 - Consent orders. 
    The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 10.08.880 and 10.08.890 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(§ 10.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.870 - Show cause hearing. 
    The city may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, the rules and procedure for the hearing, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the city. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
A.  Hearing Proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the city manager. 
1.  A tribunal composed of the city manager, or his designated representative, a registered professional engineer, and a college level instructor of environmental engineering, both appointed by the city manager, shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and shall: 
a.  Issue in the name of the city notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of the witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
b.  Prepare a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence; 
c.  Issue in the name of the city an order to the industrial user. 
2.  A transcript of the testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter at any show cause hearing held pursuant to this article. 
B.  Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, an order will be issued, by the city, to the industrial user directing any of the following actions: 
1.  Immediate compliance with the industrial users' wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this article or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation; 
2.  That pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment or equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment and equipment be accomplished within a specified time period. Sewer or wastewater treatment service may be discontinued upon failure to comply; 
3.  Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self-monitoring analysis during a specified time period; 
4.  Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date; 
5.  Control of discharge quantities; 
6.  Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring and administration of the industrial users activities by the city during compliance efforts; and/or 
7.  Any such other orders as are appropriate, including, but not limited to immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit or orders directing that following a specified time period, sewer or wastewater treatment services will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or operation and maintenance practices have been employed. 
C.  Appeal. The decision of a tribunal shall be final. However, a person having an interest affected by the decision may appeal to the circuit court. Upon appeal, the circuit court shall review the record and decision of the tribunal to ensure that the decision meets all of the following: 
1.  Complies with the Constitution and laws of this state; 
2.  Is based upon proper procedure; 
3.  Is supported by competent, material and substantial evidence on the record; and 
4.  Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the tribunal. 
    If the court finds the record of the tribunal inadequate to make the review required by this section, or that additional evidence exists which is material and with good reason was not presented to the tribunal, the court shall order further proceedings before the tribunal on conditions which the court considers proper. The tribunal may modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings, or may affirm the original decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the court. 
    As a result of the review required by this section, the court may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the tribunal. 
(§ 10.3 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.880 - Compliance orders. 
    When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(§ 10.4 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.890 - Cease and desist orders. 
A.  When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
1.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
2.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
B.  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(§ 10.5 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.900 - Emergency suspensions. 
    The city may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
A.  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 13.08.910 are initiated against the user. 
B.  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Section 13.08.870 or 13.08.910. 
C.  An evidentiary hearing shall be held within ten days of the emergency suspension. If the need to extend the emergency suspension does not exist, the user shall be notified of when the discharge will be allowed to start. 
    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(§ 10.6 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.910 - Termination of discharge. 
    In addition to the provisions in Section 13.08.660 any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
A.  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
B.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
C.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
D.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
E.  Violation of the pretreatment standards in Sections 13.08.470 through 13.08.510. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 13.08.870 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(§ 10.7 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.920 - Injunctive relief. 
    When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(§ 11.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.930 - Civil and criminal penalties. 
A.  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars per violation, per day, or criminal penalty of five hundred dollars per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
B.  The city may recover reasonable attorneys fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
C.  In determining the amount of civil or criminal liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice requires. 
D.  Filing a suit for civil or criminal penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. dated 4-8-97: Ord. dated 4-8-97) 
13.08.940 - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations-Upset defined. 
A.  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation. 
B.  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection C of this section are met. 
C.  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that: 
1.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
2.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
3.  The user has submitted the following information to the city within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance, 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue, and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
D.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
E.  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
F.  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(§ 12.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.950 - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations-Bypass defined. 
A.  For the purposes of this section: 
1.  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
2.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
B.  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this section. 
C.  1.If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
2.  A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four hours. 
D.  1.  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section. 
2.  The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(§ 12.2 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
13.08.960 - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
    The city may adopt by resolution, from time-to-time, reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
A.  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
B.  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
C.  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
D.  Fees for filing appeals; and 
E.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(§ 13.1 of Ord. dated 6-22-93) 
Chapter 13.16 - ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION AND PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 

13.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a sound but reasonable basis for design of public improvements, private improvements and private improvements affecting the public in the city, so to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community, to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewage and other health and safety requirements, and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
(Ord. 61-A § 2 (part), 1994) 
13.16.020 - Generally. 
    The engineering design standards are the standards and requirements which have been set by resolution of the city council for the sound but reasonable basis of design of all development improvements. They are not intended as a substitute for sound engineering judgement. 
(Ord. 61-A § 2 (part), 1994) 
13.16.030 - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare of the city. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the state, except that this chapter shall prevail in cases where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, law or regulations. 
(Ord. 61-A § 2 (part), 1994) 
13.16.040 - Fees. 
    The following fees, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid by the proprietor at the time of filing of a plat or plan with the city, or at the time inspection is requested. Such fees shall be in addition to any and all fees required by any statute of the state or any other provision of this chapter. 
A.  Conventional subdivision plats: 
Preliminary review  For each revision thereafter As established by resolution of the city council Partial preliminary review  For each revision thereafter As established by resolution of the city council Revision to final plat As established by resolution of the city council  
B.  Planned unit development plats: 
Preliminary review  For each revision thereafter As established by resolution of the city council Partial preliminary review  For each revision thereafter As established by resolution of the city council Revision of final plat As established by resolution of the city council  
C.  Site plans (for any type of development): 
Initial review As established by resolution of the city council Final site plan As established by resolution of the city council Revision to final site plan As established by resolution of the city council Inspections of completed parks As established by resolution of the city council  
D.  Lot plat plan: 
Review of site plan As established by resolution of the city council  
E.  Parcel division plan: 
Review of parcel division As established by resolution of the city council.  
(Ord. 61-A § 2 (part), 1994) 
13.16.050 - Variances. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from these engineering design standards when it determines that undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the city council shall prescribe other conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. No variance shall be granted unless the city council finds: 
A.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the subdivision or project improvement such that a strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of the property; 
B.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the substantial property right of the applicant; 
C.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which said property is situated. 
(Ord. 61-A § 2 (part), 1994) 
13.16.060 - Compliance required. 
    The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the city, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city, shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 61-A § 2 (part), 1994) 
13.16.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each and every violation or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days, or both, such fine and costs and imprisonment being in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 61-A § 2 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 13.20 - CITY CEMETERIES 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection of public health, safety and general welfare by establishing regulations relating to the operation, control, and management of cemeteries owned by the city of Wixom; to provide penalties for the violation of this chapter, and to repeal all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Cemetery" means cemeteries owned and operated under the jurisdiction of the city of Wixom. 
    "Cemetery lot" means one or more than one grave space sold for the purpose of burial of human dead. 
    "Cemetery section" means a number of cemetery lots. 
    "City" means the city of Wixom, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Wixom, and such territory over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    "Cornerstone" means a type of marker that is used to identify the boundaries of cemetery lots or graves. 
    "Department" means the city department of public works. 
    "Director" means the city director of public works and/or his or her designee. 
    "Foundation" means a concrete pad that is set to support a marker or monument. 
    "Grave" means one burial space allocated for the interment of human dead. 
    "Infant grave" means a space set aside for a burial in a vault that is not more than four feet in length. 
    "Lot owner" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, agency or other entity with a fee, land contract or lease interest in a specific grave or group of graves, or is otherwise responsible for the use of said property. In order for a person or entity to act on behalf of the lot owner, a power of attorney must be filed and recorded at the city clerk's office. 
    "Marker" means a headstone used to identify a person buried in a specific grave. 
    "Monument" means a type of marker that is used to identify a group of people who are buried in one or more adjacent cemetery graves or lots. 
    "Sexton" means the designee retained by the city for interments and disinterments and any other duties that may be requested by the city. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.030 - Cemetery board established. 
    There is established in the city a board to be known as the board of cemetery trustees, hereafter in this chapter called "the board." All matters concerning city cemeteries shall first be brought before the board for its review and recommendations to the city council. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.040 - Board appointments. 
A.  The board shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor in accordance with the city charter concerning mayoral appointments. The first board members shall be appointed for staggered terms of one to five years. Annual appointments for expired terms shall be for five years. Appointees replacing active board members shall finish that member's uncompleted term. 
B.  The officers of the board shall consist of a chairman and a recording secretary. The officers shall be chosen from among its members at an annual meeting after the first of May each year, and shall hold office until a successor is elected. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the board. The secretary shall record the minutes of all meetings and maintain a record book of the minutes. Copies of all board meeting minutes shall be provided to the mayor, city council and city clerk. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection and shall be made available for such purposes at the city clerk's office. 
C.  The cemetery board shall meet as often as necessary under terms specified in its by-laws. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.050 - Management of cemeteries. 
A.  The department of public works shall have jurisdiction over the general maintenance of all cemetery grounds. The director of public works and/or his or her designee shall have jurisdiction over all areas of the cemetery facilities, which are designated in the cemetery master plan, as adopted by city council, and over the design, construction, maintenance and operation of facilities therein. 
B.  The board may hire and retain a cemetery sexton, subject to the approval of city council. 
C.  The city clerk's office shall be responsible for the sale of lots and be responsible for all cemetery records. 
D.  The sale or transfer of lots for purely speculative purposes is prohibited. 
E.  The purchase of more than two lots by any one person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, agency or other entity must be approved by the cemetery board. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.060 - Maintenance of cemetery lots. 
A.  Unless otherwise stated herein, no person or entity shall fill any grave or lot above the established grade. 
B.  The grave owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all plants that are placed or planted on their grave. This maintenance shall consist, at a minimum, of trimming and removing the plant if it dies or becomes unattractive in appearance. 
C.  In order to provide for worker safety and an attractive appearance of the cemetery grounds, all real or artificial flowers or floral plantings must be placed in approved urns or containers. The department shall approve these urns or containers. 
1.  All urns or containers must be placed within twelve inches of the grave marker so as not to impede the maintenance activities of the city. 
2.  Any and all seasonal decorations, with the exception of grave blankets, which are allowed from November to March, shall be removed within thirty days of a given holiday. Any seasonal decoration that is not removed within thirty days of the given holiday and any grave blanket that is not removed by March 15th shall be removed and disposed of by the department. 
D.  The department shall have the right to remove, prune or perform other plant maintenance activities, without notice, on any plant that has not been maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. This includes live plants that are wilted or dying or have become unsuitably large for the site and artificial plants that have become faded or tattered. The department may also remove, without notice, objects used for the adornment of graves, such as flags or emblems, which have become unsightly or unattractive. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.070 - Grave markers, lot cornerstones and foundations. 
A.  Only one grave marker is permitted per grave, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
B.  All grave markers and monuments must be of a material approved by the board. Approvals shall be given if the material is solid and for all practical purposes, permanent and indestructible. Any grave markers that are made of wood or other easily degradable material are prohibited. 
C.  Raised letters or appendages are not permitted on the vertical sides of raised markers or monuments. 
D.  All foundations shall be constructed or supervised by the department and/or the director or sexton, at the expense of the grave owner. Foundations for markers shall be constructed in such a way as to allow a two-inch border. 
E.  The boundaries of cemetery lots shall be identified by the use of cornerstones. These cornerstones shall be set by the department and/or director or sexton, and shall not be altered or removed, or be made or permitted to project above the ground by the grave owner. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.080 - Interments and burial rights. 
A.  All charges that are associated with grave spaces, lots, burials, disinterments, opening and closing costs, or any other service or activity shall be in accordance with the most recent schedule of charges established by the board and approved by resolution of city council. Copies of the current charges are available at the city clerk's office. 
B.  Graves and lots shall be paid in full to the city clerk at the time of purchase. 
C.  Upon payment in full for a grave or lot, a certificate of right of burial will be issued by the city clerk and forwarded to the purchaser's address of record. It shall be the responsibility of the purchaser thereafter to notify the city clerk should this address change. 
D.  The city shall have the right to purchase a grave or graves at the price for which it was sold to the owner should an individual owner wish to sell or transfer any such ownership; however, if the city chooses not to exercise this option, then the owner of a grave may transfer burial rights to another person or entity, providing the transfer is recorded with the city clerk's office. All applications for transfer must be made on forms provided by the city or on a document form acceptable to the city clerk's office. All applications for transfer must state a reason(s) for the transfer, and a notary public shall notarize all such transfer documents. 
E.  Should any owner of certain burial rights die without having designated the person(s) to be buried on all or any part of the lot, then the city will permit the burial of a person(s) designated by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, upon presentation of that order at the city clerk's office. Possession of a certificate of right of burial is not, in itself, sufficient evidence on which to record the transfer of ownership of the grave or lot. 
F.  All interments and disinterments are to be made in accordance with state and county laws governing such matters, and a burial permit from the Oakland County Health Department, signed by the proper authorities, is required before interments can be made. 
G.  The location of all graves scheduled to be opened shall be marked and laid out by or supervised by the department and/or director or sexton. All graves shall be opened and closed by the department and/or director or sexton. 
H.  Only one person is permitted per grave, except for a mother or a relative who has acted as the guardian and an infant, or infant twins. The following cremation combinations are also available: two cremations or one cremation and one casket/vault. 
I.  The city will not be liable for misrepresentations or errors made by the person or person purported to be the owners, legal representatives or agents. 
J.  Burial containers shall be subject to following conditions: 
1.  In all adult interments, the minimum requirement shall be unfinished cement or alternative outside container or composition materials approved by the city and be able to withstand five thousand psi crush strength. The casket shall be enclosed in a permanent outside container and shall be installed by the department and/or director or sexton. Reinforced concrete boxes and concrete, copper or steel burial vaults are considered permanent outside containers. Flat top grave liners will not be accepted. 
2.  At a minimum, all infant interments shall be in watertight containers that are impervious to vermin and approved by the city. 
3.  At a minimum, all cremations shall be in watertight containers that are impervious to vermin and approved by the city. 
K.  No disinterment and removal of a body in order to be reinterred in another location within the cemetery will be permitted without written consent of the personal representative of the deceased, or unless directed by a duly authorized public official or court order. No disinterment and removal of a body in order to be reinterred in another location outside the cemetery will be permitted without a permit from the Oakland County Health Department, or unless directed by court order. The city will not be liable for any damage resulting from the removal of any remains. 
L.  The city shall have the right to correct any error that may have occurred while making interments, disinterments or removals, or to correct any mistakes in the description, transfer or conveyance of any interment property, either by canceling the conveyance and substituting other interment property of equal value or similar location, or by refunding the amount of money paid by the purchaser. In order to correct these errors, the city shall have the right to inter, disinter, remove or transfer the subject remains to other property of equal value or similar location. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.090 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  The cemetery will be open to the general public from sunrise to sunset, Sunday through Saturday. 
B.  No person or vehicle may enter the cemetery except through the established gates and entrances thereof. All motorized and non-motorized modes of transportation shall travel on designated roads, except those vehicles that are being used in the maintenance of the cemetery, attendance at a funeral, or on official cemetery business. 
C.  All vehicles shall obey the posted speed limit of ten miles per hour. 
D.  No pets of any kind shall be allowed within the cemetery grounds unless confined within a vehicle. This provision shall not apply to dogs or other animals assisting handicapped persons. 
E.  The consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within cemetery grounds. 
F.  Marking of cemetery graves or lots with decorative fencing, stone, wood or any kind or enclosure is prohibited. 
G.  No person shall deface, injure, disturb, mark or write upon any marker, monument or headstone. 
H.  Unless otherwise stated herein, no person shall injure, destroy or take away any vases, flower pots or other containers or ornaments placed upon graves, except such as were originally brought in by the party so removing them. 
I.  No person shall create any improper noise, disorderly conduct, carelessness, or any other activity which tends to destroy the peace, tranquility and attractiveness of the cemetery and its sacred devotion to the interment and repose of the dead. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
13.20.100 - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety days, or may be punished by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 03-12 § 1 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 13.24 - DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE 
Sections: 

13.24.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context: 
    "Approved container" means a container provided by the city for the purpose of collecting all recyclables. 
    "Ashes" means the residue from fires, including, but not limited to, fires used for cooking and/or heating buildings. 
    "Bulk items" means large items of furniture, bedsprings, refrigerators, stoves, large appliances and other such items incidental to housekeeping for and in single-family residences and condominiums as defined in the definition for "premises." "Bulk item" does not include discarded appliances resulting from an appliance replacement program in a multiple-family residential building and/or multiple-family residential complex. 
    "Compostables/yard waste" means the miscellaneous organic waste material resulting from landscaping and/or maintenance of a home and/or property including, but not limited to, grass, weeds, fallen leaves, shrub and plant clippings, plant materials, twigs and other items as further outlined in the rules and regulations promulgated by the director of the department of public works. 
    "Garbage" means rejected food waste and all refuse of animal, fruit or vegetable matter including that used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, handling, processing or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and/or vegetables. 
    "Hazardous waste" means any material or substance which by reason of its composition or characteristics is (1) hazardous waste as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC, 6907 et seq., as amended, replaced or superseded, and the regulations implementing the same; or (2) material the disposal of which is regulated by the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC, 2601 et seq., as amended, replaced or superseded, and the regulations implementing the same; or (3) special nuclear or by-products material within the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954; or (4) hazardous waste as defined in Act 64 of the Public Acts of 1979, as amended from time to time, and as identified in the reasonable rules and regulations promulgated by the director of the department of public works and/or by regulations adopted by the Department of Natural Resources. 
    "Industrial special waste" means nonhazardous wastes generated by industrial users, which due to their size or composition require special handling and/or disposal procedures, including, but not limited to, foundry, sand, incinerator/boiler bottom ash, fly ash, sludge, scrap pallets and other waste from manufacturing processes which require special handling and/or disposal procedures. 
    "Mixed waste" means a mixture of rubbish and garbage. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, public or private corporation, partnership, trust, public or private agency or any other entity or any group of such persons. 
    "Premises" means any property used for single-family residential purposes as defined in the city zoning ordinance, to which a separate street address, postal address or box or tax roll description or other similar identification has been assigned. "Premises" shall not include single-family dwellings which do not have a separate distinct individual entrance from the dwelling unit to an open area which abuts a public or private street and/or access easement and shall also not include any property used for multiple-family residential purposes as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
    "R.R.R.A.S.O.C." means the Resource Recovery and Recycling Authority of Southwest Oakland County, a municipal authority established under Act 179 of the Public Acts of 1947, in which the city is a member. 
    "Recyclables" means presorted materials that are separated from solid waste prior to collection. Materials may include, but are not limited to, newspaper, tin cans, glass bottles and jars and plastic containers or any other materials designated in the reasonable rules and regulations promulgated and published by the director of the department of public works. 
    "Rubbish" means miscellaneous materials including, but not limited to, paper, magazines, ashes, glassware, dishes and other items incidental to the usual routine of housekeeping but not including dirt, gravel, sand or construction debris. 
    "Solid waste" means garbage, rubbish, compostables/yard wastes and recyclables and/or a mixture thereof. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste and/or industrial special waste. 
(Ord. 161 § 1, 1991) 
13.24.020 - Disposal-Scavenging prohibited. 
A.  No solid waste, hazardous waste or industrial special waste shall be disposed of within the city by burial or by dumping nor shall solid waste, hazardous or industrial special waste be used as fill. No special waste or hazardous or industrial special waste shall be disposed of into a lake, stream or other body of water. A person shall not place hazardous waste, industrial special waste or hot ashes at curb side or other designated location for collection. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner or occupant, his or her employees or agents, city employees and/or the city's contractor to tamper or meddle with, take, carry away, pick through or scavenge any container, bundle or approved container for recyclables and remove the contents thereof from the location where the same has been properly placed pending collection. 
(Ord. 161 § 2, 1991) 
13.24.030 - Containers. 
    No person shall be permitted to accumulate upon his or her premises any solid waste unless it is placed and maintained in containers which are tightly covered and also animal-proof and rodent-proof. Containers for solid waste shall be of reasonably substantial construction to permit handling and shall also be large enough and secured to prevent the scattering of materials. Persons who are subject to the mandatory separation of recyclable material provisions of this chapter shall use the approved containers provided by the city for the collection of the recyclables. 
(Ord. 161 § 3, 1991) 
13.24.040 - Collection business-License. 
    Commencing July 1st, 1991, no person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. Licenses shall be issued upon application to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and upon payment of such fee as is required by the fee schedule included in the city business licensing ordinance (Chapter 5.04 of this code). No such license shall be issued except upon certification by the director of the department of public works that equipment and the ability of the licensee is such that the licensee is able to conduct a solid waste collection business in accordance with the terms of this chapter and rules and regulations adopted by the director of the department of public works under this chapter. The director of the department of public works shall promulgate and publish such reasonable rules and regulations governing the operation of the business of solid waste collection, transportation and disposition as may be deemed necessary to effectuate the intent of this chapter. The director of the department of public works may revoke the license of any solid waste collector who fails to abide by any such rule or regulation adopted by the director of the department of public works or any provision of this chapter after giving the solid waste collector reasonable written notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. 161 § 4, 1991) 
13.24.050 - Establishments. 
A.  The term "establishment" as used in this section means any mercantile, industrial or service business, such as, but not limited to, a store, shop, restaurant, theater, bowling alley, drive-in, gas station, car wash, office building selling goods or services, either retail or wholesale, office buildings and other nonresidential establishments and residential units not receiving solid waste collection from the city. Every establishment shall provide for the proper storage of solid waste in receptacles as provided in this chapter, and shall place such receptacles in such a location as approved by the city. 
B.  It is the duty of the owner or occupant of any lot or premises on which an establishment is operated to keep the premises in a clean, neat and orderly condition. 
C.  Every establishment shall provide for the weekly collection of all its refuse. 
D.  Every establishment shall be responsible for wind-blown refuse and all other refuse on its premises. 
E.  Every establishment shall be responsible for escaping refuse emanating from its premises onto neighboring premises. 
(Ord. 161 § 5, 1991) 
13.24.060 - City contractor. 
    The city may grant an exclusive contract to the city contractor for the collection of garbage and rubbish for premises within the city. The terms, provisions and conditions of such agreement or contract shall be within the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. 161 § 6, 1991) 
13.24.070 - Mandatory separation of recyclable materials into approved containers. 
A.  Commencing on July 1, 1992, all persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of any premises shall separate all recyclable materials and place them in an approved container at the curb on their designated collection day and in the manner set forth by the rules and regulations promulgated by the director of the department of public works. 
B.  If a container is lost, stolen or damaged, it is the responsibility of the property owner to replace the receptacle with a container approved by the city unless such loss, theft or damage is the fault of the solid waste collection contractor. All containers shall remain the property of the city. Any unauthorized possession of containers is a violation of this chapter. 
C.  Nonrecyclable materials shall not be placed in the recycling containers. 
D.  Failure to separate recyclables as required in this section excuses the city and/or its contractors from any obligation to remove the solid waste from the curb in addition to the other penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 161 § 7, 1991) 
13.24.080 - Separation of compostables and yard waste. 
A.  Commencing on July 1st, 1992, all persons who are the owners, lessees or occupants of any detached single-family residences located on acreage parcels, or in subdivisions or in condominium developments wholly composed of such detached single-family residences, shall either dispose of compostables/yard wastes on their property in a manner which will not create a nuisance and/or be injurious to the public health or shall participate in the compostables/yard waste program and separate compostables/yard waste from solid waste. If participating in the compostables/ yard waste program, compostables/ yard waste must be placed at the curb in appropriate containers on pick-up day and in the manner set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the director of the department of public works. 
B.  Failure to separate compostables/yard waste as required in this chapter excuses the city and/or its contractor from any obligation to remove the solid waste from the curb, in addition to other penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 161 § 8, 1991) 
13.24.090 - Fees. 
A.  The fees to be charged for solid waste disposal and other services provided pursuant to this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fees shall be billed on the summer tax statement as provided for in the reasonable rules and regulations to be promulgated and published by the director of the department of public works, and all fees shall be timely paid. 
B.  Solid waste fees paid on or before August 31st of each year shall be collected by the finance department without penalty or interest. If August 31st is a holiday or non-business day, the last day of collection without penalty and interest shall be the next regular city business day after August 31st. 
C.  The finance department shall add to all unpaid solid waste fees a penalty of four percent and interest of one percent per month on the solid waste fees that remain unpaid while said delinquent solid waste fees remain under the jurisdiction of the city for collection. All solid waste fees paid after March 31st and the settlement of taxes with the county treasurer, shall be subject to state statutory provisions regarding collection fees, penalties and interest. 
D.  Unpaid fees for solid waste disposal and other services provided pursuant to this chapter shall be a lien against the property for which the services have been provided, and amounts delinquent for three months or more may be certified annually by the city assessor to be entered upon the next tax roll against the property to which the services have been provided. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the tax roll and the enforcement of the lien for unpaid taxes. This lien remedy does not preclude any other remedy provided for by law. 
(Ord. 161-A-1 § 1, 1992: Ord. 161 § 9, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, 8-10-2010) 
13.24.100 - Promulgation of rules. 
    The director of the department of public works or his designee shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations concerning the implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 161 § 10, 1991) 
13.24.110 - Authority to delegate. 
    The city may, by resolution of the city council, transfer, assign and/or delegate the administration and/or implementation of the collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclables and compostables/yard waste and the collection of fees and billings with respect thereto to RRRASOC and/or other similar body and/or agency and may further transfer, assign and/or delegate any contract between the city and a contractor for the collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclables and compostables/yard waste to RRRASOC and/or other similar body and/or agency. 
(Ord. 161 § 11, 1991) 
13.24.120 - Enforcement. 
    Authorized employees and representatives of the police department, the department of public works and the building department are authorized to issue citations to any person violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 161 § 12, 1991) 
13.24.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 161 § 13, 1991) 
13.24.140 - Pick-up and emptying of solid waste containers and Dumpsters. 
    No solid waste container or Dumpster, which is located within five hundred feet of any structure intended for or used as a residential dwelling, except hotels and motels, shall be picked up or emptied between the hours of six p.m. and seven a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. 01-02 § 1, 2001) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-02, §§ 1-4, adopted May 9, 2017 , amended former Ch. 15.04, Arts. I, II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 69-E, § 1, 1984; Ord. No. 39-A14, 1994; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 2007. 

Article I. - Construction Code 

15.04.010. - Adoption of State Construction Code. 
    The City of Wixom hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement within the City of Wixom of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501, et seq.), as amended, referred to in this article as the "Act," and the Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Residential, Existing Building, Energy Conservation, Electrical, and other codes promulgated as the State Construction Code under Section 4 of the Act, as amended, referred to in this article as the "Construction Code." 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.020. - Construction codes adopted. 
    The following codes are additionally adopted by the city: 
A.  The National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, as amended, and Michigan Part 8 Amendments, as amended. 
B.  The Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as amended. 
C.  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as amended. 
D.  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, as amended. 
    Three copies of the codes shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.030 - Enforcing agent designated. 
    Pursuant to the Act, the city hereby designates the building official and such building inspectors, plumbing inspectors, heating and refrigeration inspectors and other officers and employees as shall be designated by the building official as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities under the Act and Construction Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.040 - Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Study, entitled the Oakland County Michigan Flood Insurance Study, dated September 29, 2006, and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Panel Nos. 26125C0466F, 466 of 704; 26125C0467F, 467 of 704; 26125C0468F, 468 of 704; 26125C0469F, 469 of 704; 26125C0606F, 606 of 704; 26125C0607F, 607 of 704 dated September 29, 2006, are adopted by the city by reference and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.050 - Fees. 
    Fees required under the construction code adopted in this article shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.060 - Construction board of appeals. 
    Pursuant to Section 14 of the Act, MCL 125.1514, there is hereby established a construction board of appeals, which shall consist of not less than three regular members and not more than seven members appointed by the city council. Appointments to the board shall be for terms of four years. Members serving at the time of amendment to this section shall continue to serve for the remainder of their terms, absent resignation or removal by city council. 
    The construction board of appeals shall have the powers and duties set forth in Section 14 of the Act and the construction code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 5-9-2017 ) 
Article II. - Electrical Code 

15.04.070 - Adoption of electrical code. 
    The City of Wixom assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, with Part 8 Rules, as amended, throughout its corporate limits. The building official for the city is designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under the construction code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2, 5-9-2017 ) 
Article III. - Property Maintenance Code 

15.04.080 - Adoption of property maintenance code. 
    The City of Wixom assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition as amended, as the property maintenance code of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of fees and collection of fees thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the exception of Sections 15.04.090 and 15.04.100 below. The building official for the city is designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under the property maintenance code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 3, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.090. - Insertions. 
    101.1 -Insert City of Wixom as the Name of Jurisdiction. 
    103.5 -Insert "Fee Schedule adopted by Resolution of the Wixom City Council." 
    112.4 -Insert a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
    302.4 -Insert nine inches (9") as the maximum allowed height of weeds and plants. 
    304.14 -Insert April 1 to October 31 as the dates for insect screens to be supplied. 
    602.3 -Insert October 15 to May 14 as the dates for heat to be supplied. 
    602.4 -Insert October 15 to May 15 as the dates for heat to be supplied. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 3, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.100 - Amendments. 
    Sections 103.1, 106.1, 106.3, 106.4, and 111.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
    103.1 General. The City of Wixom Building Official is designated as the Code Official for purposes of administering and enforcing this Code. 
    106.1. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code by action or omission, or directing, authorizing, allowing or directly or indirectly causing such conflict or violation. 
    106.3 Prosecution of Violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Code Official may institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structural premises in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the violation is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate that may be assessed and collected on the tax rolls in the same manner and with the same interest and penalties as delinquent special assessments. 
    106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and be subject to the penalties, including civil fines, costs, damages, expenses and court judgments and orders to enforce or enjoin violations of this Code as provided in the City of Wixom Municipal Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense. A violation of any of the provisions of this Code is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
    111.2 Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall be the City of Wixom Construction Board of Appeals, established and appointed as provided in Section 15.04.021 of the City of Wixom Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 3, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.105 - Referenced codes. 
A.  References to the International Building, Existing Building, Fuel Gas, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, and the list of those ICC Codes in Chapter 8 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, are amended to refer to the versions of those codes that are part of the state construction code that is administered and enforced in the city as provided in Chapter 15.04 of the City of Wixom Municipal Code. 
B.  References to the International Fire Code in the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, are amended to refer to the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, adopted in Section 15.04.015 of the City of Wixom Municipal Code. 
C.  References to the International Zoning Code and the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, are amended to refer to the City of Wixom Zoning Ordinance, Title 18 of the City of Wixom Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 3, 5-9-2017 ) 
Article IV. - Fire Code 

15.04.110 - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
    The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I , J, K, L and M, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code for the City regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property and the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees thereof, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if set out in this ordinance, with changes as noted below. References in the International Fire Code, 105 Edition, to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Wixom. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 4, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.120 - Insertions. 
    101.1 -Insert City of Wixom as the Name of Jurisdiction. 
    109.4 -Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties, including civil fines, costs, damages, expenses and court judgments and orders to enforce or enjoin violations of this Code as provided in the City of Wixom Municipal Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense. A violation of any of the provisions of this Code is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
    111.4 -Insert a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
    202-Definitions, Fire Code Official. The fire chief, fire marshal, code enforcement officer, or other designated authority charged by the applicable governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement of the Code, or the duly authorized representative. The term "fire code official" may be used interchangeably with "code official" and "fire official" in this Code. 
    307.6-Fire Department Training. Open burning is allowed for the purpose of training fire fighters for firefighting practice, or for the purposes of training the public, including workers or employees, or for the purpose of demonstration by the fire official or other trained fire personnel, when such burning is done in accordance with acceptable practice. 
    503.6-Security Gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire chief or his designated official. Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency operation. The security gates and emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. 
    505.1-Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch. Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole of other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained. 
    506.1-When Required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving or fire-fighting purposes, or where an alarm signaling system or device is installed that may summon the fire department, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain access as required by the fire code official. 
    507.3-Fire Flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings of portions of buildings and facilities shall be determined in accordance with Appendix B and in accordance with the City of Wixom Engineering Design Standards. 
    507.5-Fire Hydrant Systems. Fire Hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.1 through 507.5.6 and shall be in accordance with Appendix C and City of Wixom Engineering Design Standards. 
    2204.5-Location. Stationary Containers shall be located in accordance with Section 3203.6. Containers of cryogenic fluids shall not be located within diked areas containing other hazardous materials. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings: In accordance with the City of Wixom Municipal Code or as otherwise mandated. 
    3405.8-Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks are Prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside buildings: In accordance with the City of Wixom Municipal Code or as otherwise mandated. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 4, 5-9-2017 ) 
15.04.130 - Geographic limits. 
    The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
    Section 5704.2.9.6.1- The geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited: Zoning Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, MHP and VCA. 
    Section 5706.2.4.4- The geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited: Zoning Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, MHP and VCA. 
    Section 5806.2- The geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited: Zoning Districts R-1, R-2, R-3 R-4, RM-1, MHP and VCA. 
    Section 6104.2- The geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas: The geographical boundary limits of the City of Wixom. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, § 4, 5-9-2017 ) 
Chapter 15.12 - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Unlawful dwellings. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building as defined in Section 15.12.020. 
(Ord. 94 § 1, 1974) 
15.12.020 - Defined. 
    As used in this chapter, "dangerous building" means any building or structure which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions: 
A.  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city wherein the property lies, it shall be considered that such dwelling does not meet the requirements of this chapter; 
B.  Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of any building code of the city where the building is located for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location; 
C.  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
D.  Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required in the case of new construction by the Building Code of the city where the building is located; 
E.  Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way; 
F.  Whenever, for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used; 
G.  Whenever the building or structure has been to damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts; 
H.  Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the health officer or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within; 
I.  Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(Ord. 94 § 2, 1974) 
15.12.030 - Notice-Contents-Filing. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the building department shall issue a notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition. 
B.  Such notice shall be directed to each owner of or party in interest in the building in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. 
C.  The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the condition of the building or structure at which time and place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
D.  The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at his pleasure. The building department shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the hearing officer. 
E.  All notices shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom they are directed personally, or in lieu of personal service, may be mailed by certified mail-return receipt requested-addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(Ord. 94 § 3, 1974) 
15.12.040 - Hearing-Procedures. 
A.  The hearing officer shall take testimony of the building department, the owner of the property and any interested party. The hearing officer shall render his decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
B.  If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply therewith. 
C.  If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall file a report of his findings and copy of his order with the city council and request that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise made safe the building or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in Section 15.12.030 of this chapter. 
D.  The city council shall fix a date for hearing, reviewing the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in Section 15.12.030 of this chapter of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the building should not be demolished or otherwise made safe and the city council shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order for the demolition or making safe of the building or structure. 
E.  The cost of the demolition or making the building safe, plus an additional fifteen percent administrative fee, shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer of the city who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. 
F.  The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If he fails to pay the same within thirty days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next tax roll of the city and the same shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes by such. 
(Ord. 94-A1 (part), 1986; Ord. 94 § 4, 1974) 
15.12.050 - Judicial review. 
    An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council under Section 15.12.040 may appeal the decision order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within twenty days from the date of decision. 
(Ord. 94-A1 (part), 1986: Ord. 94 § 5, 1974) 
Chapter 15.16 - RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS 
Sections: 
Article I. - Definitions 

15.16.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    "Enforcing official" means the building official of the city or his authorized representative. 
    "Health department" means the Oakland County health department or its authorized representatives. 
    "Permanent pool" means any pool built into the ground, more than one foot; and any above-ground pool with a structure which provides fencing and a walkway partially or completely around the water's edge. 
    "Swimming pool" means any artificially constructed structure intended for human swimming or bathing, located either above or below grade and located either in or outside or partially in or partially outside a permanent and enclosed roofed building. 
    "Temporary pool" means any above-ground pool, with maximum water depth greater than eighteen inches, that is or can be assembled with hand tools by the homeowner. 
    "Wading pool" means any temporary pool with maximum water depth of eighteen inches. 
(Ord. 78 Art. 1, 1969) 
Article II. - Administration 

15.16.020 - Enforcement. 
    The enforcing official shall administer the requirements of this chapter so as to protect the health and safety of the public, the bathers and other persons. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.1, 1969) 
15.16.030 - Permits. 
    On and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter it shall be unlawful to construct, install or alter any permanent or temporary swimming pool as defined in this chapter without first having obtained a permit therefor. Before a permit is issued an application shall be approved by the health department. A permit is not required for a wading pool as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.2, 1969) 
15.16.040 - Application approval. 
    Pools shall be constructed, installed and/or altered in conformity with the application approved by the enforcing official. Any deviation from the approved application shall require prior approval by the enforcing official. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.3, 1969) 
15.16.050 - Inspection fee. 
    The city council shall annually by resolution set the fees to be paid for inspection work conducted by the city building department in relation to the construction and installation of residential swimming pools. 
(Ord. 78-A-1 § 1, 1989: Ord. 78 § 2.4, 1969) 
15.16.060 - Workmanship. 
    All work shall be done in an acceptable manner and shall comply with applicable building, plumbing, electrical and heating codes. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.5, 1969) 
15.16.070 - Inspection. 
    The pool contractor, or the owner if no contractor is involved, shall notify the building official upon completion of pool construction, installation, or modification. The enforcing official shall inspect all permanent or temporary pools after such notification so that all provisions of this chapter are satisfied. When necessary, the enforcing official or health department shall make additional inspections. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.6, 1969) 
15.16.080 - Stop-work order. 
    Construction work that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be immediately stopped upon notice from the enforcing official or health department. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.7, 1969) 
15.16.090 - Right of entry. 
    The enforcing official and representatives of the health department shall have the right at any reasonable hour to inspect any swimming pool for the purpose of determining compliance with the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.8, 1969) 
15.16.100 - Compliance with Electrical Code. 
    No swimming pool shall be constructed or maintained except in compliance with the National Electrical Code, 1968 edition, Article 680, as may be amended. 
(Ord. 78 § 2.9, 1969) 
Article III. - Design Requirements 

15.16.110 - Pool clearance. 
    The location and enclosure of any pool shall be such that no hazard exists for pool users or the public. The minimum distance from the nearest part of the pool water shall be as follows: 
A.  Six feet horizontally to any street property line, and five feet horizontally to any other property line and ten feet to any building wall or nonproperty line fence. No pool shall be located in a required front yard setback. 
B.  Ten feet horizontally from any overhead electrical or telephone wire to the water's edge or to any diving board or platform. Under no circumstances shall wires of any kind cross over the water surface. 
C.  Twenty-five feet horizontally to any private water well or seventy-five feet to any semipublic water well, unless a shorter distance is approved by the health department. 
D.  Three feet horizontally to any sewer for a permanent pool. There shall be ten feet horizontally to a septic tank and tile field or other similar treatment facility, provided the water level in the pool is one foot or more above the ground surface elevation of the treatment facility. 
E.  Except as approved by the enforcing official there shall be ten feet to any underground water, electrical, telephone, gas or other pipes and conduits, except for parts of the swimming pool system. 
(Ord. 78-A-1 § 2, 1989; Ord. 78 § 3.1, 1969) 
15.16.120 - Fence. 
A.  No temporary or permanent pool eighteen inches or deeper shall be constructed or maintained unless such swimming pool is entirely enclosed by a building, wall and/or fence. The minimum height of all parts of the fence or wall shall be forty-eight inches measured from the outside of the fence or wall upward from the highest point on the adjacent ground. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices made inaccessible from the outside by small children. 
B.  A permanent above-ground pool which has a structure intended to provide self-fencing shall satisfy the fencing requirements of this chapter if it provides: 
1.  A walkway not less than twenty inches in width completely around the water's edge and at least three feet above grade; 
2.  The self-fencing shall be at least three feet high above the walkway; 
3.  A fold-up stairway or gate which must be locked when residents are away from the home or when the pool is not in use; 
4.  The self-fencing shall make the pool inaccessible to children by climbing or entering through the fence openings. 
C.  No wading pool shall be left unattended unless it is provided with a substantial cover or is surrounded by a fence as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 78-A-1 § 3, 1989; Ord. 78 § 3.2, 1969) 
15.16.130 - Potable water supply. 
    Every swimming pool shall be filled and maintained with potable water. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.3, 1969) 
15.16.140 - Method of pool fill. 
    If a hose is used to fill the pool or to add makeup water, an acceptable vacuum breaker shall be installed on the hose thread of the hose bib, still cock or fixture. Fill spouts will be acceptable if located under a diving board or installed so as to prevent any hazard and provided there is a fixed air gap of six inches or more above the pool coping. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.4, 1969) 
15.16.150 - Pool drainage. 
    Facilities shall be provided for disposing of all pool drainage and wastewater to the community sanitary sewer system or in some other manner approved by the enforcing official. There shall be a six-inch air gap between the pool discharge line and the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.5, 1969) 
15.16.160 - Material and equipment. 
    Pool equipment and material shall be subject to evaluation and acceptance by the enforcing official before installation. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.6, 1969) 
15.16.170 - Overflow. 
    The pool and surrounding area shall be constructed and arranged in such a manner that no water shall return from the deck to the pool. Wastewater shall not be allowed to create a nuisance or to overflow onto adjoining property. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.7, 1969) 
15.16.180 - Surface drainage. 
    No surface or roof drainage shall be permitted to enter the pool. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.8, 1969) 
15.16.190 - Hazards and shape. 
    There shall be not hazardous projections, or low over-water construction in the pool or the pool enclosure which could trap or injure bathers. The pool shall be shaped so that all parts of the pool can be observed from a single vantage point on the pool deck. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.9, 1969) 
15.16.200 - Lights. 
    Pool area lights, if provided, shall be shielded so as to direct the light away from adjacent premises. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.10, 1969) 
15.16.210 - Equipment location. 
    Water treatment equipment shall be installed above grade, except that it may be installed in a properly drained residential basement, cellar, or other approved structure. Any accessory building shall comply with applicable requirements of zoning and building codes. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.11, 1969) 
15.16.220 - Skimmers. 
    Unless a continuous overflow weir gutter is installed around the pool, one or more surface skimmers shall be provided. There shall be one skimmer for each eight hundred square feet of water surface or any fraction thereof, which shall operate continuously while the pool water is being circulated and which shall automatically adjust for vertical variations in the water level of three inches or more. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.12, 1969) 
15.16.230 - Suction cleaner. 
    There shall be a suction cleaner outlet connected to the pump suction piping between the pool and the hair and lint strainer, to permit the use of a suction cleaner or other acceptable device for cleaning the entire pool. 
(Ord. 78 § 3.13, 1969) 
Article IV. - Temporary Pools-Additional Provisions 

15.16.240 - Ladders. 
    Any temporary pool with maximum water depth of four feet or more shall have at least one acceptable ladder or set of steps permitting exit from the pool water. 
(Ord. 78 § 4.1, 1969) 
15.16.250 - Diving boards. 
    Diving boards shall not be permitted at temporary pools. 
(Ord. 78 § 4.2, 1969) 
15.16.260 - Filters. 
    Each temporary pool shall have a filter capable of maintaining clear water in the pool whenever the pool is in use. 
(Ord. 78 § 4.3, 1969) 
15.16.270 - Pumps. 
    Each temporary pool shall have a pump with sufficient capacity to circulate the pool volume each twelve hours or less. 
(Ord. 78 § 4.4, 1969) 
Article V. - Permanent Pools-Additional Provisions 

15.16.280 - Finish and cove. 
    Pool floor and walls shall have a cleanable, light colored and impermeable surface. The pool floor and the deck shall be skid resistant. Where the water depth is less than five feet, the maximum cove radius shall be eight inches. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.2, 1969) 
15.16.290 - Ladders. 
    Every permanent pool shall have at least one acceptable ladder or set of steps permitting exit from the pool water. The ladder is to be located at the deepest end of the pool. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.3, 1969) 
15.16.300 - Deck. 
    Below-ground pools shall have a walkway or deck or concrete or other approved impervious material around the perimeter of the pool and shall be at least three feet wide and shall slope away from the pool. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.4, 1969) 
15.16.310 - Slopes. 
    The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet in depth shall not be more than one foot vertically in each eight feet horizontally. The top three feet of all side and end walls shall be vertical or shall have an outward batter not to exceed six feet vertically to one foot horizontally, except to comply with Section 15.16.280. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.5, 1969) 
15.16.320 - Diving board or platform. 
    There shall be at least eight feet clearance between the end of any diving board or platform and each side wall of the pool. The end of the diving board or platform shall project over the water one foot from the deep end wall. Diving structures shall be securely anchored and shall have at least thirteen feet unobstructed headroom for at least eight feet horizontally over the water surface from all parts of the diving surface. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.6, 1969) 
15.16.330 - Water depths for diving. 
    No diving board or platform shall be installed except in accordance with the following limits: 
A.  Minimum water depth, at deepest point in pool, shall be eight feet. 
B.  Minimum distance from diving wall to deepest point in pool shall be ten feet. 
C.  Minimum distance from deepest point in pool to point where water is five feet deep shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.7, 1969) 
15.16.340 - Depth markings. 
    If a diving board is installed, there shall be at least one depth marking on the deck or wall of the pool above the water line indicating greatest depth in feet. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.8, 1969) 
15.16.350 - Floatline. 
    When maximum water depth exceeds five feet, recessed floatline anchors shall be provided in the walls at the place where the water depth is five feet. A suitable floatline shall be installed when the pool is in use. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.9, 1969) 
15.16.360 - Piping. 
    Pool piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and filter backwash without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump will provide such flows. The water velocity in the pool piping shall not exceed ten feet per second in pressure piping and five feet per second in suction piping at design flows. (The water velocity in plastic piping shall not exceed five feet per second.) 
(Ord. 78 § 5.10, 1969) 
15.16.370 - Inlets. 
    There shall be a minimum of one filtered water inlet for each sixty feet of pool perimeter. Each of the minimum required water inlets shall be at least ten inches below the highest overflow line and at least ten feet from any other inlet or from any skimmer, unless otherwise approved by the enforcing official. Inlets shall be located to impart a circulatory motion to the pool water. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.11, 1969) 
15.16.380 - Main drains. 
    One or more outlets shall be placed at the deepest point in every permanent pool for circulating the pool water. The effective area of the drain grating shall be at least four times the area of the outlet pipe. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.12, 1969) 
15.16.390 - Skimmers. 
    All skimmers in permanent pools shall be recessed or flush with the walls of the pool. Unless a continuous overflow weir gutter is installed around the pool, one or more surface skimmers shall be provided. There shall be one skimmer for each eight hundred square feet of water surface or any fraction thereof, which shall operate continuously while the pool water is being circulated and which shall automatically adjust for vertical variations in the water level of three inches or more. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.13, 1969) 
15.16.400 - Valves. 
    A regulating valve shall be installed in the line so as to control the flow of water. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.14, 1969) 
15.16.410 - Pumps. 
    The pump shall have sufficient capacity at maximum anticipated hydraulic head to circulate the pool volume each twelve hours and to supply the required backwash rate to any one filter. Unless hydraulic analysis demonstrates otherwise, each pump shall supply the required filtration rate at a total head of at least fifty feet for any sand filter system and sixty feet for a diatomite filter system at permanent pools. The motor horsepower rating shall be determined for maximum total head conditions at a twelve-hour pool volume turnover time. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.15, 1969) 
15.16.420 - Strainer. 
    A pump connected to a pressure filter shall be equipped on its inlet side with a noncorrosive hair and lint strainer. The ratio of the open strainer area to the open area of the suction piping shall be at least four to one. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.16, 1969) 
15.16.430 - Gauges. 
    A pressure gauge of appropriate range shall be installed on the piping between the filter(s) and pool. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.17, 1969) 
15.16.440 - Filters. 
A.  All filters approved by the building official shall be equal in performance to the sand and diatomite filters described in this chapter. Filters approved by the National Sanitation Foundation testing laboratory will be accepted. 
B.  The total effective filter area in square feet shall be at least equal to the volume of the pool in gallons divided by two thousand one hundred sixty (three gallons per minute per square foot for twelve-hour turnover). Each filtering system shall be provided with a slight glass or visible discharge. The influent shall be applied to the filter media surface in a manner which prevents direct turbulent discharge against the media. 
C.  All pressure filters shall be equipped with an air release at the high point in the system. If an automatic device is installed for this purpose, there shall be a manual valve for testing its effectiveness. 
D.  The shell containing the filter media or elements shall be constructed so as to provide satisfactory strength and freedom from corrosion, and shall be installed in a manner to prevent setting or upset. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.18, 1969) 
15.16.450 - Sand filters. 
A.  High rate sand filters shall be approved by and carry the seal of the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory. 
B.  Standard sand filters shall be sized so that the filtration rate does not exceed three gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area. Each pressure sand filter shall be provided with backwash water at a minimum rate of twelve gallons per minute per square foot of effective surface area. 
C.  For standard sand filters, the filter sand shall be uniformly graded silica material with effective particle diameters between 0.45 and 0.55 millimeters and with uniformity coefficient less than 1.75. The sand shall be free of clay, organic matter, and water-soluble material and no less than twenty inches in depth, with a twelve-inch or greater freeboard. 
D.  For standard sand filters the graded gravel or crushed anthracite used to support the filter media shall be free of organic and water-soluble material. It shall be graded by size and separately leveled in layers. The total depth of the graded gravel shall not be less than sixteen inches. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.19, 1969) 
15.16.460 - Diatomite filters. 
    Diatomite filters shall be sized so that the filtration rate does not exceed two gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area. A precoat funnel or other feeding device shall be provided. 
(Ord. 78 § 5.20, 1969) 
Article VI. - Operation, Maintenance and Removal 

15.16.470 - General. 
    Pools and pool equipment shall be operated and maintained in a manner which will not create health or safety hazards or any public nuisance. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.1, 1969) 
15.16.480 - Water clarity. 
    Between Memorial Day and Labor Day of each year the water shall be free of algae and turbidity. During this period satisfactory water clarity will permit observation of a coin on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point when the viewer is standing on the deck. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.2, 1969) 
15.16.490 - Supervision. 
    The pool shall be so supervised that safety hazards are not created. The gate or gates must be locked when pool is not in use. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.3, 1969) 
15.16.500 - Disinfection. 
    Proper germicidal levels shall be maintained at all times during pool usage to protect the health of users. A chlorine residual of 0.4 to 0.8 parts per million shall satisfy this requirement. Other disinfecting agents than chlorine may be used if approved by the health department. The hydrogenation concentration (pH) of the pool water shall be maintained between 7.2 and 7.6. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring pH and chlorine residual or other disinfectant shall be available. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.4, 1969) 
15.16.510 - Rescue devices. 
    A rescue pole, hook or a similar device shall be available within the pool enclosure. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.5, 1969) 
15.16.520 - Water restrictions. 
    The filling of swimming pools from the public water supply shall be regulated the same as lawn sprinkling. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.6, 1969) 
15.16.530 - Drainage restrictions. 
    No swimming pool shall be drained to a sewer during a period of heavy rainfall if such drainage would contribute to overloading the sewer. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.7, 1969) 
15.16.540 - Maintenance. 
    Any swimming pool which is not maintained to the minimum standard established by this chapter shall be placed out of use by the owner after a notice by the enforcing official itemizing the corrections needed. Upon failure to correct the item or items cited, the pool may be ordered removed in accordance with Section 15.16.550. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.8, 1969) 
15.16.550 - Pool removal. 
    Upon discontinuing the use of a pool, the owner thereof shall forthwith remove all water therefrom and shall remove and/or fill the structure or excavation with earth level to grade or otherwise make the premises safe. 
(Ord. 78 § 6.9, 1969) 
Article VII. - Enforcement 

15.16.560 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, association, copartnership or corporation who violates any provisions of the chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. Each day any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any unsafe, improper or incorrect installation, operation, maintenance or use so defined in this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter and the enforcing official may, in addition to the penal provisions, abate such violation by means of a court action. 
(Ord. 78 § 7.1, 1969) 
15.16.570 - Appeal. 
    An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person, firm or corporation, or any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal, with the board of zoning appeals on appropriate forms provided by the building inspector and payment of the required fee. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Ord. 78 § 7.3, 1969) 
Chapter 15.20 - MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREENING 
Sections: 

15.20.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter may hereafter be referenced as the Mechanical Equipment Screening Ordinance for the city. 
(Ord. 39-A10 § 1, 1982) 
15.20.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "Mechanical equipment" includes all heating units, cooling units, air handling units, refrigeration and other similar equipment. 
    "Screening" means all structures erected to bar sight, which in the context of this chapter shall be constructed of decorative material which is resistant to weather elements. 
(Ord. 39-A10 § 2, 1982) 
15.20.030 - Commercial and office structures. 
    Mechanical equipment which is located on or around a commercial structure or an office building shall be screened from public view. Such screening shall be of a height sufficient to screen the mechanical equipment but in no case shall the owner of the structure be required to provide screening which is higher than the height of the highest piece of mechanical equipment on or around the structure. 
(Ord. 39-A10 § 3, 1982) 
15.20.040 - Roof placement of mechanical equipment. 
    Mechanical equipment which is located on a roof of a residential or multifamily dwelling shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the mechanical equipment in any district which is located on a roof of a building is not visible from a distance of two hundred feet at a grade level equal to the front entrance of the building, no screening shall be required. 
(Ord. 39-A10 § 4, 1982) 
15.20.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days, or both such fine or imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 39-A10 § 5, 1982) 
Chapter 15.24 - TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION OFFICES 
Sections: 

15.24.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter may hereafter be referenced as the Construction Office Ordinance for the city. 
(Ord. 39-A11 § 1, 1982) 
15.24.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, "construction office" means any trailer, van, bus or structure used as a temporary construction office for any construction site within the city. 
(Ord. 39-A11 § 2, 1982) 
15.24.030 - Permit-Issuance. 
    No construction office shall be placed or used within the city for any purpose without first having obtained a permit issued by the building department for the city, which permit shall be posted within the construction office for the duration of the permit. 
(Ord. 39-A11 § 3, 1982) 
15.24.040 - Permit-Duration. 
    Permits for the placement of construction offices within the city shall be for a duration deemed appropriate by the building official based upon the length of the construction project itself. The permit may be extended by the building official upon application for extension, should the construction project exceed the original estimates for completion. 
(Ord. 39-A11 § 4, 1982) 
15.24.050 - Abandonment. 
    All construction offices which remain on any premises located within the city after the permit for its placement has expired shall be deemed abandoned by the city and any and all removal procedures for abandoned property which may be followed by the city in parallel instances may be applied to construction offices as treated by this chapter. 
(Ord. 39-A11 § 5, 1982) 
15.24.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days, or both such fine or imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 39-A11 § 6, 1982) 
Chapter 15.28 - FIRE LIMITS 
Sections: 

15.28.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter may hereafter be referred to as the Fire Limits Ordinance for the city. 
(Ord. 39-A9 § 1, 1982) 
15.28.020 - Fire limits district created. 
    A fire limits district is created for the city consisting of all lands and premises within the following district zones: all OS-1 residential offices; all B-1 local business districts; all B-2 community business districts; all B-3 general business districts; all M-1 and M-2 industrial districts; all FS freeway service districts and all IRO industrial research office districts. 
(Ord. 39-A-13 § 1, 1992: Ord. 39-A9 § 2, 1982) 
15.28.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall have the following meanings: 
    "Brick" means a solid masonry unit having a shape approximately a rectangular prism twelve by four by four inches. A brick may be of burned clay or shale, or of cement and suitable aggregates, or of other approved material. 
    "Solid masonry" means masonry consisting of solid masonry units laid contiguously in mortar, or consisting of solid concrete. 
    "Solid masonry unit" means a masonry unit whole net cross-section area in every place parallel to the bearing surface in seventy-five percent or more of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the same place. 
(Ord. 39-A9 § 3, 1982) 
15.28.040 - Construction in fire limits district. 
    No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected or placed on any land or premises within the fire limits district for the city other than solid masonry units as defined above. Suitable material may be substituted for solid masonry if such material furnishes equivalent fire rating quality and is approved by the city prior to substitution. 
(Ord. 39-A12 § 1, 1982: Ord. 39-A9 § 4, 1982) 
15.28.050 - M-1 and M-2 industrial districts. 
    All construction in M-1 and M-2 industrial districts shall have either brick veneer or solid masonry fronts. The side and rear walls of the construction may be eight-inch or ten-inch cement block with painted walls according to the structure being built and its particular fire rating and occupancy load. 
(Ord. 39-A9 § 5, 1982) 
15.28.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety days, or both such fine or imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 39-A9 § 6, 1982) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this title shall be known and may be designated as the city Subdivision Regulations Ordinance. 
(Ord. 80 § 100, 1969) 
16.04.020 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this title are to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
(Ord. 80 § 101, 1969) 
16.04.030 - Standard details, standard specifications and general supplementary conditions. 
    The city standard details, standard specifications and general supplementary conditions as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be complied with. 
(Ord. 80 § 600, 1969) 
16.04.040 - Compliance required. 
    The approvals required under the provisions of this title shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the city, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 80 § 601, 1969) 
16.04.050 - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of these regulations shall be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare of the city. These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the city, nor to conflict with any statutes of the state or county, except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations. 
(Ord. 80 Art. 7, 1969) 
16.04.060 - Variance. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this section, the council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds: 
A.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
B.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
C.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated. 
(Ord. 80 Art. 12, 1969) 
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

16.08.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this title, certain words, terms and phrases shall be defined as follows. All terms as defined in Public Act No. 288 of 1967, as amended (MCL 560.101, et seq.), also known as the Land Division Act, shall control in this title unless indicated to the contrary in this section. 
    "Block" means property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, un-subdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    "Clerk" means the clerk of the city of Wixom. 
    "Commission" means the planning commission of the city of Wixom. 
    Condominium. The following definitions are related to condominiums: 
    "Condominium Act" means Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
    "Condominium documents" means the master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
    "Condominium subdivision" ("site condominium") means a method of development where land ownership of sites is regulated by the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended MCL 559.101), as opposed to the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101). "Condominium subdivision" shall be equivalent to the term "subdivision" as used in this title and in the zoning ordinance. 
    "Condominium subdivision plan" means the drawings and information prepared in accordance with Section 66 of the Condominium Act. Such drawings and information typically include the site, survey and utility plans, floor plans and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the location thereof on the land. 
    "Condominium unit" means that portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in master deed and is a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this title. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. "Lot" shall mean the same as homesite and condominium unit in the site condominium developments. 
    "Consolidating master deed" means the final amended master deed for a contractible or expandable condominium project, or a condominium project containing convertible land or convertible space, which final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed. 
    "Contractible condominium" means a condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn in accordance with this title and the Condominium Act. 
    "Conversion condominium" means a condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under Section 71 of the Condominium Act. 
    "DWSD" means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. 
    "Expandable condominium" means a condominium project to which additional land may be added in accordance with this title and the Condominium Act. 
    "Master deed" means the condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by Section 8 of the Condominium Act. 
    "Notice of proposed action" means the notice required by Section 71 of the Condominium Act, to be filed with the city and other agencies. 
    "Site condominium" means a developmental concept for a condominium development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial or other structure for uses permitted in the zoning district in which located; in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights in a condominium unit as described in the master deed. 
    "Division" means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than forty acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of Sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act. "Division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of this act or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance. 
    "Exempt split" means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns that does not result in one or more parcels of less than forty acres or the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of this act or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance. 
    "Easement" means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation or persons, for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a public or private easement, depending on the nature of the use. 
    "Forty acres or the equivalent" means either forty acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than thirty acres, or a government lot containing not less than thirty acres. 
    "General development plan" means the comprehensive plan for development of the community which may or may not be adopted by the planning commission and the city council; i.e., the master plan. 
    "Governing body" means the city council of the city of Wixom. 
    "Improvement" means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the municipality to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas, landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage and other additions to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability. Improvements do not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
    "Land Division Act" or "Subdivision Control Act" means Public Act No. 288 of 1967 as amended. 
    "Lot" means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this title. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. "Lot" means the same as "homesite" and "condominium" in site condominium developments. 
    "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    "Master streets or thoroughfare plan" means the part of the general development plan which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
    "Municipality" means the city of Wixom. 
    "Municipal engineer" or "engineer" means the staff engineer or consulting engineer of the city. 
    "Municipal planner" or "planner" means the staff planner or consulting planner of the city. 
    "Plat" means a map or chart of a subdivision or land. 
1.  "Preliminary plat" means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance with the Land Division Act. 
2.  "Final plat" means a map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the preliminary plat of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Land Division Act. 
    "Parcel" means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the Land Division Act. 
    "Proprietor" means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
    "Sketch plan" means a plan drawn to scale showing existing and proposed features of a site and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed subdivision. 
    "Street" means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, land, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. A street includes the land between the property lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns. 
1.  "Major thoroughfare" means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan as designated on the city master plan for future land use. 
2.  "Collector street" means a street within a neighborhood used primarily to carry traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares, including principal entrance streets to a residential development. 
3.  "Minor street" means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
4.  "Marginal access street" means a minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
5.  "Boulevard street" means a street developed to two two-lane, one-way pavements separated by a median. 
6.  "Turnaround" means a short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
7.  "Cul-de-sac street" means a short minor street used primarily to provide secondary vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting upon a street. 
8.  "Alley" means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    "Subdivision" means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, that results in one or more parcels of land, of less than forty acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of Public Act 288 of 1967 as amended. "Subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of Public Act 288 of 1967 as amended or the requirements of this title. 
    "Tract" means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. (§ 1 of Ord. dated 7-13-99; § 1 of Ord. dated 11-12-97: Ord. 80-4F § 1, 1989: Ord. 80 § 200, 1969) 
Chapter 16.12 - SUBDIVISIONS PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - Procedure-General. 
    The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through two phases, preliminary plat and final plat, all in accordance with the procedures found in this chapter. 
(Ord. 80 Art. 3 (part), 1969) 
16.12.020 - Tentative preliminary plat approval. 
A.  Filing. 
1.  Twelve copies of a valid and complete preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate and any other information required to be submitted under the Land Division Act shall be filed with the clerk. 
2.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with the State Land Division Act and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
3.  The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney at law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
4.  The clerk shall check the proposed plat for completeness. Should any of the data required in the Land Division Act, or in this chapter be omitted, the clerk shall be directed to inform the proprietor of the data required, and that the application will be delayed until the required data is received. 
5.  The clerk shall transmit a copy of the valid and complete preliminary plat to the city engineer and city planner for their technical review and recommendation. 
B.  Identification and Description. The preliminary plat shall include: 
1.  The proposed name of subdivision; 
2.  Location by section, town and range, or by other legal description; 
3.  Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner, and the planner, designer, engineer and surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land; 
4.  Scale of plat, one inch equals one hundred feet as minimum acceptable scale; 
5.  Date; 
6.  Northpoint. 
C.  Existing Conditions. The preliminary plat shall include: 
1.  An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two thousand feet, showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings such as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets shall be provided; 
2.  Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions; 
3.  Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those of areas across abutting roads; 
4.  Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads; 
5.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision; 
6.  Topography drawn as contours with an interval of at least two feet. Topography to be based on U.S.G.S. datum; 
7.  The school board or school board superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned shall be informed and made aware of the proposed preliminary plat by the proprietor. A letter or document from the school board or school board superintendent indicating awareness of the commission as part of the preliminary plat. 
D.  Proposed Conditions. The preliminary plat shall include: 
1.  Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, rights-of-way, widths and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways; 
2.  Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building setback lines showing dimensions; 
3.  Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision; 
4.  An indication of the ownership and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as excepted, the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat; 
5.  An indication of system proposed for sewage disposal by a method which conforms to the city's ordinances and to be approved by the governing body and the municipal engineer; 
6.  An indication of system proposed for water supply by a method which conforms to the city's ordinances and to be approved by the governing body and the municipal engineer; 
7.  An indication of system proposed for storm drainage by a method which conforms to the city's ordinances and to be approved by the governing body and the municipal engineer and, if involving county drains, the proposed drainage shall be acceptable to the county drain commissioner; 
8.  In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plan shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided; 
9.  If the subdivision is proposed to be developed under the subdivision open space plan, the subdivision shall meet the requirements of Section 18.76.030; 
10.  Final determination of street names, whether public or private streets, shall be subject to city council approval. 
E.  Planning Commission Review-Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval. 
1.  Once the clerk determines that the information required to be submitted for the preliminary plat is complete, the information will be forwarded to the planning commission. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed preliminary plat. The planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the plat within sixty-three days after the plat has been submitted by the clerk to the planning commission as administratively complete. The proprietor may waive this requirement or consent to an extension of the time period. 
2.  It shall be the duty of the clerk to send a notice by registered or certified mail to the owners of land immediately adjoining the property to be platted of the presentment of the preliminary plat and the time and place of the meeting of the planning commission to consider such preliminary plat; the notice shall be sent not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. 
3.  The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer as to plans for utilities and other improvements. The municipal engineer shall notify the planning commission of his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the preliminary plat. 
4.  Should the planning commission approve the preliminary plat, it shall notify the governing body of this action in its official minutes and forward the same, together with all accompanying data, to the governing body for its review. 
5.  Should the planning commission find that the preliminary plat is not acceptable, the reason shall be recorded in its official minutes and forward the same, together with all accompanying data, and recommend that the governing body disapprove the preliminary plat until the objections causing disapproval have been changed to meet with the approval of the planning commission. 
F.  Governing Body-Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval. 
1.  The governing body will not review a preliminary plat until it has received the review and recommendations of the planning commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the governing body shall consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The governing body shall take action on the preliminary plat within ninety days of the date of initial filing of the plat with the clerk, as required in subsection A of this section. 
2.  Should the governing body tentatively approve the preliminary plat, they shall record their approval on the plat and return one copy to the proprietor. 
3.  Tentative preliminary plat approval by the governing body shall be effective for a period of twelve months. Should the preliminary plat in whole or in part not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the planning commission and the governing body for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the governing body. 
4.  No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before approval has been given by the governing body, engineering plans have been approved by the municipal engineer, and any deposits required under Chapter 16.20 of this code have been received by the municipality. 
(§ 7 of Ord. dated 11-12-97) 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-27-2015 ) 
16.12.030 - Final preliminary plat approval. 
A.  Preparation. 
1.  The final preliminary plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land Division Act. 
2.  The final preliminary plat shall conform substantially to the final preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at that time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this title. 
3.  The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
B.  Final Preliminary Plat Review and Approval. 
1.  The proprietor shall file five copies of the final preliminary plat with the clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required for approval in Sections 112 to 119 of the Land Division Act. The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of plats from each of the required authorities. 
2.  In addition to the above required submission, the proprietor shall also deposit with the clerk such sums of money as the governing body may require under this title or by other ordinances. 
3.  The governing body shall take action on the final preliminary plat within twenty days of the submission of all necessary approved plats. 
4.  If the final preliminary plat conforms substantially to the final preliminary plat approved by the governing body and meets all of the conditions laid down at the time of final preliminary plat approval, the governing body shall give final preliminary plat approval. 
5.  The clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing. If rejected, the reasons shall be given and shall be recorded in the minutes pertaining thereto. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor. If approved, one original copy of the final preliminary plat shall be forwarded to the clerk. 
6.  Final preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of approval. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the governing body in writing. 
(§ 1 of Ord. dated 10-13-98) 
16.12.040 - Final plat approval. 
A.  The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land Division Act and shall conform substantially to the final preliminary plat as approved. The final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at that time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this title. 
B.  The proprietor shall file five (or six if proprietor wishes one returned to him) mylar copies and three paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the clerk. Such final plat shall have been processed in accord with Sections 162 through 165 of the Land Division Act, prior to submission to the city for its review. 
C.  In addition to the above required submission, the proprietor shall also deposit with the clerk such sums of money as the governing body may require under this title or by other ordinances or resolutions. 
D.  The final plat shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
E.  At its next regular meeting, or at a meeting called within twenty days of the date of submission, the governing body shall review all recommendations and shall either: 
1.  Approve the final plat if it conforms to all the provisions of the Land Division Act and instruct the clerk to certify on the plat to the governing body's approval, showing the date of the governing body's approval, the approval of the health department when required and the date thereof as shown on the approved preliminary plat; or 
2.  Reject the plat, instruct the clerk to give the reasons in writing as set forth in the minutes of the meeting, and return the plat to the proprietor. 
F.  Upon the approval of the final plat by the governing body, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the Land Division Act. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded to the clerk for retention in the clerk's file and distribution to the planning commission and the building department. The five or six mylar copies shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county plat board in accord with Section 168 of the Land Division Act. 
(§ 2 of Ord. dated 10-13-98: § 7 of Ord. dated 11-12-97) 
16.12.080 - Condominium subdivision approval. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 141 of the Condominium Act, Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, all condominium subdivision plans shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedure provided in this section. In determining whether to approve a condominium subdivision plan, the planning commission and city council may consult with the city attorney, city engineer, and city planner regarding the adequacy of the master deed, deed restrictions, utility systems and streets, subdivision layout and design, and compliance with all requirements of the Condominium Act. 
A.  Preliminary Plan. Petitioners shall submit, in accordance with prescribed administrative procedures, preliminary plans for the condominium subdivision development to the office of the city clerk, The planning commission shall review the plan and make recommendations to the city council on the appropriateness of the plan. The city council shall review the plans and either approve the plan outright, conditionally approve the plan, deny approval or table action on the plan until such time that the petitioner addresses concerns of the city council regarding the plan. Review and approval of the preliminary plan by the planning commission and city council establishes the feasibility of the site development. The following items must be included on the preliminary plan: 
1.  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
2.  Location by section, town, range or by other legal description, along with tax identification number for the development parcel; 
3.  Names and addresses of all persons, firms or corporations with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project would be developed, together with a description of the nature of the ownership interest, the developer, the planner, designer, engineer and surveyor associated with the subdivision; 
4.  An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two thousand feet, showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings, such as section lines and/or major streets; 
5.  Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision; 
6.  Property lines of the adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for development, including those of areas across abutting roads; 
7.  Location, widths and names of existing and proposed private or public street rights-of-way, improved public or private road dimensions, connections with adjoining platted streets, widths and location of alleys, public walkways and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those across abutting roads; 
8.  Location of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains, other utilities and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for development; 
9.  Topography drawn as contours with an interval of at least two feet. Based on U.S.G.S. datum; 
10.  The acreage content of the land on which the project is proposed for development; 
11.  The purpose of the project (for example: residential, commercial, industrial, etc.); 
12.  The number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel; 
13.  A wetlands and tree survey plan when appropriate; 
14.  The size, location, area vertical boundaries and volume for each unit comprised of enclosed air space. A number must be assigned to each unit; 
15.  The nature, location and approximate size of common elements; 
16.  Storm drainage and storm water management plan, including all lines, swales, drains, basins, and other facilities. 
B.  Final Plan. Petitioners shall submit, in accordance with prescribed administrative procedures, final plans for all condominium subdivisions to the office of the city clerk. Final plan approval by the city council is required before any building permits may be issued by the city to permit the commencement of construction of the proposed project. The planning commission shall review the plan and make recommendations to the city council. The city council shall review the plans and either approve the plan outright, conditionally approve the plan, deny approval or table action on the plan until such time that the developer addresses concerns of the city council regarding the adequacy of the plans. The final plan shall incorporate all of those informational items prescribed for the preliminary plan, be consistent with the information provided and approved in the preliminary plan, (unless subsequently modified at the request of the planning commission or city council), and include the additional information described below: 
1.  Size, location, pitch, elevation of sanitary sewer mains and sanitary system appurtenances, such as manholes and service leads; 
2.  Size, location and depth of water mains and appurtenances, such as valves, services and fire hydrants; 
3.  Size, location, pitch and elevation of storm water sewer mains and appurtenances, such as manholes, catch basins and inlets; 
4.  Landscaping plan, depicting existing vegetation and proposed planting for site compliance with the city's development standards; 
5.  Elevation drawing for the typical exterior of the proposed buildings within the development; 
6.  Floor plan layout for the proposed buildings (if predetermined) depicting total square footage and uses for each room; 
7.  Location and type of features of the recreational facilities proposed for development; 
8.  Sufficient information on the other proposed public improvements within the condominium subdivision as may be requested by city staff to enable the city to determine that the project would be constructed in a fashion consistent with the design standards found in Chapter 16.16, Design Standards, of this title; 
9.  A copy of the proposed master deed for the development; 
10.  A street construction, paving and maintenance plan for all private streets within the proposed condominium subdivision; 
11.  A storm drainage and storm water management plan, including all lines, swales, drains, basins, and other facilities. 
(Ord. 80-4F § 2 (part), 1989) 
16.12.090 - Easement for utilities. 
    The condominium subdivision plan shall include all necessary easements granted to the city for the purposes of construction, operating, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, and/or removing pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and storm water run-off across, through and under the property subject to the easement, and excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of the structure. 
(Ord. 80-4F § 2 (part), 1989) 
16.12.100 - Private streets. 
    If a condominium subdivision is proposed to have private streets, they shall be developed to the minimum design, construction, inspection approval, and maintenance requirements of Ordinance No. 80 and Ordinance No. 61. 
(Ord. 80-4F § 2 (part), 1989) 
16.12.110 - Condominium subdivision design and approval. 
    All condominium subdivision plans shall conform to the plan preparation requirements, design layout and improvements standards of this chapter. The requirements for final plat approval in Section 16.12.070 shall not apply to condominium subdivision plats, except that a deposit in the form of cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit acceptable to the city shall be made with the city to guarantee the installation and completion of any required public sanitary sewer, water supply and drainage facilities, within a length of time agreed upon from the date of final approval of the condominium subdivision plan by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 80-4F § 2 (part), 1989) 
Chapter 16.16 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - Generally. 
    The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this chapter are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must be reviewed and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 80-4G § (part), 1994) 
16.16.020 - Streets. 
    Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general specifications and typical cross-sections as set forth in this chapter, and other conditions set forth by the city council. 
A.  Location and Arrangement. 
1.  The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned major thoroughfares and secondary streets, all of which shall be platted in the location and width indicated on such plan. 
2.  The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector streets in the adjoining subdivisions or of the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the planning commission and approved by the city council. 
3.  The street shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
4.  If a proposed subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with an approved screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line having a minimum width of fifteen feet, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
5.  If a proposed subdivision borders on or contains a railroad, expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land as for parks in residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
6.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the planning commission, with approval of the city council, finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a dedication or platted and recorded half street, the other half shall be platted. 
B.  Right-of-Way Widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements: 
Street Type Right-of-Way Widths Major thoroughfare In conformance with the major thoroughfare plan of the city Collector streets 86' Industrial service streets 60' Multiple-family residential streets where platted 60' Minor (single-family residential) streets 60' Marginal access streets 34' Turnaround (loop) street 120' Alley 20' Cul-de-sac streets Turn-arounds  
1.  Industrial 75' radius 
2.  Residential and other 60' radius 
Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be five hundred feet maximum length for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may exceed five hundred feet subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
C.  Street Grades. For adequate drainage, the maximum and minimum street grade shall meet the requirements of the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Street Geometrics. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be provided as required by the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
E.  Grading and Centerline Gradients. Grading and centerline gradients shall be per plans and profiles approved by the city engineer. 
F.  Intersections with Major and Collector Thoroughfares. Subdivision streets or private streets in any development which intersect with major or collector thoroughfares shall be provided with paved acceleration and deceleration lanes and passing lanes on both sides of major or collector thoroughfares as designated on the thoroughfare plan. Such lanes shall be provided in keeping with the plan provided in the engineering design standards as adopted by the city council. The city council may provide for a variation of this paragraph, and of design standards where no good purpose would be served or where unusual hardship or existing conditions would merit an alteration of these requirements. 
(Ord. 80-4G § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.16.030 - Blocks. 
    Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  Sizes. 
1.  Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed one thousand four hundred feet in length, except where in the opinion of the planning commission, with approval by the city council, conditions may justify a greater distance. 
2.  Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout. 
B.  Public Walkways. 
1.  Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be required by the planning commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation and access to public and/or private facilities such as but not limited to schools, parks and shopping areas. 
2.  Widths of public walkways shall be at least twelve feet and shall be in an easement for this purpose, and such walkways shall have a five foot high chain link fence on the residential lot sides. 
3.  The surface of the walkways shall be required by the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council. Planting pockets shall be provided in public walkways for tree and shrub planting. The planting plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval of the planning commission. 
C.  Easements. 
1.  Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear, side or front lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than twelve feet wide, six feet from each parcel when along a property line common to two lots. Utility easements, when along a property line bordering a street right-of-way, shall be of a width suitable to accommodate the utility lines as required by the utility service companies utilizing such easement. 
2.  Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving the area. Utility layout shall be subject to review and approval by the department of public services. 
3.  Easements needed for city-owned utility purposes shall be provided to meet the requirements of the city as required by the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 80-4G § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.16.040 - Lots. 
    Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  Sizes and Shapes. 
1.  The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated. 
2.  Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is proposed. 
3.  Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
4.  Corner lots in a residential district having a side-to-side relationship with lots across a common separating street shall have exterior side yards which conform to at least the greater of the two minimum side yards required by the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is proposed, except that in cases where the exterior side yard of a corner lot is essentially a continuation of the front yard of the lot immediately to its rear, said side yard shall not be less than the required front yard of the zoning district. 
5.  Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three to one shall normally be considered a maximum. 
6.  Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking, off-street loading and other requirements in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Arrangement. 
1.  Every lot shall front or abut on a street. 
2.  Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines. 
3.  Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector streets, where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots with an approved screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line having a minimum width of fifteen feet, or such other treatment as may be adequate for protection of residential properties, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between building and such trafficway. 
4.  Lots shall have a front to front relationship across all streets where possible except as provided for under subsection (A)(4) of this section. Any deviation shall require the review and approval of the planning commission. 
5.  Where lots border upon bodies of water the front yard may be designated as the waterfront side of such lot provided the lot has sufficient depth to provide adequate setback on the street side to maintain a setback for all structures equal to the front setback on the street side as well as on the waterfront side. The planning commission shall review and approve any deviation from minimum requirements. 
(Ord. 80-4G § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.16.050 - Natural features. 
    The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, water courses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Ord. 80-4G § 2 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.20 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 

16.20.010 - Generally. 
    The improvements set forth under this chapter are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which standards are not specifically set forth shall have said standards set by resolution of the city council. 
    Proprietors shall be required to deposit with the city clerk, cash or certified check or the equivalent approved by city council, whichever the proprietors elect, running to the city, to insure construction of all improvements. The amount of deposit shall be set by the city council based on an estimate prepared by the developer's engineer and approved by the city engineer. The deposit shall guarantee the completion of the required improvements within a period of time specified by the city council from the date of the approval of the final plat. The city council shall rebate to the proprietors as the work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project. 
    Prior to the acceptance by the city of improvements, a two-year maintenance bond running to the city equal to twenty-five percent of the construction costs shall be posted by the proprietor and as-built plans certified by a licensed engineer submitted to the city per the city engineering design standards. 
(Ord. 80-4H § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.20.020 - Streets. 
    All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in accordance with the engineering design standards as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 80-4H § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.20.030 - Utilities. 
A.  Underground Wiring. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all distribution lines for telephone and electric service to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public rights-of-way subject to the review and approval of the department of public services. Those telephone and electrical facilities placed in dedicated public rights-of-way shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. 
B.  Sewage Disposal. A sanitary sewer system or septic tank system approved by the county health department and per the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council shall be required in all subdivisions. 
C.  Water Supply. A water distribution system approved by the DWSD and MDEQ and in accordance with the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be required in all subdivisions. 
D.  Storm Drainage. Storm drainage shall be provided in accordance with the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be required in all subdivisions. 
(§ 3 of Ord. dated 7-13-99) 
16.20.040 - Sidewalks and bike paths. 
    Sidewalks and bike paths shall be constructed in all subdivisions and all site condominium subdivisions in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 12.04, Sidewalks and Bike Paths. 
(§ 1 of Ord. dated 10-28-97: Ord. 80-4 § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.20.050 - Trees. 
A.  Existing trees near street rights-of-way shall be preserved by the proprietor. 
B.  Street trees shall be provided at least one per lot or not less than one tree for each fifty feet, placed between the sidewalk and curb with the location subject to the department of public services. 
C.  The following species of trees shall be permitted: 
    Norway Maple 
    London Plane 
    Pin Oak 
    Honey Locust 
    Cork Tree 
    Sugar Maple 
    Hop Hornbeam 
    Paul Scarlet Hawthorn 
    Such other species as may be approved by the director of public services. 
D.  The builder of any dwelling in a subdivision or site condominium development shall provide funds in the amount set forth in the city building permit fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the city council, for installation of trees by the proprietor. Such dollar amount shall be based on the requirements of subsection B of this section. 
E.  Existing trees within street rights-of-way or trees on the same building lot which meet size and species requirements may be utilized as street trees. In those instances where existing trees in the street right-of-way or trees moved from the same building lot to serve as street trees are provided, funds for such trees shall not be required as specified in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 2003-11 § 1, 2003; § 1 of Ord. dated 6-9-98; Ord. 80-4H § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.20.060 - Street signs. 
    Street name signs shall be provided by the proprietor at intersections of all streets and shall meet the approval of the department of public services. Traffic control signs shall be provided by the proprietor where necessary as determined by the city. 
(Ord. 80-4H § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.20.070 - Cluster development improvement. 
    Improvement in one-family cluster developments shall meet minimum requirements of this chapter and shall further meet the engineering design standards as adopted by resolution of the city council. Street widths for minor residential streets, when such streets are private streets in single-family cluster development, may be reduced in width to not less than twenty-four feet, subject to planning commission approval. 
(Ord. 80-4H § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.20.080 - Installation of improvements. 
    The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the city public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city, shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this chapter, the engineering design standards and the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 80-4H § 2 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.24 - REVIEW FEES 
Sections: 

16.24.010 - Generally. 
    Prepreliminary, preliminary and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering fees, attorneys' fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other applicable development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as set forth in resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 80-4I § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.24.020 - Fees not covered by Section 16.24.030. 
    Fees shall be charged for review of site plans, plats, land division other than plats, field inspection of landscape construction by the city planner and review of site plans and plats by the city as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 80-4I § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.24.030 - Engineering review, municipal review, inspection and administrative fees. 
    The proprietor shall pay to the city at the time the plans are submitted for review, a nonrefundable fee in the amount as set forth by resolution of the city council, of the cost (estimated cost to be used, but to be adjusted to final actual costs after final plan approval) of the proposed utility, improvement and/or structures to defray the city's cost of engineering review, planning and recording on city's records the proposed utility, improvement and/or structures. The proprietor shall pay to the city an additional fee to reimburse the ordinary cost of the city's inspection of construction. The proprietor shall deposit with the city, prior to start of construction, an amount of money for inspection services as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
    In the event that the cost of inspection is greater than the amount deposited, the proprietor shall deposit additional moneys. 
    In the event that the cost of inspection is less than the amount deposited, the excess shall be refunded to the proprietor. 
(Ord. 80-4I § 2 (part), 1994) 
16.24.040 - Attorney review fees. 
    Fees for attorney review conventional subdivision plats, subdivision open space plats, and easements and agreements shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 80-4I § 2 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.28 - LAND DIVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.28.010 - Approval required. 
    Land in the city shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the city assessor, or other official designated by the governing body, in accordance with this chapter and the State Land Division Act, provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
A.  A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the State Land Division Act; 
B.  A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the State Land Division Act; 
C.  An exempt split as defined in this title or as defined in the State Land Division Act. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 11-12-97) 
16.28.020 - Application. 
    An applicant shall file all of the following with the city assessor or other official designated by the governing body for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development. 
A.  A completed application form on such form as may be approved by the city council; 
B.  Proof of free ownership of the land proposed to be divided; 
C.  A tentative parcel map drawn to scale including an accurate legal description of each proposeddivision, and showing the boundary lines, approximate dimensions, and the accessibility of each division for automobile traffic and public utilities; 
D.  Proof that all standards of the State Land Division Act and this chapter have been met; 
E.  If a transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer; 
F.  A fee as determined in a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this chapter and the Land Division Act. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 11-12-97) 
16.28.030 - Review and approval of land divisions. 
A.  The city shall approve or disapprove the land division applied for within forty-five days after receipt of a complete application conforming to this chapter's requirements and the State Land Division Act, and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision, and if denied, the reasons for denial. 
B.  A proposed land division reviewable by the city shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
1.  All parcels created by the proposed division(s) meet the minimum width requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
2.  All such parcels shall contain the minimum area requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
3.  The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed a four-to-one ratio exclusive of access roads, easements, or non-development sites. The depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road right-of-way to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of commencement of the measurement; 
4.  The proposed land division(s) comply with all requirements of this chapter and the State Land Division Act; 
5.  All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility or an area available therefor, for public utilities and emergency and other vehicles. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 11-12-97) 
16.28.040 - Consequences of noncompliance. 
    Any division of land in violation of any provision of this chapter shall not be recognized as a land division on the city tax roll and no construction thereon which requires the prior issuance of a construction or building permit shall be allowed. The city shall further have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to prevent any violation or continuance of any violation of this chapter. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 11-12-97) 
Title 17 - ENVIRONMENT 
Chapters: 
Chapter 17.04 - SOIL PRESERVATION 
Sections: 
Article I. - Lot Grading and Drainage 

17.04.100 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Building contractor" means the person holding a general contract for the construction of a building or structure. If no such person is employed by an owner, then in such cases the owner of the property affected shall be the building contractor. 
    "Department" means the city department of public services. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as director, the city manager or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Landscape contractor" means a person, whether a licensed landscape contractor or not, who performs any grading, earth filling, earth removal, planting or landscape construction or maintenance work for hire. 
    "Owner" means, individually and collectively, the fee title holder, a land contract vendee, a lessee, a tenant of the property and the persons entitled to possession of property. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
17.04.110 - Grading generally. 
A.  Any home, building or structure erected in the city shall have the land surrounding the structure so graded as to readily carry all rain or surface waters away from such structure to a point where it will not infiltrate around the basement wall or foundation footings. 
B.  The established grade on all types of homes in the city shall be not more than twenty inches above or below the sidewalk or crown of the road. Special cases, where natural topography has an adverse effect upon drainage and where this provision would serve no good purpose, must have special approval from the department; such approval shall be conditioned upon a determination by the department that the proposed grade will not be injurious to the adjacent properties. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
17.04.120 - Residential driveway grading. 
    Any driveway which serves as a means of vehicular access to a residence shall have an established slope not to exceed seven percent grade throughout its length and breadth; provided, however, that the slope may be increased to a grade not to exceed twelve percent in those instances where the property owner files with the department a signed statement acknowledging that the slope requested exceeds required and recommended standards. In special cases, where natural topography or other unusual conditions of the land make adherence to this requirement impractical, special approval of slopes in excess of twelve percent grade may be granted by the department under such reasonable conditions as may be determined to ensure no adverse consequences to adjacent property or to the public safety. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
17.04.130 - Responsibility for maintaining grade. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the building contractor to erect any home, building or structure in such a manner as to permit it to be graded in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and to construct and maintain such a grade until title to the property passes to another or until an occupancy permit is issued, whichever last occurs. Thereafter, the owner of such property shall maintain such grade or slope. 
B.  The building contractor shall also be responsible for the structure thereon so that it is in accordance with the drainage plan that may have been established in any approved subdivision plat. If there is no drainage plan in the plat or none which will accomplish the requirements of this chapter, then the grading must be accomplished and maintained in such a manner so as not to obstruct, impede, accelerate, channel or concentrate the flow of rainwaters or surface waters onto or from the lands of another so as to cause damage thereto or create a nuisance thereon. The building contractor shall maintain such grade until title to the property passes to another or until an occupancy permit is issued, whichever last occurs. Thereafter, the owner of such property shall maintain such grade or slope. 
C.  The building contractor shall be responsible for the adjustment of public utility structures, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer and storm sewer manholes, water main gate valves, fire hydrants, storm drain catch basins and cleanouts, located on the property upon which the structure is to be built or within the confines of his site grading or access in accordance with standards and specifications established by the department. At the discretion of the director, a separate permit and/or inspection may be required to ensure conformance to the standards and specifications. Fees charged for the inspection shall be established by resolution of the city council and paid by the building contractor. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
17.04.140 - Landscape contractor's duties. 
    No landscape contractor shall grade the surface of any property, fill it with earth, remove earth, do any planting or landscape construction or maintenance work which shall create a condition that prevents rainwaters or surface waters from draining in the manner required by this chapter. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
17.04.150 - Residential improvements permit. 
    Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owner and/or contractor of any single-family home, building structure shall file a grading plan with the department. Simultaneous with the filing of the grading plan, the owner and/or contractor shall pay a review and/or inspection fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. The department will review the plan to determine if such plan conforms to all city requirements. Upon approval of such plan, the city will issue a residential improvement permit. All construction shall conform to the approved grading plan. 
(§ 1 (part) of Ord. dated 10-24-95) 
17.04.160 - Violations and penalty. 
A.  A violation of this article shall be deemed to be a civil infraction. 
B.  In addition to ordering the defendant responsible for a civil infraction to pay a civil fine, the court shall also impose any other costs, damages, and expenses as provided by law. 
C.  In addition to civil infraction enforcement, the court shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ, order or equitable relief necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this article. 
D.  Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 07-03 § 2, 2007) 
Chapter 17.08 - WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES 
Sections: 

17.08.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Wixom's Wetlands and Watercourses Ordinance. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The wetlands and watercourses of the city are indispensable but sensitive natural resources subject to flooding, erosion, soil bearing capacity limitations and other hazards. In their natural state, wetlands and watercourses serve multiple functions for flood control, storm water storage and release, pollution control, erosion control, wildlife habitat, aesthetics, open space and recreation. The continued destruction and loss of wetlands and watercourses constitutes a distinct and immediate danger to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Throughout the state, considerable acreage of these important natural resources has been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, polluting and other acts inconsistent with the natural uses of such areas. Remaining wetlands and watercourses are in jeopardy of being despoiled or impaired. 
C.  Pursuant to Michigan Constitution 1963, Art. IV, 52, the conservation and development of natural resources of the state is a matter of paramount public concern in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the people. It is, therefore, the policy of the city: 
1.  To protect wetlands, watercourses, flood and natural retention basins, while taking into account varying economic, ecological, hydrologic, recreational and aesthetic values; 
2.  To provide for the protection, preservation, replacement, proper maintenance and use of wetlands, watercourses, flood and natural retention basins located in the city in order to minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion, siltation and flooding; 
3.  To provide for the issuance of permits and approved activities; 
4.  To establish standards and procedures for the review of proposed activities in wetlands and watercourses; 
5.  To establish penalties for the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.030 - Definitions. 
    The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    "Activity" means any use, operation or action including but not limited to filling, dredging, constructing or excavating material and/or structures. 
    "Aquatic vegetation" means plants and plant life forms which naturally occur in, at, near, or predominantly near water. 
    "Bottomland" means all land area of a lake, stream or watercourse which lies below the ordinary high water mark and which may or may not be covered by water. 
    "Channel" means the geographical area within the natural or artificial banks of a watercourse required to convey continuously or intermittently flowing water under normal or average flow conditions. 
    "Drainageway" means any drain, pipe, stream, creek, or swale which serves to transport water runoff to the primary watercourse system. 
    "Fill material" means any soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, debris and refuse, waste of any kind, or any other material which displaces soil or water or reduces water retention potential. 
    "Natural retention basins" means any naturally occurring basin that receives and stores storm water or releases it slowly to an adjacent wetlands, stream or lake channel. 
    "Ordinary high water" means the line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is markedly distinct from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil, and the vegetation. On an inland lake which has a level established by law, the ordinary high water mark means the high establishing level. When water returns to its natural level as a result of the permanent removal or abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary high water mark. 
    "Owner" means any person who has dominion over, control of, title to and/or any other proprietary interest in wetland and watercourse areas, or title to an obstruction, natural or otherwise, to wetland and watercourse properties. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental agencies conducting operations within the city. 
    "Runoff" means surface discharge of precipitation to a watercourse or low area. 
    "Seasonal" means any intermittent or temporary activity which occurs annually and is subject to interruption from changes in weather, water level or time of year, and may involve annual removal and replacement of a device or structure. 
    "Structure" means any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the land or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings, bulkheads, piers, docks, landings, dams, waterway obstructions, towers and utility transmission devices. 
    "Temporary" means a time period as specified in the use permit, or if unspecified, an uninterruptible time period less than one year in duration. 
    "Upland" means the land area adjoining a lake, stream, watercourse, or wetland above the ordinary high water mark, and the uses of which are essentially nonaquatic. 
    "Watercourse" means any waterway, drainage-way, drain, river, stream, lake, pond, or any body of surface water having beds, banks and continuous or intermittent flow. 
    "Wetlands" means lands characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life and are commonly referred to as bogs, swamps or marshes. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.040 - Lands to which chapter applies. 
    Those wetlands subject to the regulatory terms of this chapter include: 
A.  An inland lake or pond, or river or stream, and more than two acres in size; 
B.  An inland lake or pond, or a river or stream, or natural retention basin, two acres or less in size. If the city determines that protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the city from pollution, impairment or destruction and the city has so notified the owner; 
C.  All other wetlands and natural basins determined by the city to be essential to preservation of the natural resources of the City. These wetlands or natural retention basins must meet one or more of the following: 
1.  The site supports state or federal endangered or threatened plants, fish or wildlife appearing on a list specified in Section 6 of the Endangered Species Act of 1974, Act No. 203 of the Public Acts of 1974, being Section 299.226 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, 
2.  The site represents what is identified as a locally rare or unique ecosystem, 
3.  The site supports plants or animals of an identified local importance, 
4.  The site provides groundwater recharge documented by a public agency, 
5.  The site provides flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage capacity of the wetland, 
6.  The site provides wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting or feeding grounds or cover for forms of wildlife, waterfowl, including migratory waterfowl, and rare, threatened or endangered wildlife species, 
7.  The site provides protection of subsurface water resources and provision of valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies, 
8.  The site provides pollution treatment by serving as a biological and chemical oxidation basin, 
9.  The site provides erosion control by serving as a sedimentation area and filtering basin, absorbing silt and organic matter, 
10.  The site provides sources of nutrients in water cycles and nursery grounds and sanctuaries for fish. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.050 - Wetlands map. 
A.  The wetlands are established as shown on the Wetlands Map which accompanies the ordinance codified in this chapter and which map with all notations, references, and the information show thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein. If, because of problems with scale or detail, there is any ambiguity as to whether a particular area is a part of a wetlands, that determination shall be made by the body or official reviewing the use or activity for that area. The map shall include the location of designated lakes, streams, drains and vegetative wetlands. The map is based upon the most accurate information available from state and county agencies, 1986 aerial photographs of the city, and field surveys conducted by the city environmental committee. 
B.  The city council may revise the Wetlands Map at any time that new and substantial data for wetlands and watercourses are available. Where the Wetlands Map is amended to and an individual property or several properties are affected, notice of the proposed amendment and hearing shall be given to all owners of such property or properties at least fifteen days before the hearing. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.060 - Notice to Department of Natural Resources. 
    The city shall notify the Department of Natural Resources of the state of Michigan of the adoption of this chapter. The city shall enter into an agreement with the Department of Natural Resources providing for the exchange of information and for the coordination of the granting of permits, as required by Section 8 of the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, Act No. 203 as amended of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979 (MCL 281.708, MSA 18.595 [58]), as amended. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.070 - Property inspection. 
    The city, its officials, agents and employees may make reasonable entry upon any lands or waters within the city for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter or the conduct of any investigation, survey, or study contemplated by this chapter. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.080 - Permits required. 
    Except for those activities expressly permitted by Section 17.08.090, it is unlawful for any person to conduct any activity within a wetlands area without first having obtained a permit upon proper application, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Depositing or permitting the depositing of any material including but not limited to hazardous chemicals, nonbiodegradable aquatic pesticides and herbicides and harmful fertilizers into, within or upon any watercourse or wetland area; 
B.  Dredging, removing or permitting the dredging or removal of material or minerals from a watercourse or wetland area; 
C.  Erecting or building any structure including but not limited to buildings, roadways, bridges of any type, tennis courts, paving, utility or private poles or towers within or upon any watercourse or wetland area; 
D.  Constructing, operating or maintaining any land use or development in a wetland or watercourse area; 
E.  Enlarging, diminishing or altering any lake, stream or other naturally occurring watercourse; 
F.  Creating, enlarging or diminishing any natural or artificially constructed canal, channel, ditch, lagoon, pond, lake or other waterway for navigation or any other purpose, whether or not connected to an existing lake, stream or watercourse; 
G.  Constructing, placing, enlarging, extending or removing any temporary, seasonal or permanent operation or structure upon bottomland or wetlands, except seasonal docks, rafts, diving platforms and other water recreational devices customarily owned and used by individual households; 
H.  Constructing, extending, enlarging or connecting any conduit, pipe, culvert or open or closed drainage facility carrying stormwater runoff from any site, or any other land use permitting discharge of silt, sediment, organic or inorganic material, chemicals, fertilizers, flammable liquids or other polluting substances except in accordance with requirements of county, state, federal agencies and the city; 
I.  Constructing, enlarging, extending or connecting any private or public sewage or waste treatment plant discharge to any lake, pond, stream, watercourse or wetland, except in accordance with requirements of county, state, federal agencies, and the city; 
J.  Pumping surface water for irrigation or sprinkling of private or public uses, other than for individually owned single-family residences, from lakes, ponds, rivers, streams or waterways, except when the water body is wholly contained within the user's property; 
K.  Draining, or causing to be drained, any water from a watershed; 
L.  Developments that increase the use or density upon a wetland or watercourse that would threaten the natural character of the resource or produce a recreational impact beyond the capacity of the lake and/or stream to provide for the health and safety of existing users. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.090 - Permitted activities. 
    Notwithstanding the prohibition of Section 17.08.080, the following activities are permitted within wetland areas without a permit, unless otherwise prohibited by statute or ordinance: 
A.  Fishing, trapping or hunting; 
B.  Swimming or boating; 
C.  Hiking; 
D.  Grazing of animals; 
E.  Farming, horticulture, silviculture, lumbering and ranching activities, including plowing, irrigation, irrigation ditching, seeding, cultivating, minor drainage, harvesting for the production of food, fiber and forest products, or upland soil and water conservation practices. Wetland altered under this subdivision shall not be used for a purpose other than a purpose described in this subsection without a permit from the department; 
F.  Maintenance or operation of serviceable structures in existence on the effective date of this act or constructed pursuant to this act; 
G.  Construction or maintenance of farm or stock ponds; 
H.  Maintenance, operation or improvement which includes straightening, widening, or deepening of the following which is necessary for the production or harvesting of agricultural products: 
1.  An existing private agricultural drain, 
2.  That portion of drain legally established pursuant to the drain code of 1956, Act No. 40 of the Public Act 8 of 1956, as amended, being sections 280.1 to 280.630 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, which has been constructed or improved for drainage purposes, 
3.  A drain constructed pursuant to other provisions of this act; 
I.  Construction or maintenance of farm roads, forest roads or temporary roads for moving mining or forestry equipment, if the roads are constructed and maintained in a manner to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized; 
J.  Drainage necessary for the production and harvesting of agricultural products if the wetland is owned by a person who is engaged in commercial farming and the land is to be used for the production and harvesting of agricultural products. Except as otherwise provided in this act, wetland improved under this subdivision after the effective date of this act shall not be used for nonfarming purposes without a permit from the department. This subdivision shall not apply to a wetland which is contiguous to a lake or stream, or to a tributary of a lake or stream, or to a wetland which the department has determined by clear and convincing evidence to be a wetland which is necessary to be preserved for the public interest, in which case a permit shall be required; 
K.  Maintenance or improvement of public streets, highways or roads, within the right-of-way and in such a manner as to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized. Maintenance or improvement does not include adding extra lanes; increasing the right-of-way; or deviating from the existing location of the street, highway or road; 
L.  Maintenance, repair or operation of gas or oil pipelines and construction of gas or oil pipelines having a diameter of inches or less, if the pipelines are constructed, maintained or repaired in a manner to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized; 
M.  Maintenance, repair or operation of electric transmission and distribution power lines and construction of distribution power lines of the distribution power lines are constructed, maintained or repaired in a manner to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized; 
N.  Operation or maintenance, including reconstruction of recently damaged parts, of serviceable dikes and levees in existence on the effective date of this act or constructed pursuant to this act; 
O.  Construction of iron and copper mining tailings basins water storage areas. 
    After the effective date of this act but immediately prior to the approval of a state program under Section 404 of Title 4 of the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. 1344, where a project solely involves the discharge of fill material subject to the individual permit requirements of Section 4040 of Title 4 of the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. 1344, an additional permit shall not be required by this act; 
P.  Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, wildlife and other natural resources; 
Q.  Actions taken in times of emergency, including the repair or restoration of public roads, electrical lines, natural gas lines, storm drainage systems, when immediate action is necessary to protect public health or safety or to prevent damage to property. A person taking such emergency action shall within fourteen days thereof provide a report to the city planning commission describing the action taken and the nature of the emergency necessitating the action. The matter shall be reviewed by the planning commission which shall make a determination as to whether the resulting activity was reasonably necessitated by the emergency situation. To the extent the resulting damage exceeds that reasonably necessitated by the emergency situation, the person shall be subject to penalty; 
R.  Installation on lakes, for noncommercial use, of any type of dock, boat hoist, ramp, raft or other recreational structure which is placed in a lake and removed at the end of the boating season; 
S.  Where a final subdivision plat or final site development plan containing work as defined in this article has been reviewed and approved by the council in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, such approval, together with any additional terms and conditions attached hereto, shall be considered to have completed the requirements for a permit under this article, which shall then be issued by the city. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.100 - Nonconforming activities. 
    An activity that was lawful before November 24, 1987, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following: 
A.  No such activity shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity with this chapter. 
B.  On a building or structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use or activity, work may be done in any period of twelve consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of the building or structure. 
C.  If a nonconforming activity is discontinued for twelve consecutive months, any resumption of the activity shall conform to this chapter. 
D.  If any nonconforming use or activity is destroyed, it shall not be resumed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Activities that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming activities. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.110 - Permit application. 
    A permit applicant shall submit the following materials to the building department: 
A.  A completed permit application which includes the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of the applicant's agent, 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property, 
3.  The project location, including as applicable, the street, road or highway, section number (and name of any wetlands or watercourses which will or may be impacted), 
4.  A detailed description and statement of the purpose of the proposed activity, 
5.  The location and number of trees to be removed of three inch caliper or greater. (The caliper of a tree is its diameter at four and one-half feet above the ground), 
6.  Where the removal of material, placement of fill material or grading is proposed, 
7.  The amount and type of material to be removed or deposited; 
B.  A permit application fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council; 
C.  Where the applicant is not the owner of the property, a written authorization from the owner permitting the proposed activity; 
D.  A site plan, including topographical survey, sealed by a registered engineer or registered surveyor, which includes the following information: 
1.  The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed locations of structures and improvements, if any, 
2.  Specification of the extent of all areas to be disturbed, the depths at which removal or deposition activities are proposed, and the angle of repose of all slopes of deposition material, and/or sides of channels or excavation resulting from removal operations, 
3.  Existing general soil conditions throughout the parcel as indicated on the Oakland County soil survey, 
4.  Location and dimensions of all setbacks easements, and existing and proposed public and private utilities, and 
5.  Statements as to grade changes proposed and proposed drainage pattern changes for the lot or parcel and how such changes will affect these regulations. Existing contour data for the entire property with a vertical contour interval of no more than two feet, and vertical contour data at an interval of no more than one foot for all areas to be disturbed by proposed operations, extending for a distance of at least fifty feet beyond the limits of such areas. Indicated elevations shall be based on United States Geological Survey datum. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.120 - Review of permit applications. 
A.  The city administration shall review the submitted permit application to insure that all required information has been provided. At the request of the applicant or the city, an administrative review meeting may be held to review the proposed activity in light of the purpose and review standards of this chapter. The city administration or consulting engineers shall, after review of the proposed activity, submit a report and recommendations as to the propriety of the proposed use under the review standards of Section 17.08.130. 
B.  Where the proposed activity is on property used for a single-family residence, the granting or denying of a use permit shall be the responsibility of the building department. The granting or denying of all other use permits shall be the responsibility of the city planning commission. The granting or denying of all permits shall be governed by the standards contained in Section 17.08.130. 
C.  Prior to a determination by the planning commission on a permit application, notice of the application and the date, time and location of a planning commission meeting at which the application will be considered shall be published in a paper of general circulation within the city. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to those persons to whom real property adjacent to the proposed activity is assessed. Prior to a determination on a permit application by the department of building and safety, a notice of the pending application shall be published and mailed to those persons to whom real property adjacent to the proposed activity is assessed. The notice shall include a date prior to which written comments regarding the application may be submitted to the city for consideration by the building department. 
D.  Whenever a permit application is denied the reasons for denial shall be transmitted, in writing to the applicant. 
    A landowner may request a revaluation of affected property for assessment purposes to determine its fair market value under the use restriction if a permit is denied by the city for a proposed wetland use. A landowner may protest and appeal that determination, action or inaction pursuant to the General Property Tax Act, Act 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being Sections 211.1 to 211.157 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
E.  Whenever a permit is granted, the building department or the planning commission shall: 
1.  Impose such conditions on the manner and extent of the proposed activity or use as are necessary to ensure that the intent of this chapter is carried out and that the activity or use will be conducted in such a manner as will cause the least possible damage, encroachment or interference with natural resources and natural processes within the watercourse and/or wetland area; 
2.  Fix a reasonable time within which any wetland operation must be completed; 
3.  Require the filing with the city administration of a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit, in such form and amount as determined necessary by the city to ensure compliance with the approved permit; and 
4.  When the permit is granted by the building department, the department shall send written notice of the granting of the permit to all persons who have submitted written comments on the application to the department. 
F.  A permit approved by the building department or planning commission shall not be issued until ten calendar days following the date of the approval. Any interested person who is aggrieved by the granting or denying of a permit may request an appeal of the decision to the city council. A request for appeal must be filed within ten calendar days following the grant or denial. If an appeal is requested during such ten-day period, the issuance of any permit shall be suspended pending the outcome of the appeal. The city council, upon review, may reverse, affirm or modify the determination and/or permit issued by the planning commission or building department. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.130 - Review standards. 
    The following standards shall govern the grant or denial of permit applications: 
A.  The proposed activity shall not threaten public health or safety by increasing flooding, erosion, siltation, pollution or stormwater runoff volumes. 
B.  The proposed activity shall not interfere with the natural functions of wetlands and watercourses, including the flow of waters and nutrients between wetlands and adjacent watercourses. 
C.  The proposed activity shall not unnecessarily alter the natural grade or soils of any wetland or watercourse, or alter the flow of surface or subsurface water to or from the wetland at any season of the year. 
D.  The proposed activity shall not interfere with public rights to the enjoyment and use of public waters. 
E.  The proposed activity shall not interfere with the scenic, aesthetic, recreational and educational benefits of wetlands and watercourses. 
F.  There shall be no less harmful, feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed activities. 
G.  The proposed activity must be consistent with the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare in light of the paramount concern for the protection of its natural resources from pollution, impairment or destruction. 
H.  The proposed activity shall be in compliance with all other applicable statutes and ordinances. 
I.  Proposed recreational activities shall not increase user density beyond the ability of the resource to provide for a safe and healthy environment. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.140 - Display of permits. 
    The permit grantee shall prominently display on the site the permit issued. Such display shall be continuous while work authorized under the permit is being done, and for at least ten days after the completion thereof. Failure to allow entry for inspection by city representatives pursuant to the conditions attached to the permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.150 - Taking without compensation. 
A.  This chapter shall not be construed to abrogate rights or authority otherwise protected by law. 
B.  For the purpose of determining if there has been a taking of property without just compensation under Michigan law, an owner of property who has sought and has been denied a permit or has been made subject to modifications or conditions in the permit under this ordinance may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
C.  If the court determines that an action of the city pursuant to this chapter constitutes a taking of the property of a person, then the court shall order the city, at the city's option, to do one or more of the following: 
1.  Compensate the property owner for the full amount of the lost value; 
2.  Purchase the property in the public interest as determined before its value was affected by this chapter; 
3.  Modify its action with respect to the property so as to minimize the detrimental effect to the property's value; and 
4.  Modify its action with respect to the property so that the action will not constitute a taking of the property. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.160 - Performance assurance. 
    Prior to the issuance of the wetlands permit, the applicant shall provide the city with a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the value of the permitted work (as determined by the city administration) to assure the city that soil erosion and wetland preservation efforts will be undertaken in accordance with the approved plans. These assurances shall run to the city and shall be forfeitable by its terms and conditions automatically fifteen days after the city has provided notice to the applicant, either by personal delivery, certified mail or first class mail, that the requirements of the plan have not been complied with and that failure to proceed poses harm to the protected wetlands. If the applicant fails to perform within the fifteen-day period, the value of the assurance shall be automatically transferred to the city or otherwise be enforceable by the city by any means available. Thereafter, the city shall be authorized to go onto the property and complete the construction in accordance with the requirements of the approved plans. In the case of the deposit, certified check or the irrevocable letter of credit, the amount on deposit may be reduced as the work progresses; provided, that at all times the deposit or letter of credit amount is sufficient in the estimation of the city administration to assure the completion of the approved work. If the assurance does not sufficiently cover the cost of implementing the necessary improvements as determined by the city, the applicant will be responsible for reimbursing the city for any and all costs incurred in completing the work. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.170 - Emergency remedy. 
    If, during the course of construction under a wetlands permit, an applicant takes action or through a lack of action threatens the function of a wetland or watercourse area and fails to remedy the condition within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the city administration, the city shall be permitted to enter the property of the applicant to take remedial action to alleviate the threat. The applicant will be subject to reimbursing the city for any and all expenses incurred by the city in remedying the condition. A stop-work order shall be issued and remain in effect until the time the city is reimbursed for any remedial action. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.180 - Interpretation and application. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comport, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to activities within wetlands areas; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
17.08.190 - Penalties-Enforcement. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined up to five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city council, in addition to other remedies, including those provided in subsection C of this section, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate, or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages and charged to the violator. 
C.  In the event of a violation, the city shall have the power to order complete restoration of the wetland area involved by the person or agent responsible for the violation. If such responsible person or agent does not complete such restoration within the time specified in the order (not to exceed eighteen months), the city shall have the authority to restore the affected wetlands to the prior condition wherever possible and the person or agent responsible for the original violation shall be held liable to the city for the cost of restoration. 
(Ord. 137-A-3 (part), 1993) 
Chapter 17.12 - WOODLANDS 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as Wixom's Woodlands Protection Ordinance. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.020 - Purpose. 
    The city finds that rapid growth, the spread of development, and increasing demands upon natural resources have had the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, or eliminating many of the trees and other forms of vegetation and natural resources and processes associated therewith which, if preserved and maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitutes important physical, aesthetic, recreational, and economic assets to existing and future residents of the city. Specifically, the city finds: 
A.  That woodland growth protects public health through the absorption of air pollutants and contamination, the buffering of excess noise and wind, the screening of undesirable views, the cooling of buildings in summer and insulating buildings in winter 
B.  That woodlands provide for public safety through the prevention of erosion, siltation, and flooding; 
C.  That trees and woodland growth are an essential component of the general welfare of the city by maintaining natural beauty, recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, and irreplaceable heritage for existing and future city residents; 
D.  That the provisions of such natural resources is a matter of paramount public concern, as provided by Article IV, Sec. 52 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, and the Environmental Protection Act, part 17 of Act 451, Public Acts of 1994 (MCL 324.1701, et seq.); 
E.  To protect significant individual trees located on sites subject to development during the course of construction of improvements to benefit the development site and buildings on the site. 
    Therefore, the purposes of this chapter are: 
A.  To provide for the protection, preservation, replacement, proper maintenance, and use of trees and woodlands located in the city in order to minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion, siltation, and flooding; 
B.  To protect the woodlands (including trees and other forms of vegetation) of the city for their economic support of local property values when allowed to remain uncleared and/or unharvested; 
C.  To protect the woodlands (including trees and other forms of vegetation) of the city for their significance as large specimens of their species and/or rare and endangered species; 
D.  To protect functional strips of vegetation (including fencerows, hedgerows, shrubby borders of streams and public rights-of way, railroad-edge and road-edge) of the city for their significance as travel lanes for wildlife, noise buffer, visual screens, aesthetically pleasing enclosures and vistas for pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
E.  To provide for the paramount public concern for these natural resources in the interest of health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.030 - Definitions. 
    The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning, given in this section, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    "Bonafide agriculture" means a land use to derive income from growing plants and trees on land including but not limited to land used principally for fruit groves and timber production, and not including land use principally for another use and incidentally for growing trees or plants for income. 
    "Commercial nursery or tree farm" means a licensed plant or tree nursery or farm in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee, which are planted and growing for sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said licensee's business. 
    "Department" means the city of Wixom department of public services. 
    "Development" includes any lawful land use authorized under the city Zoning Ordinances, Chapter 18 of this code, as amended. 
    "Diameter breast high (d.b.h.)" means the diameter in inches of a tree measured at four and one- half feet above the existing grade. 
    "Director" means the director of the department of public services or the director's designee. If no such person is employed by the city as director, the city manger or an individual designated by the city manager shall act as the director. 
    "Drip line" means an imaginary vertical line that extends downward from the outer most tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
    "Forbs" means flowing plants commonly referred to as "weeds" or "herbs" that are nonwoody and grow close to the ground. 
    "Grubbing" means the effective removal of under-story vegetation from a site which does not include the removal of any trees with a d.b.h. of greater than three inches. 
    "Hardship" means situations created by circumstances unique to a property and which circumstances make the use of the property in question not feasible under conditions imposed by this chapter. Hardship shall not include personal or financial hardship nor circumstances which are self-created. 
    "Land clearing" means those operations where trees and vegetation are removed and which occur previous to construction of building: e.g. road right-of-way excavation, utility excavation, grubbing, and any other necessary clearing operation. 
    "Landmark tree" means any tree twenty-four inches d.b.h. or greater and trees so designated in the landmark tree list. 
    "Large tract" means a tract of one acre or more in area. 
    "Linkage vegetation" means strips of vegetation defined as primary linkage strips and secondary linkage strips including fencerow, hedgerows, shrubby stream banks, road-edge, railroad-edge, and public rights-of-way that function as travel lanes for wildlife, pedestrian and vehicular traffic, as passive and recreational greenbelts, and as visual screens, noise buffers, and weather control vegetation. 
    "Locate" means construct, place, insert, or excavate. 
    "Material" includes soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, mud, debris and refuse, or any other material organic or inorganic. 
    "No-tree affidavit" means a signed, notarized statement by owner or agent stating that no tree exists upon the site of eight inch d.b.h. or greater, or no linkage vegetation of significant value to the city. 
    "Operations" includes the locating, moving or deposition of any material, or any construction use or activity, or a combination thereof, which in any way modifies the conditions of lands subject to this chapter. 
    "Owner" means any person who has domain over, control of, or title to woodlands. 
    "Person" includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental agencies conducting operations within the city, including all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of others. 
    "Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city of Wixom. 
    "Primary linkage strips" means strips of vegetation, twenty to thirty feet across, that exist as old fencerows, hedgerows, road-edge, railroad-edge, shrubby stream sides, and are composed of trees in the center, shrubs bordering the trees, and grasses and forbs on the edge and serve as a connective link to other linkage strips in the city or abutting communities. 
    "Protective barrier" means a physical structure limiting access to a protected area, composed of wood or other suitable materials, which assures compliance with the intent of this chapter. Variations of these methods may be permitted upon written request if they satisfy the intent of this chapter. 
    "Remove" and "removal" include the cutting of trees and the injury and/or destruction of any form of vegetation, by whatever method, on any land subject to this chapter. 
    "Secondary linkage strips" means strips of vegetation, ten to twenty feet across, that exist as old fencerows, hedgerows, road-edge, railroad-edge, shrubby stream sides, and are composed primarily of shrubs bordered by grasses and forbs. Isolated trees may be present but are not historical or specimen trees. 
    "Significant individual tree" means deciduous hardwood or coniferous trees existing in a healthful condition, with d.b.h. in excess of eight inches. 
    "Small tract" means a tract of less than one acre in area. 
    "Structure" means any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the land or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings, bulkheads, piers, docks, landings, darns, waterway obstructions, towers, utility transmission devices. 
    "Transplant" means the digging up by a property owner of a tree from one place on a property and the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property. 
    "Tree" means a woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, which at maturity is thirteen feet or more in height, which has a more or less definite crown of foliage. 
    "Woodlands areas" means all lands which are subject to this chapter under Section 17.12.040. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.040 - Lands to which chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all sites containing trees with a d.b.h. of eight inches or greater, excluding Box Elder, Poplar, Elm, and Domestic Fruit. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.070 - Property inspection. 
    The city, its officials, agents, and employees may make reasonable entry upon any lands or water within the city for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter or the conduct of any investigation, survey or study contemplated by this chapter. Failure to allow entry for inspection by city representatives shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.080 - Tree removal use permits required. 
A.  Except for those activities expressly permitted by Section 17.12.090, it is unlawful for any person to conduct any activity within woodlands area without first having obtained a use permit upon proper application, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Remove, damage, or destroy any tree or similar woody vegetation with a d.b.h. of eight inches or more; 
2.  In a woodlands area that is also within a wetland or watercourse regulated by the Wetlands and Watercourse Protection Ordinance (Chapter 17.08), remove, damage or destroy any tree or similar woody vegetation of any d.b.h. without a valid wetland permit; 
3.  Land clearing or grubbing. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.090 - Permitted activities. 
    Notwithstanding the prohibition of Section 17.12.080, the following activities are permitted within woodlands areas without a use permit, unless otherwise prohibited by statute or ordinance: 
A.  The transplanting of a tree on a small tract within the designated woodlands areas; 
B.  The removal of a tree with a d.b.h. of less than eight inches on a small tract where a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued; 
C.  The removal or trimming of dead, diseased, or damaged trees or other woody vegetation, provided that the damage resulted from an accident or nonhuman cause, and provided further that the removal or trimming is accomplished through the use of standard forestry practices and techniques; 
D.  Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, wildlife and other natural resources; 
E.  Outdoor recreation, such as field trails for nature study, hiking and horseback riding, boating, trapping, hunting, and fishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated; 
F.  Farming, gardening, grazing of small animals, harvesting of crops, forestry, and nursery practices, where otherwise legally permitted, and where compatible with the individual woodland ecology and not in conflict with the standards contained in Section 17.12.100(C), provided that a forest management use permit is obtained pursuant to Section 17.12.100(B)(3), for forestry activities within a woodlands area; 
G.  Actions taken in times of emergency, including the repair or restoration of public roads, electrical lines, natural gas lines, sewage lines and storm drainage systems, when immediate action is necessary to protect public health or safety or to prevent damage to property. A person taking such emergency action shall, within fourteen days thereof, provide a report to the department describing the action taken, the nature of the emergency necessitating the action, and the extent of any cutting or removal of, or damage to any trees within the woodlands area. The matter shall be reviewed by the department for the city planning commission which shall make a determination as to whether the resulting tree cutting, removal or damage was reasonably necessitated by the emergency situation. To the extent the resulting tree cutting, removal, or damage exceeds that reasonably necessitated by the emergency situation, the person shall be required to provide replacement trees in accordance with the replacement standards of Section 17.12.100(H). 
H.  The cutting, trimming, or removal of trees and other woody vegetation in connection with the construction, maintenance or repair of a natural gas transmission main, electrical line, water main, sewer line, and other essential utilities that are located within a private or public easement, or property dedicated for such purpose, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  If the activity is conducted within an easement, the applicant shall notify the underlying property owner in writing at least fourteen days in advance of the activity, with a copy of the notification forwarded to the City of Wixom Department of Public Works; 
2.  The applicant shall, where possible, protect and maintain historic and specimen trees; 
3.  If the activity is adjacent to property where there is located a residential dwelling, the applicant shall, where possible, preserve an undisturbed buffer area of vegetation adjacent to such property; and 
4.  Any area that is cleared shall be cleaned, graded, and seeded. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
( Ord. No. 2016-05, § 1, 9-13-2016 ) 
17.12.100 - Tree protection, removal and replacement. 
A.  Permit Required. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person, except as otherwise provided herein, to remove a tree or trees or cause a tree or trees to be removed in the city without a tree removal permit issued by the department of public services except for tree species listed as "exemptions" herein. Each unauthorized removal of a tree protected by this section shall be deemed a separate offense. A tree removal permit shall be required for the following: 
1.  The removal, relocation or destruction of any eight inch tree, except as otherwise exempt herein; 
2.  The construction of any structure, the depositing of any materials, land clearing, grubbing or grading within the drip line of any protected tree; 
3.  A permit fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council shall be required; 
B.  Permit application and review: 
1.  Where a tree permit is required, an application shall be filed with the department of public services. The application shall be submitted together with a tree location survey and all other documentation as required elsewhere under this section prior to, or concurrent with, the submission of a site plan or application for a building permit, whichever may be required, 
2.  Where a site plan is required, the tree location survey shall be superimposed on the site plan and submitted to the department of public services along with accompanying documents and shall be part of the site plan review process. Site plan approval shall precede issuance of a tree removal permit, 
3.  Forest Management Use Permits for the Purpose of Maintaining and Improving a Woodlands Area by Professional Forestry Management Methods. Application for this permit must be accompanied by a management plan for the subject area prepared by a forester licensed and registered in the state. The management plan shall include a description of and a schedule for the program, justifying reasons for the work specified, and a summary of the benefits to be obtained. Work under a forest management use permit shall be directed by a licensed and registered forester. Under the forest management use permit, provisions of this chapter which are applicable solely to development or land clearing activities shall not apply. The city shall not levy any fee for this special permit. 
C.  Review Standards. The following standards shall govern the grant or denial of use permit applications: 
1.  No application shall be denied solely on the basis that some trees are growing on the property under consideration. However, the protection and conservation of irreplaceable natural resources from pollution, impairment or destruction is of paramount concern. While the preservation of woodlands, trees, linkage strips and endangered species and related natural resources is the object of this chapter, every effort will be made to meet not only that objective, but to preserve the basic property rights of the land owner as well; 
2.  The integrity of woodland areas shall be maintained irrespective of whether such woodlands cross property lines; 
3.  Diversity of tree species shall be maintained where essential to preservation of a woodland; 
4.  The removal or relocation of trees or shrubs shall be limited to those instances: 
a.  When necessary for the location of a structure or site improvement and when no feasible alternative location of the structure or improvements can be achieved without causing undue hardship, 
b.  The tree is dead, diseased, injured or in danger of falling, is too close to proposed or existing structures, interferes with existing utility services, interferes with safe vision clearances, or conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. Replacement of trees as provided herein shall not apply to removals permitted under this paragraph. However, this exemption shall not be construed by affected property owners as an exemption from providing new plantings on the development site as a part of a landscaping plan which may be required by the planning commission in order to address the loss of trees or other vegetation due to construction activity; 
5.  Where the removal or cutting of a linkage strip, a portion of linkage strip, or any trees eight inches d.b.h. or greater is permitted, replacement trees shall be provided in accordance with Section 17.12.100(H); 
6.  The proposed activity shall include necessary provisions for tree protection in accordance with this section; 
7.  Where the proposed activity consists of land clearing, it shall be limited to designated street rights-of way, drainage, and other utility areas, and areas necessary to the construction of proposed buildings and structures, as depicted on the plat or site plan. Where the proposed activity consists of grubbing, all trees with a d.b.h. of three inches or greater will be left undisturbed with the drip line understory left intact; 
8.  Where the proposed activity includes residential development, residential units shall blend into the natural setting of the landscape for the enhancement of the sound, orderly, economic growth and development and for the protection of property values in the city. 
a.  The proposed activity shall be in compliance with all other applicable statutes and ordinances, 
b.  The burden of demonstrating that no feasible and prudent alternative location or improvements without undue hardship shall be upon the applicant. 
D.  Tree Location Survey Guidelines. 
1.  The tree location survey shall be in a form acceptable to the building department and shall bear the following information and details: 
a.  Minimum scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1? = 50'). The scale shall be the same as that of the site plan if a site plan is submitted; 
b.  The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed locations of structures and improvements, including existing and proposed utilities; 
c.  Locations and dimensions of all building and parking lot setbacks and existing or proposed easements; 
d.  All trees shall be tagged in the field with identifying numbers, using non-corrosive metal tags; 
e.  Locations of all existing trees eight inch d.b.h. or more, including trees within the adjoining street rights-of way, trees within twenty-five feet of the property lines, and all trees to be affected by the development such as trees located within areas of right-of-way improvements or off-site utility work. Excluding trees of non-regulated tree species (box elder, poplar, elm, domestic fruit). Trees proposed to remain shall be shown with a solid dot. Trees to be removed shall be shown with an "x." Trees to be relocated shall be shown with a hollow dot; 
f.  The survey shall be accompanied by a table identifying the numbered trees by size, common name and condition; 
g.  The existing and proposed grade at the base of each tree shall be indicated on the tree location survey either through showing existing and proposed contours at a minimum two foot interval or showing existing and proposed spot grades; 
h.  Tree location surveys are to be prepared by a registered land surveyor and verified on site by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist or forester. Both professionals must verify the contents by seal or signature, whichever applies; 
i.  If existing trees are to be relocated, the proposed location for such trees, together with a statement as to how such trees are to be protected and/or stored during land clearance and construction and how they are to be maintained after construction; 
j.  A note shall be provided on the plan stating that, "Barriers shall be erected of four foot high wooden snow fencing or similar sturdy stock material staked with metal stakes ten feet on center which will shield and protect trees no closer than six feet from the trunk or at the drip line, whichever is greater, of all such trees or groups of trees; 
k.  The number of trees to be removed which are eight inch d.b.h. or more. 
2.  The requirement for a tree location survey may be waived by the city for areas thirty feet or more outside the construction zone. If waived, a statement indicating predominant species and estimated number and size of trees in this area, will be required. 
3.  For tracts of land ten acres or larger in area, an aerial photograph or copy thereof, of suitable quality, one inch equals one hundred feet (1? = 100') minimum shall be submitted along with a tree location survey meeting the condition of subsection "C1" above. 
4.  An on-site examination may be made by the department of public services in lieu of the tree location survey under any of the following conditions: 
a.  Where a permit is required to remove or relocate trees on occupied single-family lots. 
b.  Where a permit is required to remove fewer than three trees. 
E.  Tree removal permits shall be issued for only the following reasons: 
1.  Trees pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threaten to cause disruption to public utility service; 
2.  Trees pose a safety hazard to buildings or structures; 
3.  Trees unreasonably prevent the development of a lot or parcel or the physical use thereof. However, a permit shall not be granted for the removal of any tree where a reasonable alternative design solution exists consistent with the permitted use of the property; 
4.  Trees completely prevent access to a lot or parcel; 
5.  Diseased trees or trees so weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury so as to pose a danger to persons, property, improvements or other trees. 
F.  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
1.  Any tree less than eight inches d.b.h.; 
2.  Undesirable trees species listed below: 
a.  Box Elder, 
b.  Poplar, 
c.  Elm, 
d.  Domestic fruit trees; 
3.  The removal of two trees per calendar year, other than landmark trees, on occupied one-family residential lots; 
4.  On occupied one-family residential lots which are one acre or more in area, the removal of eight trees per calendar year or not more than ten percent of the total number of trees on the lot, whichever is less. This provision shall not apply to landmark trees; 
5.  Trees for which it is determined by the city to have a health condition factor less than sixteen as determined using the factors and rankings below: 
Factor Value 5 or 4 3 or 2 1 Trunk Sound or solid Sections of bark missing Extensive and hollow Growth/Rate More than six-inch twig elongation 2 to 6 inch twig elongation Less than 2 inch twig elongation Structure Sound 1 major or several minor limbs dead 2 or more major limbs dead Insects/Diseases No pests present 1 pest present 2 or more pests present Crown/Development Full and balanced Full but unbalanced Unbalanced and lacking a full crown Life Expectancy Over 30 years 15 to 20 years Less than 5 years  
G.  Tree Protection During Site Development. 
1.  Prior to the land clearing stage of development and before a tree permit will be issued, the owner, developer or agent shall do the following: 
a.  All trees for which application is being made for removal shall be so identified on site by fluorescent orange spray paint (chalk base) or by red flagging tape prior to field inspection by the city; 
b.  Barriers shall be erected of four foot high wooden snow fencing or similar sturdy stock material staked with metal stakes ten feet on center which will shield and protect trees no closer than six feet from the trunk or at the drip line, whichever is greater, of all such trees or groups of trees. 
2.  During construction, the owner, developer or agent shall not cause or permit any activity within the drip line of any protected tree or group of trees, including, but not limited to, the storage of equipment, dumpsters, boulders, dirt and excavated material, building or waste material or any other material harmful to the life of a tree. 
3.  No damaging attachment, wires (other than cable wires for trees), signs or permits may be fastened to any tree protected by this section. 
4.  The department of public services shall conduct periodic inspections of the site during land clearing and construction in order to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
H.  Tree Replacement or Relocation During Site Development. 
    As a condition of granting a tree removal permit, the applicant will be required to replace trees of regulated species being removed having eight inches or more d.b.h. 
    Due to limited potential planting areas, tree replacement will be as follows: 
TREE REPLACEMENT* SCHEDULE FOR 
ALL DEVELOPMENTS 
Trees to be removed Prevent of Tree Replacement Max Required Up to 10 100% 10 Up to 20 95% 19 Up to 30 90% 27 Up to 40 85% 34 Up to 50 80% 40 Up to 60 75% 45 Up to 70 70% 49 Up to 80 65% 52 Up to 90 60% 54 Up to 100 55% 55 Over 100**  
*  Replacement trees may include required parking lot trees and in subdivision and site condominiums may include required street trees. 
**  All trees removed over 100 trees shall be replaced at 30%. Example: 130 trees to be removed, to be replaced by: 50% of first 100 trees plus 30% of 30 trees (55+9=64) replacement trees required. 
1.  All replacement trees shall measure a minimum of two inch caliper for deciduous trees or eight foot height for evergreen trees. Where it is not feasible and/or desirable to replace or relocate trees on site, the planning commission may substitute a greater size for replacement trees, or allow replacement of trees on public land. 
2.  Replacement trees shall have shade potential and other characteristics comparable to the trees proposed for removal and shall be State Department of Agriculture Nursery Grade No. 1 stock or better. Replacement trees shall be staked, wrapped and mulched, and shall be guaranteed for one year. 
3.  When landmark trees are permitted to be removed, replacement trees shall be provided to a minimum of twenty-five percent of d.b.h. of the tree to be removed. Replacement trees, measured in d.b.h. or calipers, shall be provided either individually or on an accumulative basis to meet the twenty-five percent d.b.h. requirement. 
4.  Applicant shall be required to replace trees originally indicated and intended to be saved when such trees are excessively damaged or removed in violation of an approved site plan during construction to the extent that it puts the tree at risk of death as determined by the department. The replacement shall have at least equal shade potential and other characteristics comparable to those, of the damaged trees and shall be a minimum five inch caliper, excluding landmark trees. Landmark trees shall be replaced at one hundred percent d.b.h. on an individual or a cumulative basis using minimum five inch caliper stock. 
5.  Trees required to be planted in accordance with this paragraph "H" shall be in place and properly supported prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. The center of said tree shall not be located closer than four feet to any property line or ten feet to any utility line. 
I.  Landmark Trees. All trees twenty-four inches d.b.h. or greater or included in the Landmark Tree List are considered landmark trees and are protected under this chapter: 
COMMON NAME SPECIES MINIMUM DBH (inches) Ash Fraxinus spp 18 American Beech Fagus grandifolia 18 American Chestnut Castanea dentata 8 Birch Betula spp 18 Black Alder Acinus glutinosa 12 Black Tupelo Nyssa sylvatica 12 Black and White Walnut Juglans nigra, J. cinerea 20 Buckeye Aesculus glabra 18 Cedar, Red Juniperus spp 12 Crabapple (cultivar) Malus spp 12 Choke Cherry Prunus spp 18 Douglas Fir Pseudotsuga menziesii 18 Eastern Hemlock Nuga canadensis 12 Flowering Dogwood Cornus florida 8 Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba 18 Hickory Carya spp 18 Horse-chestnut Aesculus camea 18 Kentucky Coffeetree Bymnociadus diocius 18 Larch/Tamarack Larix Laricina (Eastern) 12 London Planetree/Sycamore Plantanus spp 18 Maple Acer spp 18 Oak Quercus spp 16 Pine Pinus spp 18 Sassafras Sassafins albidum 15 Spruce Picea spp 18 Tuliptree Liriodendron tulipfera 18  
J.  Emergency Tree Removal. When it is necessary to expedite the removal of damaged or destroyed trees in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare following high winds, storms, tornadoes, floods, freezes, fires or other natural or manmade disasters, the requirements of this section may be suspended by the department of public services for a period of thirty days in the affected areas. 
K.  There may be instances or situations where the city may determine that trees regulated under this chapter have been or will be removed, and the planting of replacement trees under this chapter and Chapter 18, Zoning Ordinance, Section 18.14.020, Landscaping Requirements, is not possible due to specific site limitations. In such instances, funds in lieu of required tree planting shall be paid into the city tree fund by the landowner in an amount established by the city council. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
( Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 6-28-2016 ) 
17.12.110 - Display permits. 
    The permit grantee shall prominently display on the site the permit issued. Such display shall be continuous while trees are being removed or replaced or while work authorized under the permit is being done, and for at least ten days after the completion thereof. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.120 - Taking without compensation. 
A.  This chapter shall not be construed to abrogate rights or authority otherwise protected by law. 
B.  For the purposes of determining if there has been a taking of property without just compensation under Michigan law, an owner of property who has been made subject to modifications or conditions in the permit under this chapter may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.130 - Appeals. 
    If a person subject to regulation under this chapter disagrees with an official interpretation of a certain provision of this chapter or where hardship in the application of the provision of this chapter occurs, they may appeal the interpretation to the city council. The request for appeal shall be in letter form to the city council, submitted to the attention of the city clerk. The city council shall consider the matter of the appeal at a regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
17.12.140 - Violation-Penalties-Enforcement. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor shall be fined no more than five hundred dollars for each such conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. Each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the city a civil penalty equal to the total value of those trees illegally removed or damaged, as computed from the International Society of Arboriculture shade tree value formula. Such sum shall accrue to the city and may be recovered in a civil action brought by the city. Said sum so collected shall be placed in the city tree fund. Replacement of illegally removed trees may be required as restoration in lieu of money. This replacement will be computed on an inch-for-inch ratio based on the total diameter measured at d.b.h. in inches of the illegally removed trees. If, because of destruction of the removed trees, exact inch-to-inch measurements cannot be obtained, the city may use other means to estimate the tree loss. A combination of money and tree replacement may be required. 
C.  Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The city council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, abate, or restrain the violation. All costs, fees, and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
D.  If activities are conducted in a woodlands area contrary to a use permit, this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances, the department of public services shall give written notice to the permit grantee, or if a permit has not been issued, then to the person conducting the activity, notifying him of the violation of the permit, this chapter, or other applicable law or ordinance, and to appear and show cause why the activity should not be stopped. If the permit grantee or the person conducting the activity fails to appear and show cause within one full work day after notice is delivered, the department of building and safety shall cause a written order to stop the activity to be posted on the premises. A person shall not continue or cause or allow to be continued, activity in violation of such an order, except with permission of the enforcing agency to abate a dangerous condition or remove the violation, or except by court order. If an order to stop is not obeyed, the enforcing agency may apply to the circuit court of Oakland County for an order enjoining the violation of the order. This remedy is in addition to, and not in limitation of, any other remedy provided by law or ordinance, and does not prevent criminal prosecution for failure to obey the order. 
E.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense or loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(§ 2 (part) of Ord. dated 5-25-99) 
Title 18 - ZONING* 
Chapters: 
Chapter 18.01 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND ENACTING CLAUSE 
Sections: 

18.01.010 - Short title. 
    This zoning ordinance, codified in this title, for the city of Wixom shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wixom," the "Zoning Ordinance" or "this title." 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.01.020 - Preamble and enacting clause. 
A.  The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006) establishes the right to adopt comprehensive zoning regulations, and empowers the city to enact a zoning ordinance and provides for its administration, enforcement, and amendment. 
B.  The city deems it necessary for the purpose of promoting and protecting the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
C.  The city has prepared and adopted a master plan designed to guide growth in a logical and orderly fashion; to control congestion on the public streets; and to provide for a well-balanced community from a physical, economic, and social standpoint. 
D.  The city has been divided into districts and regulations have been prepared pertaining to such districts in accordance with the city of Wixom master plan and in consideration of the character of the districts and their unique suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving property values and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
    Now therefore be it ordained by the city of Wixom, Michigan that this title is declared to have been adopted by the city council of the city of Wixom, Oakland County, Michigan, at a meeting thereof, duly called and held on the 26th day of August, 2008, and it is ordered that publication be given in the manner prescribed by law and that this title be in effect fifteen days following publication. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.01.030 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this title is to promote and safeguard the public health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of the residents and businesses of the city of Wixom through the following actions: 
A.  Create a diversified and balanced mixture of land uses that will support the economic vitality, tax base, and livability of the city. 
B.  Regulate the intensity of land development to ensure compatibility among land uses and where applicable, provide transitions between land uses to reduce the negative physical and visual impact on adjacent properties. 
C.  Provide a solid residential base that will accommodate expansion of existing neighborhoods, protect residential areas from incompatible land uses, offer a variety of housing opportunities, and support the needs of Wixom's residents. 
D.  Protect the character and stability of residential properties, nonresidential uses and public amenities within the city and promote orderly development and/or redevelopment of these areas. 
E.  Provide commercial and office uses that offer a diversity of services for different target markets that are appropriately located for convenience and safety and maximize the design potential to create aesthetic business areas in the city that reflect the intended character of the area. 
F.  Promote the development of a thriving, sustainable mixed-use downtown village center area (VCA) for Wixom that offers a walkable area for residents to live, work, and socialize, and which serves as the epicenter of the city. 
G.  Provide an organized pattern of various industrial land uses that accommodates business development, properly minimizes negative impacts such as noise and truck traffic, is located away from residential areas, and reflects a quality design image of the city. 
H.  Promote development and redevelopment of sites and buildings that fulfills the city's land use goals and enhances the desirability of the city for future development. 
I.  Protect natural resources and maintain views into open spaces. 
J.  Incorporate open space elements into the land use design in a manner that creates an interconnected, unified system and provides green space, recreation, and protects sensitive natural features. 
K.  Preserve, protect, and enhance the integrity, character, economic viability and livability of Wixom's neighborhoods. 
L.  Improve the appearance and design quality of nonresidential development in Wixom. 
M.  Create a safe, balanced, and coordinated multi-modal transportation system adequate to accommodate the current and future needs of the city of Wixom. 
N.  Preserve and improve the capacity and safety of the existing road system and mitigate direct impacts of new development where possible. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.01.040 - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this title imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this title shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this title, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.01.050 - Compliance with law. 
    Uses of land, buildings or structures for purposes that are prohibited by or contrary to federal, state or local regulations and ordinances are expressly prohibited in any zoning district within the city. However, the following are exempt from this prohibition in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, MCL 333.26423(d): 
A.  Medical marihuana activities by a registered qualifying patient as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, subject to Section 18.12.160; 
B.  Medical marihuana activities, including the provision of services to a qualifying patient by a primary caregiver as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, subject to Section 18.12.160. 
( Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 1-28-2014 ) 
Chapter 18.02 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 
Sections: 

18.02.010 - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this title, the city is divided into the following districts: 
    R-1 One-Family Residential District 
    R-2 One-Family Residential District 
    R-3 One-Family Residential District 
    R-4 One-Family Residential District 
    RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District 
    RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District 
    MHP Manufactured Home Park District 
    B-1 Local Business District 
    B-2 Community Business District 
    B-3 General Business District 
    FS Freeway Service District 
    I-S Industrial Service District 
    VCA Village Center Area District 
    OS-1 Office Service District 
    IRO Industrial Research Office District 
    M-1 Light Industrial District 
    M-2 General Industrial District 
    The following conversion chart compares the residential zoning districts in the new zoning ordinance with the corresponding districts in the old zoning ordinance that was repealed. 
New Zoning Districts Old Zoning Districts R-1 None R-2 RA-1A R-3 RA-1 R-4 RA-2 RM-1 RC-1 RM-2 RC-2  
    The names for the nonresidential zoning districts remain unchanged. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.02.020 - Official zoning map. 
    An official zoning map is adopted as a part of this title. The zoning map shows the boundaries of the zoning districts and the applicable zoning district that regulates each parcel of land within the city of Wixom. The city council may amend the zoning map following the procedures outlined in Chapter 18.23. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.02.030 - District boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow the centerlines. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following the lot lines. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
E.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow the shoreline, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow the centerline. 
F.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in subsections A through E of this section shall be so construed. 
G.  Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
H.  Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through G of this section, the zoning board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
I.  Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that the district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.02.040 - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    "Zoning of annexed areas" means any area annexed to the city shall, immediately upon annexation, be automatically classified as an "R-1" district, until a zoning map for the area has been adopted by the city council. Following annexation, the city council shall refer the zoning to the planning commission for review and recommendation of an appropriate zoning district in accordance with the rezoning procedures and criteria contained in Chapter 18.23. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.02.050 - Zoning of vacated lands. 
    "Zoning of vacated areas" means whenever any street, alley or other public way within the city shall be vacated, the street, alley or other public way or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.02.060 - District requirements. 
    "District requirements" means all buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of height and placement requirements listed for the underlying zoning districts in Chapters 18.03 Residential Districts, 18.05, Manufactured Home Park District, 18.06, Commercial Districts, 18.07, VCA Village Center Area District, 18.08, Office and Research Districts, 18.09, Industrial Districts and 18.12, General Provisions. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.03 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

18.03.010 - Intent. 
A.  R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 One-Family Residential Districts. The R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 one-family residential districts are intended to provide for an environment of one-family detached dwellings in a quiet neighborhood setting along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. The districts provide for a range of low to moderate density one-family residential dwellings to meet the housing needs for various residents, and provide a range of housing prices. 
B.  RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential Districts. The RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lower-density one-family districts. The multiple-family residential districts are further provided to serve the needs for various age groups, income levels and lifestyles. 
C.  These residential districts are intended to achieve the following: 
1.  Provide for future residential development that is of a density and character that is compatible with adjoining, existing neighborhoods. 
2.  Distinguish between levels of residential density in order to promote a mixture of lot sizes, neighborhood design, housing types and income levels. 
3.  Ensure that new residential development possesses the important elements of a quality neighborhood such as sidewalks, street trees, access to parks and recreation, and prominent front entryways to homes. 
4.  Link new neighborhoods to existing neighborhoods through connecting street and sidewalk systems that offer a consistent streetscape theme. 
5.  Accommodate open space for active and passive recreation in neighborhoods. 
6.  Facilitate innovative neighborhood design, open space preservation and high-quality neighborhoods. 
7.  Enforce zoning, building code, and property maintenance standards to ensure that the condition of housing units does not deteriorate thereby preserving investment and maintaining the desirability of neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.03.020 - Schedule of uses. 
    Use and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this title. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of Table 3.02 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations: 
    P: Permitted Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. 
    SLU: Special Land Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for this purpose by obtaining Special Land Use approval when all applicable standards cited in Chapter 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures and specific standards of Section 18.03.040 are met. 
    NP: Not Permitted: The use is not permitted in the district. 
    Requirement: Provides reference to additional requirements or conditions applicable to that specific use. 
Table 3.02 
Schedule of Uses 
Use R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM-1 RM-2 Requirement Residential Uses One-family detached dwellings P P P P P P Section 18.03.030 Two-family dwellings NP NP SLU SLU P P Townhouses/attached one-family dwellings NP NP NP NP P P Multiple-family dwellings/apartments NP NP NP NP SLU P Agricultural Uses Farms P P P P P P The raising and keeping of horses and other livestock P P P NP NP NP Section 18.03.040(A) Roadside stands for the sale of garden produce raised on the premises P P NP NP NP NP Section 18.03.040(B) Public and Institutional Uses Churches and other places of worship and other facilities normally incidental thereto, excluding "large-scale churches" SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Section 18.03.040(C) Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title P P P P P P Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education P P P P P P Public, parochial and private intermediate or secondary schools offering courses in general education SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Section 18.03.040(D) Uses and buildings of the municipality (without storage yards) P P P P P P Utility and essential public service buildings and uses (without storage yards), when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Recreational Uses Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers, nonprofit swimming pool clubs SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Section 18.03.040(E) Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities P P P P P P Golf courses SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Section 18.03.040(F) Human Care Uses Adult Foster Care Facilities Adult foster care family homes (6 or fewer adults 24 hours per day) P P P P P P Section 18.03.040(G) Adult foster care small group homes (12 or fewer adults 24 hours per day) SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Section 18.03.040(G) Adult foster care large group homes (13 to 20 adults 24 hours per day) NP NP NP NP P P Section 18.03.040(G) Adult foster care congregate facilities (more than 20 adults 24 hours per day) NP NP NP NP SLU SLU Section 18.03.040(G) Child Care Facilities Foster family homes (4 or fewer children 24 hours per day) P P P P P P Foster family group homes (5 to 6 children 24 hours per day) P P P P P P Family day care homes (6 or fewer children less than 24 hours per day) P P P P P P Group day care homes (7 to 12 children less than 24 hours per day) SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Section 18.03.040(H) Child care or day care centers NP NP NP NP SLU SLU Child caring institutions NP NP NP NP SLU SLU Adult day care facilities NP NP NP NP SLU SLU Adult day care homes SLU SLU SLU SLU P P Section 18.03.040(I) Senior housing (apartments, assisted living, senior independent living) NP NP NP NP SLU SLU Section 18.03.040(J) Nursing homes and convalescent homes NP NP NP NP SLU SLU Section 18.03.040(J) Hospice NP NP NP NP SLU SLU Accessory Home Business Uses Home occupations P P P P P P Section 18.03.040(K) Garage sales P P P P P P Section 18.03.040(L) Bed and breakfast inns SLU SLU SLU SLU SLU SLU Section 18.03.040(M)  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.03.030 - Residential dwelling units. 
    All one-family residential dwelling units shall be subject to building permit requirements and review by the building official based upon the following requirements: 
A.  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
B.  If the dwelling unit is a manufactured home, the manufactured home must either be: (1) new and certified by the manufacturer or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards of the U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, as amended, or any similar successor or replacement standards which may be promulgated, or (2) used and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in subsection (B)(1) of this section, and found, on inspection by the building official, to be in excellent condition and safe and fit for residential occupancy. 
C.  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. The perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. The perimeter wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. Any such home shall be anchored by an anchoring system approved by the city. 
D.  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building width to depth and depth to width ratio that does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. All dwelling units shall have minimum width and depth dimensions of twenty feet each. 
E.  Dwelling units shall have a roof with a minimum four to twelve pitch and minimum eight-inch eave, and with a gutter drainage system that will collect and concentrate the discharge of storm water or snow away from the sides of the dwelling. The roof shall have wood shake, asphalt or other acceptable shingles, and meet the snow load standards for southern Michigan. The roof pitch requirement may be waived by the building official for specific architectural styles that do not typically have pitched roofs, such as modernistic or international style buildings. 
F.  The dwelling unit shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or one hundred square feet, whichever is less. 
G.  Dwelling units with habitable basements, whether finished or unfinished, shall provide escape windows that meet the city building code. 
H.  Bars shall not be put over windows and doors that are visible from the street. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.03.040 - Specific standards applicable to uses. 
    Uses allowed in the residential districts shall be subject to meeting the following specific requirements applicable to that use: 
A.  Raising and Keeping of Horses and Other Livestock. The raising and keeping of horses and other livestock shall be permitted where there is a minimum of three acres for the first animal and one acre for each animal thereafter. The animals shall not be housed within one hundred feet of a property line of a platted subdivision lot or within one hundred feet of a dwelling on any adjoining unplatted parcel. 
B.  Roadside Stands for the Sale of Garden Produce Raised on the Premises. The raising of garden produce for sale on the premises may be permitted, provided a zoning permit is obtained from the building official. Permits shall be issued for one year periods subject to yearly renewal, provided structures or buildings are properly maintained. Buildings and structures for which permits are not renewed shall be dismantled as directed by the building official. Building permits shall be issued for any structures or buildings. Buildings, structures, and displays shall not be located in the public road right-of-way. 
C.  Churches and Other Places of Worship. Churches, and other similar places of worship and other facilities normally incidental thereto; provided that the uses do not meet the definition of "large-scale churches," shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Off-street parking spaces and drives or aisles shall not be located within twenty feet of the front lot line, which shall be landscaped as a greenbelt meeting the requirements of Section 18.14.020. Off-street parking spaces and drives or aisles shall not be located within twenty feet of a side or rear lot line when such lot line abuts a residential district. This minimum setback area shall be landscaped as a buffer zone meeting the requirements of Section 18.14.020. 
2.  Principal buildings shall have a setback of at least fifty feet. 
3.  All accessory buildings shall have a setback of at least fifty feet from any residential district unless such district is occupied by an existing use other than a dwelling. 
4.  Storage of buses, trucks and maintenance equipment shall be entirely within a totally enclosed building. 
5.  There shall be no outside loudspeaker or amplified sound outside of a totally enclosed building, except for church bells, call to prayer or other similar purpose. 
D.  Colleges, Universities, and other such Institutions of Higher Learning. Colleges, universities and other institutions of higher learning offering courses in general, technical or religious education, public or private, and not operated for profit, shall be permitted provided all buildings are setback a minimum of eighty feet from all lot lines. 
E.  Recreational Areas, Recreation Centers and Clubs. Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers, and nonprofit swimming pool clubs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The site for a recreational use that is intended to serve areas beyond the immediate residential neighborhood of residents shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the city of Wixom master plan. 
2.  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least eighty feet. 
3.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may approve a reduction in the off-street parking requirements in those instances where it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas and will, therefore, be pedestrian or other justification for reduced parking. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
4.  All swimming pools shall be provided with a protective fence four feet in height and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 
F.  Golf Courses. Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  All principal and accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of two hundred feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands, provided that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the planning commission may reduce this requirement. 
2.  Fairways and driving ranges shall be oriented in such a manner and set back a sufficient distance to prevent golf balls from being hit outside the perimeter of the golf course. 
3.  All swimming pools shall be provided with a protective fence four feet in height and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 
G.  Adult Foster Care Facilities. A copy of the state of Michigan license shall be submitted to the city with the special land use application. A copy of the license should be predominately displayed on the premises. The licensee shall immediately notify the city of any change in, or loss of, the license. 
H.  Group Day Care Homes. Group day care homes shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  An on-site drive shall be provided for drop-offs/loading. This drive shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without affecting traffic flow on the public street. 
2.  There shall be a fenced, contiguous open space with a minimum area of one thousand five hundred square feet provided on the same premises as the group day care home. The required open space shall not be located within a required front yard. 
3.  A copy of the state of Michigan license shall be submitted to the city with the special land use application. A copy of the license should be predominately displayed on the premises. The licensee shall immediately notify the city of any change in, or loss of, the license. 
I.  Adult Day Care Homes. Day care homes for elderly adults shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Not more than twelve persons, other than the full-time occupants of the dwelling, may be cared for in any one dwelling. 
2.  Certification shall be provided from the Michigan Association of Day Care Providers to ensure safety and quality of care. 
3.  The facility shall not provide nursing or medical care. 
J.  Senior Housing, Nursing Homes and Convalescent Homes. Independent senior housing including senior apartments and condominiums, and dependent senior housing including assisted living, nursing homes and convalescent homes for seniors, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Independent senior housing and senior apartments may be developed in a multiple-family or cluster housing form with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual unit. A community center for this overall development may be provided. 
2.  Senior assisted living housing shall be developed in a multiple-family housing form with central dining facilities provided as a basic service to each unit. A community center for the overall development shall be provided to support recreational and social activities. 
3.  The following minimum requirements shall be provided for the senior housing types permitted in subsections (J)(1) and (J)(2) of this section: 
Table 3.04 
Senior Housing Requirements 
Independent Seniorl 
Housing/Apartments Dependent Senior 
Housing Density-same as RM-2 RM-2 Minimum Usable Floor Area One bedroom 500 sq. ft. 350 sq. ft. Two bedroom 600 sq. ft. 450 sq. ft. Building Setbacks and Height-same as RM-2 RM-2 Off-Street Parking Residents space/unit .5 space/unit Guests .25 space/unit .25 space/unit Maximum Percent Coverage of Site Buildings 30% 35% Parking 15% 10% Minimum Open space 60% 50%  
4.  Personal service uses such as a dry cleaning pickup station, beauty shop, barbershop or similar use for the exclusive service to residents of a complex may be allowed in RM-2 and VCA districts within a housing development. In no instance shall such service use be provided with direct access to a street for the use of the public in general, it being the purpose of this provision to allow such use to only be provided as a convenience to occupants of the complex in which such service is located. No signs of any nature shall be visible from outside the building in which the use is located. 
K.  Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Home occupations that create the following conditions shall not be permitted: 
a.  Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling or is visible from the street; 
b.  Generates traffic, parking, sewerage or water use in excess of what is normal in the residential neighborhood; 
c.  Creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in electrical interference, or becomes a nuisance; 
d.  Results in outside storage or display of anything including signs; 
e.  Requires the employment of anyone in the home other than the dwelling occupant; 
f.  Requires exterior building alterations to accommodate the occupation; 
g.  Occupies more than twenty-five percent of the ground floor area of the dwelling and may not occupy a detached accessory building; 
h.  Requires parking for customers that cannot be accommodated on the site and/or not exceeding one parking space at curbside on the street; 
i.  Requires the delivery of goods or the visit of customers before six a.m. and after eight p.m. 
2.  The following are permitted home occupations, provided they do not violate any of the provisions of the previous paragraph: 
a.  Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring; 
b.  Painting, sculpturing or writing; 
c.  Telephone answering; 
d.  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving and lapidary work; 
e.  Tutoring, limited to a maximum of four students at a time; 
f.  Computer application, not including sale of computers; 
g.  Salesperson's office or home office of a professional person; 
h.  Laundering and ironing, with outdoor drying of clothing prohibited; 
i.  Repair of clocks, instruments or other small appliances which do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in electrical interference; 
j.  Barber shops, beauty shops and similar personal service establishment, limited to one operator; 
k.  Other home occupations similar to the above. 
3.  Any proposed home occupation that is not specifically permitted by subsection (K)(2) of this section shall be considered a special land use and be granted or denied upon consideration of those standards contained in subsection (K)(1) of this section and under the procedures specified in Section 18.18.020. 
4.  Home occupation permits shall be limited to the applicant who legally resides in the residence. 
L.  Garage Sales. Garage sales or yard sales shall be permitted as an accessory use on a residential lot, provided a permit is obtained from the city and the total time of all garage sales shall not exceed fourteen days within a calendar year. 
M.  Bed and Breakfast Inns. Bed and breakfasts shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Bed and breakfast operations as a subordinate use to one-family dwelling units are subject to city licensing provisions. 
2.  Such dwellings shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county and state. 
3.  Floor plans drawn to scale of all floors to be utilized for bed and breakfast activities shall be submitted to the city. 
4.  Buildings shall be suitable in character for the use proposed and shall not be cause for a change in character of the neighborhood. 
5.  The dwelling shall have not more than six sleeping rooms available for guests of the bed and breakfast dwelling. 
6.  There shall be no separate cooking facilities provided for the bed and breakfast occupants. Meals, other than those served as a part of the normal operation of the household, shall be served only to occupants of the bed and breakfast facility. 
7.  Approved smoke detectors/alarms shall be provided in individual sleeping units and in common hallways. 
8.  Emergency egress lighting to assure continued illumination for a duration of not less than one hour in case of emergency or primary power loss. 
9.  An approved fire extinguisher in the common hallway accessible to all occupants. 
10.  Every sleeping unit shall have at least one operable window approved for emergency egress or rescue, except where the sleeping unit is provided with a door to a corridor having access to two remote exits in opposite directions. 
11.  Occupancy shall be of a transient nature for periods not to exceed one week in duration in any one month by any transient occupant. A guest registry indicating name, address, phone number, and vehicle license number, shall be kept indicating dates of arrival and departure of guests and shall be available to the city for inspection upon request. 
12.  An unlit sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be provided. Such sign may be provided as a ground sign or a wall sign, except in the VCA district, where the sign must be a wall sign. 
13.  Off-street parking shall be provided based upon one space for each rental room and one space for the operator of the facility. It is the city's intent to not encourage yards to be destroyed, landscaping removed or the integrity of the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking. In those instances where parking requirements cannot be met, the applicant may request special consideration from the planning commission. In such a case the applicant shall submit an analysis of parking required and parking provided within a three-hundred-foot radius of the subject parcel. After analyzing this data, the planning commission may lower the number of the required parking spaces based on the fact that sufficient off-street parking exists in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.03.050 - Height and placement requirements. 
    Table 3.05 delineates the height, bulk, and setback requirements pertaining to the zoning districts regulated by this chapter. Notes to the schedule of regulations follow. 
Table 3.05 
Schedule of Residential Regulations 
Zoning District Minimum Zoning Lot Size per Unit Maximum Height of Structure Minimum Yard Setback (In Feet) (E, F) Minimum Floor Area per Unit (Sq. Ft.) Maximum % of Lot Area Covered By Buildings Lot Area Per Unit (Sq. Ft.) (A, B, C) Lot Width (Feet) In Stories In Feet Front (G) Side (Each/ Total) Rear (H) Total Floor Area Ground Floor Area R-1 one-family residential 20,000 (D) 90 (D) 2 30 35 6/20 40 1,400 700 25% R-2 one-family residential 15,000 (D) 90 (D) 2 30 35 6/16 35 1,400 700 30% R-3 one-family residential 12,500 (D) 80 (D) 2 30 35 6/16 35 1,150 600 30% R-4 one-family residential 7,200 (D) 60 (D) 2 30 25 6/12 (I) 30 960 600 30% RM-1 multiple-family residential 3,200 - 2 30 30 (J) 10/20 (J) 30 (J) 500 (K) - 30% RM-2 multiple-family residential 2,400 - 3 40 30 (J) 10/20 (J) 30 (J) 500 (K) - 30%  

A.  Density. Maximum density shall be based upon the number of units per net buildable acre of the site. The following factors shall be utilized in determining the net buildable area of the site: 
1.  Land within the one hundred-year floodplain and regulated wetlands shall be calculated at twenty-five percent toward the total net buildable site acreage (i.e., four acres of wetland equals one net buildable acre). 
2.  All submerged land below the ordinary high-water mark of a lake, creek, or stream and public rights-of-way shall be excluded from the net area calculation. 
B.  Condominium Developments. One-family detached condominiums in condominium subdivisions shall meet all minimum requirements and standards of the district in which such dwellings are to be constructed, including minimum floor area requirements. Where condominiums are developed without individual site condominium lots, the number of dwelling units per gross acre shall not exceed the following: 
1.  R-1: 2.0 dwelling units per gross acre; 
2.  R-2: 2.2 dwelling units per gross acre; 
3.  R-3: 2.6 dwelling units per gross acre; 
4.  R-4: 4.5 dwelling units per gross acre. 
C.  Recreational Area. Areas and facilities for recreation purposes shall be provided as follows: 
1.  All land area provided for recreation space may be used in computing dwelling unit density and shall be provided and developed in accordance with Table 3.05.B. Land area shall be provided and developed for recreation purposes in all subdivisions, condominiums and multiple dwelling projects as follows: 
a.  One-Family Developments. A minimum of one thousand square feet of land area per dwelling unit. 
b.  Multiple-Family Developments. A minimum of four hundred square feet of land area per dwelling unit. 
Table 03.05.B 
Required Recreational Area 
Development Size 
(in dwelling units) Number of 
Recreation Sites Minimum Improvements Up to 100 units 1 Playground equipment, picnic facilities 101 to 200 units Min. 1 Max. 2 Playground equipment, picnic facilities, tennis courts or active recreation facility 201 to 400 units 2 Playground equipment, picnic facilities, pathways, tennis court, field sports area or active recreation areas 401 to 600 units Min. 2 Max. 3 Two playground equipment areas, picnic facilities, pathways, at least two tennis courts, clubhouse and/or swimming pool, field sports area Over 600 units Min. 2 Max 4 plus 1 additional area for each 300 units in excess of 600 units Three playground equipment areas, picnic facilities, pathways, at least three tennis courts, swimming pool and clubhouse, field sports area  
2.  The planning commission, in its review of the site plan, may modify recreational improvement requirements in those instances where it can be shown that equally appropriate recreation facilities are to be provided in place of specific improvements designated in Table 3.05.B. 
3.  The homeowners association or development owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the recreational facilities. 
D.  Open Space Plan. See Section 18.03.070 regarding flexibility allowances. 
E.  Institutional and Recreational Building Setbacks. For all uses permitted other than residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in this section, whichever is the greater. 
F.  Condominium Setbacks. Where condominiums are developed without individual site condominium lots, the minimum yard setbacks shall be measured as the combined total of the setbacks between adjacent units. 
1.  The spacing between sides of units shall be the total of both side yard setbacks combined. 
2.  The spacing between two back-to-back units shall be the total of both rear yard setbacks combined. 
3.  The front yard setback shall be measured from the road right-of-way or easement. With a private road that does not have a minimum sixty-foot wide easement, the front yard setback shall be measured from the sidewalk along the street. Where sidewalks are not present, the setback shall be measured from a distance of thirty feet from the centerline of the street. 

G.  Corner Lot Front Yard Setback. There shall be maintained a required front yard setback on each street side of a corner lot. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. All regulations applicable to a front yard shall apply to both front yards of a corner lot. Both frontages shall be designed as front facades with windows or utilize side entry garages. 
H.  Stream Setback. All structures shall be a minimum of twenty feet from each side of Norton Creek and any other stream or established county drain unless a greater setback is required in this chapter. 
I.  R-4 Setbacks. Any new principal dwelling built after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall provide a six-foot side yard setback. Existing dwellings with five-foot side yard setbacks shall be permitted to continue, provided any additions shall be setback six feet from the side lot line. 
J.  Multiple-Family Building Setbacks. The setback requirements indicated in Table 3.05 shall be measured from the perimeter of the overall site or development. Parking lots shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from the front lot line and ten feet from the side, and rear lot lines. Setbacks internal to the site shall be as follows: 
1.  There shall be at least thirty feet between any two multiple-family or senior housing buildings and at least twenty feet between buildings containing duplexes, townhouses or attached one-family residential units. 
2.  A minimum twenty-foot setback from all internal roads, drives and parking areas shall be provided for multiple-family or senior housing buildings; duplexes; townhouses; and attached one-family residential units. 
3.  Individual unit driveways shall have a minimum length of twenty feet between the building and a sidewalk for the parking of a vehicle without blocking the sidewalk. 
K.  Multiple-Family Storage Areas. All multiple-family dwelling units shall contain utility storage capability for such things as bicycles, sports equipment, barbecues, etc., in a basement located under the dwelling unit, in an attic area, in the living areas, not including clothing closet or in an accessory structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling. Such storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling unit or one hundred square feet, whichever is less. An enclosed garage may be utilized to achieve this requirement. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.03.060 - Development requirements. 
A.  Improvements. All residential developments, including one-family subdivisions, condominiums and multiple-family, shall be provided with improvements for streets and utilities as provided in the city's subdivision regulations contained in Title 16 and in the ordinance establishing engineering design standards for subdivisions and project improvements. 
B.  Site Plans. Site plans shall be submitted as provided for in Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures. 
C.  Access. All access to the site shall be in accordance with Section 18.15.050. 
D.  Utilities. Assurance shall be given that adequate utility services necessary to the development of the entire property will be provided. Utilities shall be located along the rear of the lot, except where the building official determines that utilities may not be located in the rear yard. Where utilities must be located in the front or side yard, landscape screening shall be provided for utility boxes. Any new utility lines shall be installed underground. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.03.070 - Clustered open space development. 
A.  Intent. The intent of the clustered open space development is to promote the following objectives: 
1.  Provide for moderate density development of residential areas and thereby assist an overall city effort to provide for efficiency of city services, a reduction of transportation needs, and to provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, streams, wetlands, hills and similar natural assets. 
2.  Encourage a more creative approach in the development of residential areas. 
3.  Assure the permanent preservation of natural, social, cultural and/or historic resources. 
4.  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area while recognizing a reduction in development costs and allowing the property owner to preserve natural features on the site. 
5.  Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
B.  Eligibility Criteria. To be eligible for clustered open space development consideration, the applicant must present a proposal for a residential development that meets all of the following: 
1.  A clustered open space development shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit, both to the residents of the property and to the overall quality of life in the city. The benefits can be provided through site design elements in excess of the requirements of this chapter, such as extensive landscaping, unique site design features, preservation of woodlands and open space, particularly along major thoroughfares or lakes, buffering development from wetlands and provision of buffers from adjacent residential. 
2.  The site shall preserve significant natural features such as woodlands, significant views, natural drainage ways, regulated or nonregulated wetlands, or natural corridors that connect quality wildlife habitats which would be in the best interest of the city to preserve and which might be negatively impacted by conventional residential development. 
3.  The clustered open space development shall be designed to create a cohesive neighborhood through a network of spaces such as parks and common open space areas for recreation and resident interaction. All open space areas shall be equally available to all residents of the development. 
4.  The site shall be under single ownership or control, such that there is a single person or entity having proprietary responsibility for the full completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient documentation of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and/or deed restrictions that indicate that the development will be completed in its entirety as proposed. 
5.  The clustered open space development shall be consistent with and further the implementation of the city of Wixom master plan. 

C.  Density. 
1.  Residential density shall be determined by a parallel plan that illustrates how the site could be developed as a conventional subdivision with the underlying zoning district, meeting all applicable city zoning and subdivision requirements. Lots on the parallel plan shall meet the dimensional requirements required by Section 18.03.050, except in the R-1 district, the parallel plan shall be based upon eighteen thousand square foot lots. The parallel plan shall be submitted with the clustered open space development that contains all information required for a preliminary plat. The city shall review the design and determine the number of lots that could be feasibly constructed with a conventional subdivision. This number shall be the maximum number of dwelling units allowable for the open space cluster development. 
2.  The city council shall have the discretion to grant a density bonus of up to twenty-five percent, based upon the recommendation of the planning commission, for projects that meet the following requirements: 
a.  The amount of open space and usable recreational land provided is at least fifty percent more than the minimum requirement (i.e., thirty percent of the site must be open space and fifteen percent of the site must be usable recreation area). 
b.  The project will create a walkable neighborhood with a continuous pedestrian circulation system that links all areas of the development, links the development to other destinations in the surrounding area and is designed to facilitate a variety of transportation choices by providing alternatives to automobile travel. 
c.  The project takes advantage of compact design through clustering of development into a walkable scale neighborhood. 
d.  The development will preserve significant open space and natural features. 

D.  Dimensional Standards. All lots shall comply with the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district, provided the lot area and width may be reduced in order to preserve a minimum of twenty percent of the total net site area as common open space (thirty percent with a density bonus) meeting the requirements of subsection F of this section. 
1.  All setback and other dimensional standards of Section 18.03.050 for the underlying zoning district shall be complied with. The site plan shall clearly illustrate the building envelopes for the dwellings and potential decks in accordance with Section 18.13.030. The planning commission may allow a reduction in setbacks for yards adjoining open space or to allow for clustering of dwelling units. 
2.  The attaching of one-family dwelling units, one to another, may be permitted when the homes are attached by means of a common party side wall. 
a.  No other common party wall relationship is permitted and the number of units attached in this manner shall not exceed four. 
b.  Each unit shall have individual entrances. 
c.  The units shall meet all other setback requirements of the underlying zoning. 
d.  The spacing between the sides of groups of buildings shall be equal or greater than the combined total of two side yards required by Section 18.03.050. 
3.  The zoning board of appeals shall have no authority to grant variances to a clustered open space development site plan or any conditions placed by the city council. The zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to hear and decide appeal requests by individual lot owners for variances following final approval of the clustered open space development, provided such variance does not contradict the requirements of this section or any conditions placed on the approval of the clustered open space development. 
E.  Subdivision Requirements. The layout of the clustered open space development shall comply with the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the city (codified in Title 16). The site shall provide for interconnection of roads and the future integration of circulation between adjacent sites. All landscaping and nonmotorized pathway requirements of Chapter 18.14, General Site Development Requirements shall be met. 
F.  Open Space. A minimum of twenty percent of the total site area (thirty percent with a density bonus) shall be preserved as common open space for recreation or conservation and shall be exclusive of residential lots, road rights-of-way, stormwater detention ponds, required greenbelts, minimum building setbacks or other improvements. The open space shall be arranged on the site to meet all of the following requirements, provided the planning commission may modify these standards where it is demonstrated that additional natural features will be preserved elsewhere on the site: 
1.  At least one-half of the minimum required open space area, shall be usable upland that shall be improved to provide active or passive recreational use. Open bodies of water such as lakes, rivers, streams and ponds over five acres shall not be included in open space area calculations, but wetlands may be used to satisfy up to one-half of the minimum required open space area. 
2.  All wetlands and streams shall be preserved as open space. 
3.  Open space shall be located to minimize removal of woodlands. 
4.  A twenty-five-foot open space setback shall be provided from all floodplains, wetlands and streams. 
5.  Open space will be designed to include recreational trails, picnic areas, parks and greenways. The planning commission may permit recreational buildings within the open space. Golf courses may be permitted, provided the area of the golf course may not be used to satisfy the twenty percent minimum open space requirement. 
6.  Access shall be provided to areas dedicated for open space for those lots not bordering on such open space by means of streets or pedestrian access ways. 
G.  Open Space Protection. The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance in a form approved by the city, such as: recorded deed restrictions, covenants that run in perpetuity with the land, or conservation easements. The conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all forms of development and shall never be changed to another use. 
1.  Where deed restrictions are utilized for the protection of open space, the restrictions applicable to the open space shall not be amended. Final approval by the city council shall not be granted until the deed restrictions protecting the open space are recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds and copies are filed with the city. 
2.  A preservation and maintenance plan for the open space shall be submitted with the final preliminary plat or final condominium plan and shall include mechanisms for the long-term funding of open space preservation. The city may require performance guarantees or other funding mechanisms to ensure long-term maintenance of open space. Measures for protection of open space shall be put in place prior to issuance of any building permits. 
3.  Signs shall be posted by the developer delineating protected wetlands and conservation areas. 
H.  Approval Process. 
1.  Tentative Preliminary Plat or Site Plan. 
a.  A tentative preliminary plat or site plan shall be submitted for review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval by the city council. 
b.  The tentative preliminary plat or site plan shall include all information as required in the city subdivision regulations, codified in Title 16, for a tentative preliminary plat, plus the following additional information: 
i.  An aerial photograph of the entire site and all areas within one hundred fifty feet of the site, taken not more than one year prior to the date of the application. 
ii.  A second parallel development plan that shows the number of dwelling units that could be developed on the site with a conventional subdivision for the purpose of determining base density. 
iii.  Location and definition of function of both developed and undeveloped open spaces. Layout of recreational facilities shall be included on developed open spaces. 
iv.  Outline and depiction of major wooded areas and wetlands, and description of the means to be employed to preserve them. 
v.  Total site acreage and percent of total project in various uses, including developed and preserved open space. 
vi.  Total site density and density of detached and attached dwellings and percent of ground area covered by buildings. 
vii.  A table of the required modifications or deviations to the regulations which are otherwise applicable to the site. 
c.  The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the tentative preliminary plat or site plan. The planning commission shall review the plan and make a recommendation for approval or denial to the city council. Notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 18.21.110. 
d.  If the proposal meets the requirements of this title and the subdivision regulations of the city (codified in Title 16), the planning commission shall recommend approval of the tentative preliminary plat or site plan to the city council along with any conditions upon which approval should be based. If the proposal does not meet the requirements of this title, or the planning commission finds that approval of the proposal would be detrimental to existing development in the general area and should not be approved, the planning commission shall recommend denial to the city council along with the reasons therefore in the minutes of the planning commission. Notice of recommendation of approval or disapproval of the proposal together with copies of all layouts and other relevant information shall be forwarded to the city clerk. 
e.  The city council shall review the action of the planning commission together with relevant material submitted by the applicant. The city council may take action to approve or disapprove the tentative preliminary open space plan or may refer such plan back to the planning commission with direction for further review. The city council may also take concurrent action on any tentative preliminary plat or tentative preliminary condominium plan. 
2.  Reasonable conditions may be required with approval of a clustered open space development for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner, and further the implementation of the city of Wixom master plan. 
3.  Final Preliminary Plat or Site Plan. 
a.  After approval of a tentative preliminary plat or site plan, the final preliminary plat or site plan shall be submitted for planning commission review and recommendation to the city council. The following shall be submitted for planning commission review and recommendation to the city council: 
i.  The final preliminary open space cluster development shall meet all requirements of the plan that was tentatively approved and meet all requirements for a final preliminary plat in the subdivision regulations of the city (codified in Title 16). 
ii.  Copies of all necessary county and state approvals shall also be submitted to the city. 
iii.  Copies of draft conservation easements, deed restrictions, protective covenants, master deeds, bylaws or other legal mechanisms to protect open space areas shall be submitted with the final preliminary plan. 
iv.  Copies of all easement documents in recordable form, as specified by the city. 
b.  If the final preliminary plat or site plan is recommended for approval by the planning commission, the plan shall be submitted to the city attorney for the preparation of agreements setting forth the conditions upon which the approval is based, the applicant's acceptance of the conditions and long-term maintenance of the open space. The agreement shall be finalized and approved by the city council prior to city council approval of the final preliminary site plan. 
c.  As a condition for the approval of the final preliminary clustered open space plan, the applicant shall deposit a performance guarantee in the amount of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements to the open land guaranteeing the completion of such improvements within a time to be set by the city. Performance guarantees shall be placed in escrow and returned to the applicant upon satisfactory completion of work, as specified in Section 18.21.100. 
d.  Detailed construction plans shall be submitted to the city for engineering review and approval prior to commencement of any construction or site grading. 
e.  Actual development of the open space shall be carried out concurrently with the construction of other improvements to serve the dwelling units. The city will require landscape improvement for the entire site frontage where such site abuts public streets as an initial site improvement even though such frontage is not part of an early stage of project development. The developer shall also be responsible for landscaping the right-of-way to the road curb along the site frontage. Development of the open space and installation of all the required landscaping must be completed prior to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the project. 
4.  Final Approvals. Final approvals shall follow procedures for approval of final plats or final condominiums, as applicable. In the case of a subdivision plat, final plats shall be submitted for approval by the city council in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the city (codified in Title 16). In the case of a condominium, final condominium as-built plans and Exhibit B drawings shall be submitted for approval by the city council in accordance with Section 18.17.070, condominium developments. The open space improvements shall be completed prior to final certificates of occupancy being granted for more than fifty percent of the dwelling units. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.05 - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT 
Sections: 

18.05.010 - Intent. 
    The purpose of the MHP manufactured home park district is to give recognition to the fact that manufactured homes can provide satisfactory living conditions provided certain minimum standards are maintained. Manufactured home parks may possess site development, use and density characteristics and private drive systems similar to multiple-family residential development. The following regulations shall apply in the MHP district and no building, structure or premises, except as otherwise provided in this title, shall be erected, altered or used except for one or more of the following specified uses. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.05.020 - Schedule of uses. 
    Use and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this title. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of Table 5.02 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations: 
    P: Permitted Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. 
    SLU: Special Land Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for this purpose by obtaining Special Land Use approval when all applicable standards cited in Chapter 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures and specific standards of Section 18.05.030 are met. 
    NP: Not Permitted: The use is not permitted in the district. 
    "Requirement" provides reference to additional requirements or conditions applicable to that specific use. 
Table 5.02 
Schedule of Uses 
Use MHP Requirement Residential Uses One-family detached dwellings P Section 18.03.030 Manufactured homes P Manufactured Home Park Uses One office building to be used exclusively for conducting the business operation of the manufactured home park P Utility buildings for laundry facilities and auxiliary storage space for manufactured home tenants P New or used manufactured homes located on lots within the manufactured home development to be used and occupied within the manufactured home park may be sold by a licensed dealer and/or broker. This shall not prohibit the sale of a new or used manufactured home by a resident of the manufactured home development provided the development permits the sale. The selling of new and/or used manufactured homes as a commercial operation to be moved to other locations is prohibited. P Use MHP Requirement New or used manufactured homes located on lots within the manufactured home development to be used and occupied within the manufactured home park may be sold by a licensed dealer and/or broker. This shall not prohibit the sale of a new or used manufactured home by a resident of the manufactured home development provided the development permits the sale. The selling of new and/or used manufactured homes as a commercial operation to be moved to other locations is prohibited. P Public and Institutional Uses Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards), when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity SLU Recreational Uses Community buildings for use by the tenants of the manufactured home park as well as recreation areas and playgrounds P Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers, nonprofit swimming pool clubs SLU Section 18.03.040(E) Human Care Uses Adult foster care family home (6 or fewer adults 24 hours per day) P Section 18.03.040(G) Foster family home (4 or fewer children 24 hours per day) P Foster family group home (5 to 6 children 24 hours per day) P Family day care home (6 or fewer children less than 24 hours per day) P Accessory Home Business Uses Home occupation P Section 18.03.040(L)  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.05.030 - Location requirements. 
A.  Access to any manufactured home park shall be to a major thoroughfare and not a local residential street. It is the intent to avoid higher-density traffic movements through existing or planned one-family developments. An emergency means of ingress and egress to a manufactured home park, not used for general access, may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare. 
B.  Manufactured home parks shall not be permitted on parcels of less than fifteen acres in area. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.05.040 - Required conditions. 
A.  The proposed site plan for the manufactured home park shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval. The suggestion of any changes or modifications shall be based on such reasonable requirements as are applied to the review and approval of all other uses in the city. Any items determined to be undesirable or inadequate shall be made known to the applicant and a copy of such objections shall immediately be forwarded to the state manufactured home commission for their consideration in reviewing the proposed manufactured home park plans. 
B.  All manufactured home park development shall further comply with Act 419 of the Public Acts of 1976, as adopted. Act 419 of the Public Acts of 1976 as amended shall supersede any requirements of the ordinance where this title may provide more restrictive standards. 
C.  Manufactured home parks shall provide land for open space use by residents of the park. These areas shall be so located and arranged that they functionally serve the residents to be served and meet or exceed manufactured home commission rules, as adopted. 
D.  The outside storage of household effects, other than normal patio furniture, etc., is prohibited. The storage of recreational vehicles, e.g., boats, campers, trailers, motor homes, snowmobiles on manufactured home sites and/or required parking spaces for longer than forty-eight hours is also prohibited. 
E.  The storage or parking of recreational vehicles, motor homes, boats, snowmobiles, or other vehicles or items ordinarily towed, driven or used for a special purpose, if storage or parking of such is permitted in the manufactured home park, shall be in accordance herewith. The storage of the vehicles or items in the manufactured home development is specifically prohibited except in a designated storage area. The storage area shall be screened by privacy fence six feet in height around its perimeter. 
F.  All utility connections shall comply with state and local codes. 
G.  The manufactured home park shall provide street trees at a rate of one tree per individual manufactured home site and the greenbelts and buffer zones required by Section 18.14.020. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.06 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

18.06.010 - Intent. 
A.  B-1 Local Business District. The B-1 local business district is designed to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. The uses permitted in this district must be compatible with and not adversely affect nearby residential uses. 
B.  B-2 Community Business District. The B-2 community business district is designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the local business district, including nearby residential areas and other neighborhoods in the community. These uses are generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by common parking areas and generating larger volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
C.  B-3 General Business District. The B-3 general business district is designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population, including the overall community, other surrounding communities and passerby traffic. The large size and variety of permitted commercial uses typically generates significant volumes of vehicular traffic. General business uses require a large area devoted to off-street parking and loading, and generally tend to create problems of congestion, noise and impact to surrounding uses. This district provides sites for more diversified business types and is often located so as to serve the passerby traffic. These uses need to be located in areas that have the transportation infrastructure to serve these intensive uses, with convenient access to regional transportation. 
D.  FS Freeway Service District. The FS freeway service district is designed to provide for servicing the needs of automobile highway traffic at the intersections of arterial roads and at the I-96 interchange. The avoidance of undue congestion on arterial roads, the promotion of smooth traffic flow at the interchange area and on I-96, and the protection of adjacent properties in other zones from adverse influences are prime considerations in the application of this district. 
E.  I-S Industrial Service District. The I-S industrial service district is designed to include uses which provide services to the city's industrial facilities and to provide services to employees at convenient locations along Wixom Road in close proximity to places of employment. It is not the intent of this district to provide for citywide shopping or service needs that are more suitably located in office or business districts. The I-S district locations are to be in accordance with the city of Wixom master plan and are to be located central to the industrial complexes they are intended to serve. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.06.020 - Schedule of uses. 
    Use and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this title. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of Table 6.02 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations: 
    P: Permitted Use: Land and buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. 
    SLU: Special Land Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for this purpose by obtaining Special Land Use approval when all applicable standards cited in Chapter 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures and specific standards of Section 18.06.040 are met. 
    NP: Not Permitted: The use is not permitted in the district. 
    "Requirement" provides reference to additional requirements or conditions applicable to that specific use. 
Table 6.02 
Schedule of Uses 
Use B-1 B-2 B-3 FS I-S Requirement Retail Businesses Retail businesses and shopping centers Uses up to 60,000 square feet gross floor area P P P P NP Uses 60,000 square feet of gross floor area or more NP NP SLU SLU NP Drive through service accessory to a permitted retail business, other than restaurants SLU SLU SLU SLU NP Section 18.06.040(A) Outdoor display and sales accessory to a permitted retail business, such as nurseries and home improvement items NP SLU P NP NP Section 18.06.040(B) Consignment shops NP NP SLU NP NP Pawnshops NP NP SLU NP NP Chapter 18.10 Precious metal and gem dealers NP NP SLU NP NP Chapter 18.10 Restaurants and Bars Standard sit-down restaurants and taverns P P P P SLU Restaurants and taverns with outdoor seating SLU SLU P P NP Restaurants with open front windows SLU SLU P P NP Carry-out restaurants P P P P P Drive-in restaurants NP NP P P NP Drive-through restaurants NP NP P P P Section 18.06.040(A) Cocktail lounges/night clubs NP SLU P P NP Banquet halls NP NP P P NP Service Uses Dry cleaning establishments or pick-up stations dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited P P P NP P Hotels and motels NP NP SLU P NP Funeral homes and mortuary establishments P P P NP NP Section 18.06.040(C) Personal service establishment including barber shops, beauty shops and health salons P P P NP P Pet grooming and training with no boarding NP P P NP NP Self-service laundry establishments NP NP P NP NP Service establishments of an office, showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing home appliance/electronic repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct P P P NP NP Small engine and equipment repair for lawn mowers, snow blowers and other home maintenance equipment NP NP SLU NP NP Section 18.06.040(D) Tattoo parlors NP NP SLU NP NP Section 18.06.040(F) Tool and equipment rental, which may include outdoor storage, but excluding vehicle rentals NP NP SLU NP NP Vehicle Related Uses Automobile washes NP NP SLU P NP Section 18.06.040(G) Automobile rental NP NP P NP P Automobile sales or showrooms NP NP P P NP Gasoline service stations NP SLU SLU P NP Section 18.06.040(G) Minor automotive repair businesses such as muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, tire stores and minor engine repair shops NP NP SLU SLU NP Section 18.06.040(I) Motorcycle, snowmobile and ATV sales or showrooms NP NP P NP NP Recreational vehicle, boat and mobile home sales NP NP SLU NP NP Office, Financial, Medical and Human Care Uses Offices for executive, administrative, professional, accounting, brokerage, insurance, writing, clerical, drafting and sales uses P P P P P Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations with or without drive-through facilities as an accessory use only P P P NP P Business services such as mailing, copying, data processing and retail office supplies NP P P NP P Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment NP NP P NP P 24-hour emergency medical clinics NP P P P P Hospitals NP NP P P NP Medical offices and dental offices and clinics P P P NP NP Nursing homes and convalescent homes P P P NP NP Section 18.06.040(J) Day care centers for children or the elderly P P P NP P Section 18.06.040(E) Veterinary clinics, not including animal boarding NP P P NP NP Accessory retail uses customarily related to another permitted medical use, such as but not limited to: a pharmacy, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical services P P P P NP Institutional, Governmental and Quasi-Public Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit NP NP P NP P Churches and other places of worship, excluding "large-scale churches" P P P NP NP Large-scale institutional uses, churches and other places of worship with a seating capacity of 1,500 people or more or parking for 500 vehicles or more SLU SLU SLU NP NP Section 18.06.040(K) Publicly owned utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrictransformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations and water and sewage pumping stations (without storage yards) P P P P P Recreational and Entertainment Uses Adult regulated uses/sexually oriented businesses NP NP SLU NP NP Chapter 18.10 Amusement arcades which provide space for patrons to engage in playing of mechanical amusement devices or similar activities NP NP SLU NP NP Section 18.06.040(L) Bowling alleys, billiard halls, indoor archery ranges, indoor tennis courts, indoor soccer facilities, indoor skating rinks or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation NP SLU P NP P Fortune tellers and palm readers NP NP SLU NP NP Health clubs and related uses including gyms, martial arts instruction, gymnasiums SLU SLU P NP SLU Social clubs SLU SLU SLU NP SLU Section 18.06.040(M) Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly NP P P NP SLU Accessory Uses Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot with a permitted use P P P P P  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.06.030 - Requirements applicable to all uses. 
    All uses permitted by right or by special land use approval shall be required to meet the following requirements: 
A.  Dealing Directly with Consumers. All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
B.  Conducted Within Enclosed Buildings. All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and approved open air uses shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
C.  Site and Building Design. All sites and buildings shall comply with the building, landscaping and all other design requirements of Chapter 18.14, General Site Development Requirements. All uses shall comply with the parking, loading and access requirements of Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.06.040 - Standards applicable to specific uses. 
    Uses allowed in the commercial districts shall be subject to meeting the following specific requirements applicable to that use: 
A.  Drive-Through. Drive-through business shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The drive-through facility must be attached to the structure. 
2.  The drive-through lane shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be provided. 
3.  Each drive-through facility shall provide a bypass lane to allow other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served. 
4.  There shall be a minimum of five stacking spaces, except drive-through restaurants shall provide a minimum of ten stacking spaces. Stacking spaces shall not include the space at the service window. 
5.  The drive-through facility shall be located on the side or rear elevation of the building to minimize visibility from a public or private roadway. The drive-through window and menu board speaker shall not face an adjacent residential district. 
B.  Outdoor Display and Sales. Outdoor display and sales uses shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The outdoor display and sales shall be accessory to a principal permitted retail use with a building on the site. 
2.  All outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of stormwater without negatively impacting adjacent property. The planning commission may approve a gravel surface for all or part of the display or storage area for low intensity activities, such as landscaping sales, upon a finding that neighboring properties and the environment will not be negatively impacted. 
3.  No outdoor storage shall be permitted in any required yard (setback) of buildings for the district in which the commercial outdoor display, sales or storage use is located. 
4.  The planning commission may require additional landscaping, screening or ornamental fencing where necessary to screen views from the street or an adjacent residential area. 
5.  Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent dust or blowing of materials. 
C.  Funeral Homes. Funeral homes and mortuary establishments shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Adequate off-street assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. The assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. 
2.  A caretaker's residence may be provided within the building of mortuary establishments. 
D.  Engine and Equipment Repair. Small engine and equipment repair for lawn mowers, snow blowers and other home maintenance equipment shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall not be permitted. 
2.  Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for the storage of equipment awaiting repair. 
3.  All vehicle or equipment servicing and repair shall be conducted within a building. 
4.  Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view. 
5.  This use shall not involve the repair of motor vehicles, which is regulated separately. 
E.  Day Care Centers. Day care centers for children shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The facility shall have received a state license to operate prior to seeking a special use permit under this title. A copy of the license must be filed with the building department as a condition of special land use approval. 
2.  Not less than four hundred square feet of outdoor play area per child, (as authorized by the license issued to the applicant by the state of Michigan Department of Human Services,) shall be provided on the site. 
3.  Screening and fencing of the outdoor play area shall be provided as required by the planning commission. 
4.  Parking shall be provided to allow for direct drop-off and pick-up of children without requiring children to cross streets or block traffic flow on the street. 
F.  Tattoo Parlors. Tattoo parlors shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The site shall not be within three hundred feet of a residential district; 
2.  The use shall not operate after ten p.m. 
G.  Automobile Washes. Automobile washes shall be subject to the following: 
1.  All buildings shall have a front yard setback of not less than fifty feet; 
2.  All washing facilities shall be within a building; 
3.  Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the required front yard and shall not be closer than twenty feet from any residential district; 
4.  All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided stacking space that is off the street right-of-way and does not conflict with required parking meeting the requirements of Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
H.  Gasoline Service Stations. Gasoline service stations shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Driveway access shall be in accordance with Section 18.15.050. 
2.  Gasoline pumps and overhead canopies may be located within a yard adjacent to a street, provided that the canopy has a minimum setback of ten feet. 
3.  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle components and parts, supplies, or equipment or other merchandise. 
4.  All restroom doors shall be accessed from inside the building. 
5.  The design and materials of the canopy and support columns shall be compatible with the main building. The canopy clearance shall be a minimum of fourteen feet and shall be noted on the site plan. 
6.  Any signs, logo or identifying paint scheme on the canopy shall be reviewed by the planning commission and considered part of the maximum wall sign permitted. 
7.  Details on the canopy lighting shall be provided to ensure there is no glare on the public streets or adjacent property, and that lighting levels are in accordance with Section 18.14.040. Canopy lighting shall be recessed such that the light source cannot be seen from off site. 
8.  The applicant shall submit a pollution incidence protection plan (PIPP) as part of the site plan. The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by accidental gasoline spills or leakage, such as: special check valves, drain back catch basins and automatic shut-off valves. 
9.  Minor automobile repair must also meet the requirements of subsection H of this section. 
I.  Minor Automotive Repair. Minor automotive repair businesses such as muffler shops, oil change, shock absorber replacement shops, tire stores, undercoating shops and minor engine repair shops shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited. 
2.  Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for more than forty-eight hours unless awaiting repair for which a work order, signed by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to be visible from outside the vehicle. The maximum number of vehicles stored outdoors for more than forty-eight hours shall be three vehicles for every one service bay. The area to be used for vehicle storage shall be shown on the site plan. 
3.  Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair. 
4.  All vehicle servicing or repair shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
5.  Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view. Used tire storage shall be limited to twenty-five tires and all tires shall be stored inside a building. 
J.  Nursing Homes and Convalescent Homes. Nursing homes and convalescent homes shall be set back a minimum of forty feet from all lot lines. 
K.  Large-Scale Institutional Uses, Churches and Other Places of Worship. Large-scale institutional uses, churches and other places of worship with a seating capacity of one thousand five hundred people or more or parking for five hundred vehicles or more shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The site shall have at least one hundred fifty feet of frontage on a major thoroughfare as designated on the master plan with an existing or planned right-of-way of not less than one hundred twenty feet. All access to the site shall be from major thoroughfares. 
2.  All buildings shall have a setback a minimum of fifty feet from any lot line in an abutting one-family residential district, unless such abutting lot is occupied by an existing institutional use other than a dwelling unit. 
3.  All structures and parking and loading areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from a side or real lot line when such lot line abuts a one-family residential district. The minimum setback area shall be landscaped as a greenbelt and shall include a five-foot high wall or berm. 
4.  Adequate site space to allow for expansion shall be provided without causing an impact on the residential neighborhood. 
5.  Storage of buses, trucks and maintenance equipment shall be entirely within a totally enclosed building. 
6.  There shall be no outside loudspeaker or amplified sound outside of a totally enclosed building. This restriction does not apply to church bells, call to prayer or other similar purpose. 
7.  Outdoor lighting of buildings and grounds shall be completely shielded from abutting residential areas. 
L.  Amusement Arcades. Amusement arcades which provide space for patrons to engage in playing of mechanical amusement devices or similar activities shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to county primary streets and shall have the entrance to both the business and parking area for such establishment on the county primary street. Access from a side or residential street shall be prohibited. 
2.  The provisions of Chapter 5.16 of the Municipal Code shall be complied with and shall be reflected on the site for the proposed use. 
M.  Social Clubs. Social clubs shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The facility shall be located no nearer than five hundred feet to any residence, park, public or private school, day care facility, convalescent/nursing home or church; 
2.  The outdoor use of loudspeakers, sound amplifying systems or paging systems shall be prohibited; 
3.  Appropriate licenses shall be required should alcoholic beverages be served. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.06.050 - Height and placement requirements. 
    Table 6.05 delineates the height, bulk, and setback requirements pertaining to the zoning districts regulated by this chapter. Notes to the schedule of regulations follow: 
Table 6.05 
Schedule of Commercial Regulations 
Zoning District Maximum Height of Structure Minimum Yard Setback (In Feet) (C, E, G, H) Maximum % of Lot Area Covered by Impervious Surfaces (I) In Stories In Feet Front (A, B) Each Side (C) Rear (F) B-1 Local Business 2 30 20 15 20 75% B-2 Community Business 2 30 20 (D) 20 75% B-3 General Business 4 60 30 (D) 20 75% FS Freeway Service 4 60 50 (J) 20 20 75% I-S Industrial Service 2 30 30 (D) 20 75%  

A.  Corner Lot Front Yard Setback. There shall be maintained a required front yard setback on each street side of a corner lot. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
B.  Off-Street Parking in the Front Yard. Off-street parking may be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard provided that there is a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of twenty feet between the parking lot and the front lot line, exclusive of access driveways. 
C.  Off-Street Parking in the Side and Rear Yard. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the side or rear lot line, except where a greater landscape buffer is required by Section 18.14.020. Where shared access or service drive connections are provided between adjacent sites, the parking lot setback can be reduced or waived. Where a lot borders on a residential district a minimum setback of twenty feet shall be provided on the side bordering the residential district. 
D.  Side Yard Setbacks. No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district adjoining another lot in the business district, with the provision of a fire rated wall as specified in the building code. If side walls of structures contain windows, doors or other openings, a minimum side yard of ten feet shall be provided. 
E.  Building Setback from Residential. No building shall be closer than fifty feet to any adjacent residential district. 
F.  Rear Yard Loading. Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in accordance with Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. Loading areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from any adjacent residentially zoned lot. 
G.  Freeway Setback. A minimum fifty-foot setback shall be provided from freeway rights-of-way. The setback shall be unoccupied except for earth berms, screening walls and landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 18.14.020 and shall be installed to provide an effective screening of outdoor sales areas and to screen any service or loading area of any building from the freeway. 
H.  Stream Setback. All structures shall be a minimum of twenty feet from each side of Norton Creek and any other stream or established county drain unless a greater setback is required in this chapter. 
I.  Lot Coverage. All site improvements, such as buildings, accessory structures, parking lots, drives, public streets and private roads, shall not cover more than seventy-five percent of the total lot area. Total lot area shall be the gross area, including wetland and woodland areas. 
J.  South Wixom Road Setback. Minimum one hundred eighty-foot building and one-hundred-foot parking lot setbacks shall be provided from the centerline of Wixom Road on the east side of Wixom Road between Grand River Avenue and I-96. Minimum one-hundred-thirty-foot building and one-hundred-foot parking lot setbacks shall be provided from the centerline of Wixom Road on the west side of Wixom Road between Grand River Avenue and I-96. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.07 - VILLAGE CENTER AREA DISTRICT 
Sections: 

18.07.010 - Intent. 
    This district is intended to allow for the development of a fully integrated, mixed use, pedestrian-oriented village center area (VCA), as designated on the zoning map. The intent of the VCA district is to minimize traffic congestion, infrastructure costs and environmental degradation by promoting a compact, mixed use, pedestrian-friendly community following smart growth principles. Provisions for the VCA district support traditional neighborhood design principles, which are historically based on urban development from the early colonial times to the 1940s, including, but not limited to: 
A.  Residential neighborhoods, which are interconnected to all development by roadways and pedestrian ways, with an emphasis on making the entire area a more walkable community. 
B.  Housing types and uses that are mixed and developed in close proximity to one another. 
C.  Civic buildings and civic squares, which provide places of assembly for social activities, in prominent locations that act as landmarks, symbols and focal points for community identity. 
D.  Recreation and open space, which is provided throughout the VCA district, with neighborhood greens, landscaped streets, boulevards and parkways woven into roadway and block patterns for the purpose of providing adequate space for social activity, parks and visual enjoyment. 
E.  The location of dwellings, shops and workplaces in close proximity to each other, the scale of which accommodates and promotes pedestrian travel within the community. 
F.  Preservation of open space and natural areas. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.020 - Schedule of uses. 
    Use and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this title. Land and/or buildings in the district indicated at the top of Table 7.02 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations: 
    P: Permitted Use: Land and buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. 
    SLU: Special Land Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for this purpose by obtaining Special Land Use approval when all applicable standards cited in Chapter 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures and specific standards of Section 18.07.040 are met. 
    NP: Not Permitted: The use is not permitted in the district. 
    "Requirement." provides reference to additional requirements or conditions applicable to that specific use. 
Table 7.02 
Schedule of Uses 
Use VCA Requirement Residential One-family detached dwellings P One-family attached dwellings or townhouses P Two-family dwellings or duplexes P Attached townhouse dwellings P Multiple-family dwellings P Senior apartments and senior independent living P Section 18.03.040(J) Live-work units P Dwellings within mixed-use buildings P Section 18.07.040(A) Dwellings and workshop space above garages, provided use of workshop is limited to hobby or permitted home occupation. P Home occupations P Section 18.03.040(L) Retail Businesses Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises, such as but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware Uses up to 60,000 square feet net floor area P Uses 60,000 square feet of net floor area or more SLU Drive through service accessory to a permitted retail business, excluding restaurants SLU Section 18.07.040(B) Open-air business, outdoor display and sales accessory to a permitted retail business, such as nurseries and home improvement items SLU Section 18.07.040(C) Restaurants and Bars Standard sit-down restaurants and taverns without drive-through service SLU Section 18.07.040(D) Restaurants and taverns with outdoor seating SLU Section 18.07.040(D) Section 18.07.040(E) Restaurants with open front windows SLU Section 18.07.040(D) Carry-out restaurants SLU Section 18.07.040(D) Cocktail lounge/night club (not including adult regulated) SLU Section 18.07.040(D) Banquet halls SLU Section 18.07.040(D) Service Uses Service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing home appliance/electronic repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct P Dry cleaning establishments or pick-up stations dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited P Hotels P Bed and breakfast Inns P Section 18.03.040(M) Funeral homes and mortuary establishments SLU Section 18.07.040(F) Personal service establishment including barber shops, beauty shops and health salons P Pet grooming and training with no boarding SLU Office, Financial, Medical and Human Care Uses Offices for executive, administrative, professional, accounting, brokerage, insurance, writing, clerical, drafting and sales uses P Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations with or without drive-through facilities as an accessory use only P Business services such as mailing, copying, data processing and retail office supplies P Conference and meeting facilities P 24-hour emergency medical clinics SLU Medical office and dental offices and clinics P Day care centers for children SLU Section 18.07.040(G) Adult day care homes SLU Section 18.07.040(H) Nursing homes and convalescent homes SLU Section 18.03.040(J) Veterinary clinics, not including animal boarding SLU Institutional, Governmental and Quasi-Public Public, parochial and other private secondary and elementary schools P Business schools and colleges or other similar private schools operated for profit P Churches and other places of worship and other facilities normally incidental thereto, excluding "large-scale churches" P Civic buildings, libraries, parks and civic squares, which provide places of assembly for social activities, in prominent locations that act as landmarks, symbols and focal points for community identity P Governmental offices or other governmental uses, post offices, public utility offices, exchanges and transformer stations P Publicly owned utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations and, water and sewage pumping stations (without storage yards) P Recreational Uses Amusement arcades which provide space for patrons to engage in playing of mechanical amusement devices or similar activities SLU Section 18.07.040(I) Bowling alleys, billiard halls, indoor archery ranges, indoor tennis courts, indoor soccer facilities, indoor skating rinks or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation up to 60,000 square feet gross floor area P Health clubs and related uses including gyms, martial arts instruction, gymnasiums up to 60,000 square feet gross floor area SLU Public or private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers and swimming pool clubs P Social clubs SLU Section 18.07.040(J) Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly with seating capacity up to 1,500 people or parking for not more than 500 vehicles P  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.030 - Requirements applicable to all uses. 
    All uses permitted by right or by special land use approval shall be required to meet the following requirements: 
A.  Dealing Directly with Consumers. All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
B.  Conducted within Enclosed Buildings. All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and approved open air uses, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.040 - Standards applicable to specific uses. 
    Uses allowed in the VCA district shall be subject to meeting the following specific requirements applicable to that use: 
A.  Dwellings Within Mixed-Use Buildings. Dwellings within mixed use buildings that also contain space for commercial or office shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No dwelling units shall occupy any portion of a commercial or office building at ground level or below ground level. A commercial or office business may occupy any number of the total floors. 
2.  In those instances where a residential use is proposed to occupy the same floor as an office or commercial business, the planning commission shall review and approve the mixed-use floor based on findings related to the compatibility of the residential use and the office or commercial business. These findings may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Compatible hours of operation; 
b.  Noise or odors of the operation or occupancy that would be detrimental to the office or commercial business operation, or vice versa; 
c.  Excessive foot traffic. 
3.  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of not less than six hundred square feet. 
4.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 18.15.010 and shall be located in areas within one thousand feet of the dwelling unit for which parking is provided. 
B.  Drive-Through. Drive-through business shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The drive-through facility shall be located on and attached to the rear elevation of the building to minimize visibility from a public or private roadway. 
2.  Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be provided. 
3.  Each drive-through facility shall provide a bypass lane to allow other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served. 
4.  There shall be a minimum of five stacking spaces. 
C.  Open-Air Business. Open-air business uses shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The outdoor display and sales shall be accessory to a principal permitted retail use with a building on the site. 
2.  All outdoor display and sales areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of stormwater without negatively impacting adjacent property. 
3.  Any approved outdoor sales or display within a parking lot shall meet the required parking lot setback; provided the planning commission may require additional landscaping, screening or ornamental fencing. 
4.  Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent dust or blowing of materials. 
D.  Restaurants. Restaurants shall be designed to minimize any impact from noise and odors on nearby residential uses. This may include limiting hours of operation, noise insulation, enclosed storage of waste receptacles and ventilation filters. Outdoor restaurants and cafes shall also be subject to the requirements of subsection E of this section. 
E.  Outdoor Restaurants and Cafes. Outdoor restaurants and cafes shall be subject to the following requirements, in addition to subsection D of this section: 
1.  An outdoor restaurant or cafe may be set up and used during the months of April through October. 
2.  A site drawing showing a detailed plan of the outdoor restaurant or cafe shall be administratively approved by the city. The city will review the site plan in order to ensure the following traffic and pedestrian safety measures: 
a.  Any sidewalk or open space used for the outdoor restaurant or cafe is immediately adjacent to the applicant restaurant, provided that the cafe may be separated from the restaurant by the main pedestrian walkway along the public sidewalk. 
b.  The use of a sidewalk or open space for the outdoor restaurant or cafe allows a minimum pedestrian walkway of five feet. 
c.  Any tables, chairs, umbrellas or other equipment shall not extend into or over the five-foot wide pedestrian walkway, and there shall be no barriers to pedestrian visibility. The number, size and location of tables, chairs and equipment shall be administratively approved by the city. 
d.  If alcohol is to be served in conjunction with the proposed outdoor restaurant or cafe, barriers designating the service area, as required by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, will be utilized. If no alcohol is to be served, a barrier approved by the city will be utilized between the service area and the pedestrian right-of-way. 
3.  The outdoor restaurant or cafe must be part of a licensed full service restaurant and it must meet all of the requirements of, and secure all of the necessary permits from, the Oakland County Health Department and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
4.  Liability insurance and property damage coverage, naming the city of Wixom as an insured party, in an amount approved by the city, must be provided before an outdoor restaurant or cafe may be set up. 
5.  Final approval by the appropriate city department is required for any seating placed within the public right-of-way. 
F.  Funeral Homes. Funeral homes and mortuary establishments shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Adequate off-street assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. The assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. 
2.  A caretaker's residence may be provided within the building of mortuary establishments. 
G.  Day Care Centers. Day care centers for children shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The facility shall have received a state license to operate prior to seeking a special use permit under this title. A copy of the license must be filed with the building department as a condition of special land use approval. 
2.  Not less than four hundred square feet of outdoor play area per child, (as authorized by the license issued to the applicant by the Department of Human Services), shall be provided on the site. 
3.  The outdoor play area shall not be located in the front yard. 
4.  Screening and fencing of the outdoor play area shall be provided as required by the planning commission. 
5.  Parking shall be provided to allow for direct drop-off and pick-up of children without requiring children to cross streets. 
H.  Adult Day Care Homes. Day care homes for elderly adults shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No more than six persons, other than full-time occupants of the dwelling, may be cared for in any one dwelling. 
2.  Certification shall be provided from the Michigan Association of Day Care Providers to ensure safety and quality of care. 
3.  Day care facilities shall not provide nursing or medical care. 
I.  Amusement Arcades. Amusement arcades which provide space for patrons to engage in playing of electronic and mechanical amusement devices or similar activities shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to county primary streets and shall have the entrance to both the business and parking area for such establishment on the county primary street. Access from a side or residential street shall be prohibited. 
2.  The provisions of Chapter 5.16 of the Municipal Code shall be complied with and shall be reflected on the site for the proposed use. 
J.  Social Clubs. Social clubs shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The facility shall be located no nearer than five hundred feet to any residence, public or private school, day care facility or church; 
2.  The outdoor use of loudspeakers, sound amplifying systems or paging systems shall be prohibited; 
3.  Appropriate licenses shall be required should alcoholic beverages be served. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.050 - Height and placement requirements. 
    Table 7.05 delineates the height, bulk, and setback requirements pertaining to the type of building. Notes to the schedule of regulations follow. 
Table 7.05 
Schedule of VCA Regulations 
One/Two-Family Residential Dwellings Attached Townhouse Dwellings Mixed-Use, Apartment and Nonresidential Buildings Lot area 5,000 sq. ft. minimum lot area 3,600 sq. ft. min. for lots with rear alley There is no required min. lot area Lot width 55-ft. min. lot width; 36 ft. min. lot width for lots with driveway access to a rear alley There is no required min. lot width Max. 250 ft. building length There is no required min. lot width Residential density 10 units/acre max. 25 units/acre max. Apartment (residential only) 25 units/acre max. Dwellings above the first floor in commercial/mixed-use buildings: 30 units/acre max. Front yard and building frontage requirements 14-ft. min. front yard setback. Corner lots shall provide front yard setbacks from both frontages. 10-ft. min. front yard setback. Corner lots shall provide front yard setbacks from both frontages. Zero front yard setback; 5-ft. max. front yard. The building facade shall be built to within 5 ft. of the front lot line for a min. of 60% of the street frontage length. (A, B, C) Wixom Road setback 80-ft. min. from centerline of Wixom Road 80-ft. min. from centerline of Wixom Road 60-ft. min. and 70-ft. max. from centerline of Wixom Road Side yard 5-ft. min. side yard setback with a total of 12 ft. on both sides; a total of 10 ft. on both sides where garage access is from a rear alley No side yard between units 20-ft. min. setback from one-family lot and 20 ft. spacing between groups of buildings A zero side setback may be permitted where a fire wall is provided along the side lot line. Where a fire wall is not provided, buildings shall be spaced a min. of 10 ft. Rear yard 16-ft. min. rear yard setback for principal buildings 16-ft. min. rear yard setback for principal buildings 16-ft. min. rear yard setback. Building height 2 stories min. 3 stories max. 35-ft. max. building height 2 stories min. 3 stories max. 35-ft. max. building height 20-ft. min. building height 55-ft./5 stories max. building height The first story shall be a min. of 14 ft. in height  

A.  Mixed Use, Apartment and Nonresidential Buildings Front Yard Building Setback Exceptions. All mixed use, apartment and nonresidential buildings shall have sixty percent of the length of the ground level street-facing building facade built within five feet of the front lot line. Exceptions are permitted to allow a greater amount of the building to be setback when the front yard area, or forecourt, is used for one or more purposes listed below: 
1.  Widening the sidewalk along the frontage of the building; 
2.  Providing a public gathering area or plaza that offers seating, landscape enhancements, public information and displays, fountains, or other pedestrian amenities; 
3.  Accommodating an inset entranceway to the building; 
4.  Providing outdoor seating for the proposed use; 
5.  The building is used for public or quasi-public/institutional purposes with a plaza or open space area provided in the front yard; 
6.  Driveway or pedestrian access to parking at the rear of the building; 
7.  Side yard parking along no more than forty percent of the frontage subject to the requirements of subsection B of this section; 
8.  Where older residential structures have been converted to a nonresidential or mixed use and are to be retained. 

B.  Parking. Parking lots shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Parking is permitted only in side and rear yards. When parking is located in a side yard (behind the front building line) and has frontage on a public right-of-way, no more than forty percent of the total site's frontage shall be occupied by parking. Parking in the side yard shall be screened by a three-foot tall brick screen wall between the sidewalk and the parking lot. The planning commission may permit a hedge row or ornamental wrought iron fence instead of a brick wall. 
2.  Where a parking deck is provided or parking is located on the ground level below a building, at least sixty percent of the site's frontage shall be occupied by usable building space to a depth of at least twenty feet. 
3.  Parking lot design shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. Because the regulations of this section are intended to encourage pedestrian/transit friendly design and compact mixed-use development that requires less reliance on automobiles, the amount of parking required by Chapter 18.15 may be reduced by thirty percent. 
4.  Where parking is visible from a street, it shall be screened by a three-foot tall brick screen wall located between the parking lot and the sidewalk. The planning commission may permit a hedge row or ornamental wrought iron, or similar ornamental fence instead of a brick wall. Where a parking lot for a nonresidential use is adjacent to a residential use, a six-foot tall brick screen wall shall be provided between the parking lot, including drives, and the residential use instead of the greenbelt required by Section 18.14.020. Where the commercial parking lot is separated from the residential use by an alley, then the screen wall may be reduced to three feet in height; provided however, the planning commission may also require a six-foot tall brick wall on the residential side of the alley. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided as required by Section 18.14.020, except the area of landscape islands and number of parking lot trees may be reduced to one-half the normal requirement for parking that is located in the rear yard. 

C.  Civic Uses. Sites developed with civic uses such as schools, churches, libraries, government offices and parks require specific architectural treatment and design that is unique from other uses. The planning commission may permit modifications to the dimensional and building height requirements as part of the site plan review. In considering the modifications, the planning commission shall determine that the design of the building, location of the building and parking, and the relationship of the site design to the streetscape and adjacent buildings are in keeping with the intended character of the Wixom village center area. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.060 - Commercial architectural requirements. 
    Nonresidential buildings and mixed use buildings (with residential in upper floors) shall meet the following architectural design requirements: 
A.  Building Types Permitted. Nonresidential and mixed use buildings shall be designed with traditional styles of architecture characteristic of a Midwestern small town as outlined in the city of Wixom design guidelines. Buildings shall front onto the sidewalk with windows, doors, and architectural detailing customary of traditional storefronts, and contain varying materials and appearances. 
B.  Front Facade Requirements. Walls that face a public street shall include windows and architectural features customarily found on the front of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing or decorative finish materials. 
1.  Blank walls shall not face a public street; 
2.  Entrances. 
a.  All buildings shall have a main entrance that is located on at least one street front. 
b.  The entrance to the sidewalk shall be usable and all retail and service uses shall maintain a customer entrance to the sidewalk. 
c.  Entrances for upper story offices or residential units shall be to the sidewalk. 
d.  Main entrances shall have design details that enhance the appearance and prominence of the entrance so that it is recognizable from the street and parking areas. 
e.  For buildings longer than one hundred feet, there shall be a minimum of one usable entrance every full fifty feet of frontage along the front public sidewalk and shall provide architectural variation to visually break the building up. 
f.  For office service uses, entrance must be on the first floor of the building. 

C.  Corner Buildings. Buildings situated at a corner shall possess a level of architectural design that incorporates accents and details that accentuate its prominent location. This can be accomplished through height projections incorporated into a design feature such as additional height, a building peak, tower, or similar accent with the highest point located at the intersecting corner. Alternatively, a pedestrian plaza may be provided at the corner of the intersecting streets. A main entrance must be on a street-facing wall and either at the corner or within twenty-five feet of the corner. 
D.  Building Materials. The following exterior finish materials are required on the front facade and any facade facing a street or parking area. These requirements do not include areas devoted to windows and doors. 
1.  All walls exposed to public view from the street or parking area shall be constructed of not less than sixty percent brick or stone. Panel brick and tilt-up brick textured paneling shall not be permitted. 
2.  The remaining facade may include wood or fiber cement siding. Exterior finish insulation systems (EFIS) may be used for architectural detailing above the first floor. Vinyl siding may be used on walls above the height of eight feet. 
3.  Buildings that have upper stories shall be designed to create a distinct and separated ground floor area through the use of accent such as a cornice, change in material or textures, or an awning or canopy between the first and second stories. 
E.  Windows and Doors. 
1.  Storefront/Ground Floor. Storefronts shall have windows, doorways and signage, which are integrally designed and painted. No less than seventy percent of the storefront/ground floor facade shall be clear glass panels and doorway. Glass areas on storefronts shall be clear or lightly tinted. Mirrored glass is prohibited. Required window areas shall be either windows that allow views into retail space, working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall. Windows shall not be blocked with opaque materials or the back of shelving units or signs. The bottom of the window must be no more than three feet above the adjacent exterior grade. 
2.  Entranceway. The front entranceway shall be inset a minimum of three feet but not less than six inches greater than the entrance door swing from the front building wall. 
3.  Upper Story. Openings above the first story shall be a maximum of fifty percent of the total facade area. Windows shall be vertical in proportion. 
F.  Roof Design. 
1.  Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, buildings should have flat roof appearance from the street with a decorative cornice that is designed proportionate to the size of the building and length of the wall. 
2.  The planning commission may permit a pitched roof, but mansard roofs shall not be permitted on single story buildings. Pitched and mansard roofs shall not be permitted with eaves below a height of twenty feet. All roof edges shall be accentuated in a manner proportionate to the size of the building and length of the wall. 
3.  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets. 
4.  All rooftop-mounted equipment shall be screened from view on all sides of the building. 
5.  Parapets and other screening treatment shall use high quality building materials and shall blend with the design of the building in terms of color, materials, scale and height. 
G.  Awnings. Storefronts may be supplemented by awnings, which give shade and shelter or add color and visual interest to the entry or display window of the storefront, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  Awnings may project over the public sidewalk with a minimum eight-foot clearance provided from the sidewalk, but must be a minimum of five feet from the street curb. 
2.  Awnings shall be positioned immediately above the ground floor window area of the facade and have a straight shed that projects from the building at a straight angle with open sides. 
3.  Awnings shall be constructed of a durable material such as canvas or other similar material approved by the building official that will not fade or tear easily. Plasticized, vinyl, rigid, cubed or curved awnings or mansard style canopies are prohibited. 
4.  Awnings shall not be internally illuminated and any signs may only be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed downward. 
5.  Awnings must be installed in accordance with building code requirements. 

H.  Converted Dwellings. Where buildings that were originally constructed for one-family residential purposes have been converted to nonresidential uses, the building design requirements of this subsection may be modified by the city where consistent with the historic character of the building. Such modifications may include allowing the use of siding in lieu of masonry materials and residential fenestration (windows) in lieu of the requirement for storefront windows on the first floor. The building shall be brought into compliance with the building code. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.070 - Residential architectural requirements. 
    Townhouses and one/two-family residential dwellings shall meet the following architectural design requirements: 
A.  Building Design. Residential buildings shall utilize high-quality traditional architecture, such as but not limited to: Arts and Crafts, Colonial, Gothic Revival, Italianate, Tudor, Victorian and other traditional styles characteristic of the Midwestern United States. 
B.  Building Elevations. As part of a subdivision, condominium or multiple-family site plan application, typical elevations shall be approved by the planning commission as part of the development's design guidelines or pattern book. 
C.  Front Facade. All residential units shall provide a pedestrian door facing the front lot line. 
1.  All dwellings shall include a front porch with steps. The porch shall have a minimum depth of six feet and a minimum area of seventy-two square feet. A stoop or porch (plus steps) shall not extend any nearer than three feet to the sidewalk in front of the lot. 
2.  The first floor elevation shall be no less than twenty-four inches above the exterior sidewalk elevation in front of the building. Ramps for accessibility are permitted to encroach into the front yard setback. 
3.  The front facade of all residential units shall be at least fifteen percent windows or doors. 

D.  Building Material. All buildings shall utilize high-quality building materials that are in keeping with traditional architectural styles. Permitted wall materials include, brick, stone, wood, and fiber cement siding. Vinyl siding may be permitted only above the first floor. 
E.  Accessory Buildings. Detached garages shall be located in the rear yard and may be accessed by a rear alley or in one-family dwellings by a driveway that runs from the front yard to the rear along the side of the dwelling. Detached garages and other accessory buildings located in the rear yard shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the rear and side lot lines and ten feet from the main building. Accessory buildings and structures shall be subject to the regulations of Section 18.13.010; except accessory buildings may be up to two stories, and twenty feet in height. If an accessory apartment is proposed within an accessory building, a permit shall be required from the city for the installation of a bathroom or kitchen. 
F.  Attached Garages. Attached garages may only be permitted on the rear side of the building where the garage is accessed from a rear alley. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.080 - Modifications to architectural requirements. 
    The planning commission may approve deviations to the architectural requirements of Sections 18.07.060 and 18.07.070 in order to allow for creativity and flexibility in development and design. Each deviation shall require a finding that the design standard sought to be deviated from would, if no deviation was permitted, prohibit an enhancement that would be in the public interest. A front elevation drawing of the proposed building shall be provided superimposed on a color drawing or photograph of the entire block and adjacent blocks in both directions showing the relation of the proposed building design to other buildings along the street, which shall be utilized to evaluate the proposed building design based upon all of the following criteria: 
A.  Innovations in architectural design may be permitted, provided the building design shall be in keeping with the desired character of the village center area, as articulated in the city of Wixom master plan and the city of Wixom VCA design guidelines. 
B.  The building shall be oriented towards the front sidewalk and maintain or enhance the continuity of the pedestrian-oriented environment. A modification shall not result in an increased dominance of vehicular parking or garage doors along the front of the building. 
C.  The roof design shall not be out of character with other buildings along the block and shall be within the minimum and maximum height requirements of the district. 
D.  The exterior finish materials shall be of equal or better quality and durability as those permitted herein, with the intent to allow for new technologies in building material while maintaining the desired character of the village center area. 
E.  Ground floor windows shall be provided along the front sidewalk to maintain the pedestrian orientation of the streetscape, and upper story windows shall not be incompatible with the rhythm and proportions of windows on other buildings along the block. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.07.090 - Streetscape design requirements. 
A.  Street Design Standards. All streets shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the city of Wixom, including the city engineering design standards and the VCA design guidelines, except as provided for in this section. 
1.  Streets shall meet city requirements for roadway width, except bump-outs may be permitted at intersections, crosswalks and at intermediate points along long blocks to enhance pedestrian safety. 
2.  New residential streets shall have a minimum width of twenty-seven feet, measured back of curb to back of curb. 
3.  The width of new streets serving retail, commercial services and office uses shall be determined by the city based upon traffic volumes, number of lanes and demand for on-street parking. 

B.  Traffic Calming. The use of traffic calming devices such as raised intersections, lateral shifts, and traffic circles are encouraged as alternatives to conventional traffic control measures. Whenever a conflict exists between design priority for pedestrian usage and vehicular level of service, the conflict shall be resolved in favor of the pedestrian; provided the design results in the safest possible design for both vehicles and pedestrians. 
C.  Sidewalks. 
1.  Sidewalks along the frontage of nonresidential buildings shall be a minimum of fourteen feet wide concrete or brick pavers and provided consistently on both sides of the street. The planning commission may allow the sidewalk width to be reduced to not less than eight feet for frontages that will not be occupied by uses having sidewalk cafes. 
2.  Sidewalks along the frontage of residential buildings shall be a minimum of five feet wide concrete and provided on both sides of the street. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be seven feet wide where abutting a parking space or a road curb. 
D.  Street Trees. One canopy tree shall be provided for every forty feet of frontage, planted within planters, tree grates within the sidewalk, or within a five-foot wide green planting strip located between the curb and sidewalk. 
E.  Street Lights. Pedestrian level street lighting of a decorative nature shall be installed along all sidewalks and parking areas and shall be designed to promote the traditional neighborhood character of the area. 
1.  Light fixtures shall meet the specification in the city of Wixom VCA design guidelines. 
2.  Pedestrian level lighting fixtures shall not exceed sixteen feet in height and shall be placed along the sidewalks and parking areas in accordance with the city engineering standards. Eighteen-foot tall double arm light fixtures may be permitted adjacent to intersections. 
3.  Street lighting for vehicular traffic, in addition to, or in combination with, pedestrian level lighting may be required. In the event that vehicular traffic street lighting is required, such lighting shall be installed in accordance with the city engineering standards. 
4.  Building wall and freestanding exterior lighting shall be directed downward in order to reduce the glare onto adjacent properties and streets. 
F.  Alleys. Alleys shall be permitted in all areas of the village center area and shall be required where necessary to provide access to parking lots, loading areas and garages on the rear of dwelling units. 
1.  Alleys serving as access to residential garages shall have a minimum pavement width of eighteen feet and be located within a twenty-five-foot wide easement. 
2.  Alleys accessing commercial parking lots and loading areas shall have a minimum width of twenty-four feet. 
G.  Maximum Block Size. The maximum length of any block shall be nine hundred feet and the maximum perimeter of any block shall be two thousand six hundred forty feet. Larger blocks may be allowed by the planning commission where there is recreational land or natural features that make road crossings impractical and where the police and fire departments determine that street connectivity will still provide for adequate emergency response. 
H.  Street Connections. The village center area shall be developed as an integrated area with an interconnected street network. Street connections shall be provided to all adjacent parcels. The use of cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets shall be prohibited. In locations where it is not possible to provide a through street, the planning commission may allow a looped drive with a common green in the center. The circular drive around the green shall be at least twenty feet wide, measured face to face of curb. The green shall be no less than forty feet at its narrowest dimension. 
I.  Street Furniture. Benches and trash receptacles shall be provided in park and plaza areas and along sidewalks where the planning commission determines that pedestrian activity will benefit from these facilities in accordance with the VCA design standards. 
J.  Bicycle Facilities. Developments shall be designed to accommodate bicycle travel, including the provision of bike paths and bike racks at destination points such as shopping and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.08 - OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

18.08.010 - Intent. 
A.  OS-1 Office Service District. The OS-1 office service district is designed to accommodate uses such as offices, banks and personal services that can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts, and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
B.  IRO Industrial Research Office District. The IRO industrial research office district is designed to provide for uses that are office or research type or industrial uses that have limited impact outside of the industrial building. The IRO district is designed to accommodate large-scale office and research and development parks. The district is intended to encourage uses that have a high value per acre of land which will supplement the city's tax base. Certain businesses are permitted within office buildings as secondary uses. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.08.020 - Schedule of uses. 
    Use and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this title. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of Table 8.02 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations: 
    P: Permitted Use: Land and buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. 
    SLU: Special Land Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for this purpose by obtaining Special Land Use approval when all applicable standards cited in Chapter 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures and specific standards of Section 18.08.040 are met. 
    NP: Not Permitted: The use is not permitted in the district. 
    "Requirement" provides reference to additional requirements or conditions applicable to that specific use. 
Table 8.02 
Schedule of Uses 
Use OS-1 IRO Requirement Office Uses Conference centers, convention and meeting facilities, and banquet halls P P Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment P P Design and development of computer hardware and software, data communications, information technology, data processing and other computer related services. P P Offices for executive, administrative, professional, accounting, brokerage, insurance, writing, clerical, drafting and sales uses P P Research, design, engineering, testing, diagnostics and pilot or experimental product development, including automotive, electronic device, manufacturing, materials and alternative energy technologies SLU P Medical and Human Care Uses Adult day care homes SLU P Section 18.03.040(I) Day care centers SLU P Section 18.08.040(A) Funeral homes and mortuary establishments SLU NP Section 18.08.040(B) 24-hour emergency medical clinics SLU P Hospitals SLU P Medical laboratories SLU P Medical office and dental offices and clinics P P Nursing homes and convalescent homes SLU NP Section 18.08.040(C) Veterinary clinics, provided there shall be no animal boarding in OS-1 P P Commercial, Retail and Service Uses Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations with or without drive-through facilities as an accessory use only P P Business services such as mailing, copying, data processing and retail office supplies SLU P Health clubs and related uses including gyms, martial arts instruction, gymnasiums SLU P Motels or hotels NP P Restaurants, taverns or other places serving food or beverage but not including outdoor seating, drive-in/fast food, carry-out or drive-through restaurants SLU SLU Section 18.08.040(D) Retail businesses within an office building SLU SLU Section 18.08.040(E) Social clubs SLU NP Section 18.08.040(F) Governmental, Educational and Quasi-Public Governmental offices or other governmental uses, post offices, public utility offices, exchanges and transformer stations P P Publicly owned utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations gas regulator stations with service yards but without storage yards, and water and sewage pumping stations (without storage yards) P P Vocational, business, trade or industrial training schools and other types of technical training facilities P P Manufacturing Uses The manufacture, processing, compounding, assembling, packaging or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared materials NP P Printing and publishing NP P Transportation, Warehouse, Storage and Waste Handling Uses Uses of an office warehouse nature provided a minimum of 25% of the floor area shall be devoted to office space NP P Accessory Uses Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot with a permitted use P P  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.08.030 - Requirements applicable to all uses. 
    All uses permitted by right or by special land use approval shall be required to meet the following requirements: 
A.  Conducted Within Enclosed Buildings. All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and approved open air uses shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. There shall be no outside storage of materials or supplies. 
B.  Storage and Loading. 
1.  The outdoor storage of goods or material is prohibited. 
2.  In the OS-1 district, warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incidental to the uses permitted, shall be prohibited. 
3.  In the IRO district the outdoor loading and unloading of trucks or vehicles at truck bays is allowed; however, loading and unloading shall not require the outdoor parking of trucks or trailers for periods of longer than twenty-four hours. Outdoor parking of trucks or trailers for periods longer than twenty-four hours shall be considered storage. 
4.  In the OS-1 district the outdoor loading and unloading of trucks or trailers is allowed only for deliveries to uses. There shall be no truck parking beyond the time necessary to make deliveries. 
C.  Site and Building Design. All sites and buildings shall comply with the building, landscaping and all other design requirements of Chapter 18.14, General Site Development Requirements. All uses shall comply with the parking, loading and access requirements of Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.08.040 - Standards applicable to specific uses. 
    Uses allowed in the office and research districts shall be subject to meeting the following specific requirements applicable to that use: 
A.  Day Care Centers. Day care centers for children shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The facility shall have received a state license to operate prior to seeking a special use permit under this title. A copy of the license must be filed with the building department as a condition of special land use approval. 
2.  Not less than four hundred square feet of outdoor play area per child, (as authorized by the license issued to the applicant by the Department of Human Services), shall be provided on the site. 
3.  The outdoor play area shall not be located in the front yard. 
4.  Screening and fencing of outdoor play area shall be provided as required by the planning commission. 
5.  Parking shall be provided to allow for direct drop-off and pick-up of children without requiring children to cross public streets or block traffic flow on the street. 
B.  Funeral Homes. Funeral homes and mortuary establishments shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Adequate off-street assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. The assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. 
2.  A caretaker's residence may be provided within the building of mortuary establishments. 
C.  Nursing Homes and Convalescent Homes. Nursing homes and convalescent homes shall be set back a minimum of forty feet from all lot lines. 
D.  Restaurants. Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The restaurant shall be located within an office structure or motel building. The total area devoted to retail, services and restaurants shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total floor area of the building. 
2.  In the IRO district a restaurant may be located in a freestanding building as part of an overall industrial or office park subject to the following: 
a.  The restaurant shall be planned as a part of an overall plan for development of not less than thirty acres and shall be part of a service establishment complex for the development. 
b.  The restaurant shall comprise not more than twenty percent of the land area of an overall office park. 
c.  The location of the restaurant shall be established at the time of site plan review and approval for the total office park complex. 
d.  There shall be no more than one restaurant in a freestanding building per office park. 
3.  Drive-in or drive-through restaurants shall be prohibited. 
E.  Retail Establishments Within an Office Building. Retail uses shall be permitted in buildings that exceed one story in height as secondary uses to the principal permitted office uses, and shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Such uses shall not be permitted in a one-story building or in a building separate from a permitted principal use unless otherwise provided herein. 
2.  The total area devoted to retail, services and restaurants shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total floor area of the building. 
3.  All uses shall have customer entrances from the interior of the principal building in which they are located. 
4.  In the OS-1 district, accessory retail use shall be limited to retail uses that are customarily related to a permitted medical use, such as but not limited to: a pharmacy, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical services. 
F.  Social Clubs. Social clubs shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The facility shall be located no nearer than five hundred feet to any residence, park, public or private school, day care facility, convalescent/nursing home or church. 
2.  The outdoor use of loudspeakers, sound amplifying systems or paging systems shall be prohibited. 
3.  Appropriate licenses shall be required should alcoholic beverages be served. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.08.050 - Height and placement requirements. 
    Table 8.05 delineates the height, bulk, and setback requirements pertaining to the zoning districts regulated by this chapter. Notes to the schedule of regulations follow. 
Table 8.05 
Schedule of Commercial Regulations 
Zoning District Maximum Height of Structure Minimum Yard Setback (In Feet) (C, D, F, G) Maximum % of Lot Area Covered by Impervious Surfaces (I) In Stories In Feet Front (A, B) Each Side (C) Rear (E) OS-1 Office Service 2 30 20 15 20 75% IRO Industrial Research Office - 50 (H) 50 20 40 75%  
A.  Corner Lot Front Yard Setback. There shall be maintained a required front yard setback on each street side of a corner lot. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
B.  Off-Street Parking in the Front Yard. Off-street parking may be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard provided that there is a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of twenty feet between the parking lot and the front lot line, exclusive of access driveways. No more than fifty percent of the front yard area shall be occupied by parking. 
C.  Off-Street Parking in the Side and Rear Yard. Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the side or rear lot line, except where a greater landscape buffer is required by Section 18.14.020. Where shared access or service drive connections are provided between adjacent sites, the parking lot setback can be reduced or waived. Where a lot borders on a residential district a minimum setback of twenty feet shall be provided on the side bordering the residential district. 
D.  Building Setback from Residential. No building shall be closer than fifty feet to any adjacent residential district. 
E.  Rear Yard Loading. Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in accordance with Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. In the OS-1 district loading may take place in undesignated places in parking lots provided such loading is of a short-term nature. Loading areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from any adjacent residentially zoned lot. 
F.  Freeway Setback. A minimum fifty-foot setback shall be provided from freeway rights-of-way. The setback shall be unoccupied except for earth berms, screening walls and landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 18.14.020 and shall be installed to provide an effective screening of outdoor sales and storage areas and to screen any service or loading area of any building from the freeway. 
G.  Stream Setback. All structures shall be a minimum of twenty feet from each side of Norton Creek and any other stream or established county drain unless a greater setback is required in this chapter. 
H.  IRO Building Height. The maximum building height in the IRO district may be increased to one hundred fifteen feet with the provision of additional setbacks as follows. For buildings or portions of buildings that are taller than fifty feet, the minimum required building setbacks from the front, side and rear lot lines shall be increased by one foot for every one foot of building height above fifty feet. For a building or complex of multiple buildings that have variable building heights, the additional setback requirements shall only apply to those buildings or portions of a building taller than fifty feet; allowing for taller portions of buildings to be stepped-back. 
I.  Lot Coverage. All site improvements, such as buildings, accessory structures, parking lots, drives, public streets and private roads, shall not cover more than seventy-five percent of the total lot area. Total lot area shall be the gross area, including wetland and woodland areas. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.09 - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

18.09.010 - Intent. 
A.  The general intent of the industrial districts is to provide for a range of industrial and office development divided into two districts that are appropriately located in the city for the following specific purposes: 
1.  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the municipality's expected future economy for certain types of research, office, industrial, warehouse, manufacturing and related uses; 
2.  To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing, warehousing and related activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development; 
3.  To promote research, office and light industrial development that is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences; 
4.  To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with the city of Wixom master plan while protecting the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area conserving the value of land and buildings and other structures to protect the municipality's tax revenue base. 
B.  M-1 Light Industrial District. The M-1 light industrial district is designed primarily to accommodate research and development, corporate office and light industrial uses, including wholesale activities, warehouses and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The M-1 district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is further intended that the processing of raw material or shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted. 
C.  M-2 General Industrial District. The M-2 general industrial district is designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including large-scale or specialized industrial operations whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The M-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.09.020 - Schedule of uses. 
    Use and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this title. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of Table 9.02 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations: 
    P: Permitted Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. 
    SLU: Special Land Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for this purpose by obtaining Special Land Use approval when all applicable standards cited in Chapter 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures and specific standards of Section 18.09.040 are met. 
    NP: Not Permitted: The use is not permitted in the district. 
    "Requirement" provides reference to additional requirements or conditions applicable to that specific use. 
Table 9.02 
Schedule of Uses 
Use M-1 M-2 Requirement Manufacturing Uses The manufacture, processing, compounding, assembling, packaging or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared materials P P Heavy industrial uses such as blast furnaces, steel furnaces, blooming or rolling mills, smelting of copper, iron, or zinc ore, chemicals, and allied products manufacturing, lumber, and planing mills, manufacture of corrosive acid, or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris and petroleum, or other flammable liquids, production, refining, or storage SLU SLU Section 18.09.040(A) Printing and publishing P P Transportation, Warehouse, Storage and Waste Handling Uses Airports SLU SLU Section 18.09.040(B) Commercial composting facilities NP SLU Section 18.09.040(C) Garbage, refuse and rubbish transfer stations and incineration of garbage or refuse NP SLU Section 18.09.040(D) Mini warehouses and storage buildings for lease to the public including the office and dwelling of a caretaker SLU P Section 18.09.040(E) Outdoor storage of trucks, trailers, equipment, supplies, materials, finished and semi-finished products, building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, contractor's equipment, and supplies and recreational equipment SLU SLU Section 18.09.040(F) Uses of an office warehouse nature P P Warehouse, distribution and wholesale establishments P P Office and R&D Uses Design and development of computer hardware and software, data communications, information technology, data processing and other computer-related services. P P Hospitals, medical clinics and medical offices SLU NP Laboratories P P Office buildings for executive, administrative, clerical, drafting and sales P P Research, design, engineering, testing, diagnostics and pilot or experimental product development, including automotive, electronic device, manufacturing, materials and alternative energy technologies P P Veterinary clinics, including animal boarding P P Commercial Retail and Service Uses Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations with or without drive-through facilities as an accessory use only SLU NP Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such plants shall not deal directly with retail customers P P Commercial kennels P P Commercial recreation establishments, arenas and stadiums SLU NP Section 18.09.040(J) Greenhouses and garden/landscape supplies wholesale and retail sales P P Major automotive repair businesses such as engine rebuilding, paint and body shops, undercoating, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles and collision service SLU SLU Section 18.09.040(G) Retail sales of: building/lumber/home improvement supply, stone, farm implements, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, boats, jet skis, mowing equipment, trucks, construction equipment and similar materials, including accessory outdoor sales and display SLU NP Section 18.09.040(H) Personal service establishments, such as but not limited to repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops, laundries or dry cleaners, printing or photographic reproductions, photographic, art or interior decorating studios NP NP Race tracks (including midget auto and karting tracks) and courses for motorcycles and off-road vehicles SLU NP Section 18.09.040(I) Truck, automobile and equipment sales, rentals, storage, repair and towing services SLU NP Truck stops NP SLU Section 18.09.040(K) Public and Institutional Uses Commercial television and radio towers and public utility microwaves, and public utility TV transmitting towers P P Section 18.09.040(L) Conference centers, convention and meeting facilities and banquet halls P P Day care centers for children P P Heating and electric power generating plants SLU P Municipal buildings and uses; and public utility buildings, structures and uses including the following: P P 1. Telephone exchange buildings 2. Electrical transformer stations and substations 3. Gas regulator stations 4. Water treatment plants, reservoirs, sewage treatment and disposal plants 5. Water supply and gas tank holders Vocational, business, trade or industrial training schools and other types of technical training facilities P P Accessory Uses Retail uses accessory to wholesale and manufacturing establishments P P Section 18.09.040(M) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot with a permitted use P P  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.09.030 - Requirements applicable to all uses. 
A.  Uses Within Buildings. All industrial uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for outdoor storage as permitted and approved under this chapter. 
B.  Performance Standards. All uses shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards set forth in Section 18.12.130. 
C.  Site Plan Approval. All uses shall receive site plan approval by the planning commission prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
D.  Building Materials. All buildings visible from public streets and adjacent residential and commercial districts and uses shall be in accordance with Section 18.14.010. 
E.  Truck Storage in M-1 District. A maximum of one truck or trailer per loading dock or overhead door may be permitted in the M-1 district when accessory to the principal use of the building. Such vehicles must be stored in the rear or interior side yard and screened from streets and adjoining property in accordance with Section 18.14.020. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.09.040 - Standards applicable to specific uses. 
    Uses allowed in the industrial districts shall be subject to the following specific requirements applicable to that use. Uses shall require approval by the planning commission except for certain uses requiring city council approval as specified below: 
A.  Heavy Industrial Uses. Chemicals and allied products manufacturing, lumber and planing mills, primary metal industries including blast furnaces, steel furnaces, blooming, rolling mills, smelting of copper, iron, or zinc ore, manufacture of corrosive acid, or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris and petroleum, or other flammable liquids, production, refining, or storage shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The site shall be located in the M-2 district or on an M-1 site that abuts the M-2 districts, but does not adjoin a nonindustrial district. 
2.  The site shall be located a minimum of eight hundred feet from any residential district and three hundred feet from any other nonindustrial district. 
3.  The operation shall be subject to appropriate measures to control the type of processes to prevent noxious results or nuisances, in accordance with section 18.12.130. 
B.  Airports. Airports and heliports may be allowed with approval by the city council, after recommendation of the planning commission, subject to the following: 
1.  An airport shall not be located at the edge of an industrial district where it would abut land zoned or planned for residential use. 
2.  The use shall provide maximum compatibility to abutting uses and to the planned future uses as designated in the city of Wixom master plan for the immediate area. 
3.  Runway location and/or extension shall be reviewed relative to effects on residential areas. 
4.  Buildings and structures shall comply with all setback requirements of the M-1 district and shall be set back from all runways in accord with all Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
5.  Traffic and parking for the proposed use shall be reviewed by the city engineer to ensure the adequacy of facilities. Parking locations for visitors will be required off the public right-of-way. 
C.  Commercial Composting Facilities. Commercial composting facilities shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The site shall have a minimum area of twenty acres; 
2.  Access to the facility shall be directly to a major thoroughfare with a planned right-of-way of one hundred twenty feet; 
3.  Stacking area for a minimum of five vehicles must be provided on site. Any area used for parking or unloading packaged compostable materials must be screened with a six-foot enclosure to prevent plastic or paper bagging materials from leaving the unloading area; 
4.  Active composting operations and storage of compostable and composted materials shall not take place closer than one hundred fifty feet from any boundary of the facility site. The setback from active composting and storage of compostable and composted materials shall be increased to five hundred feet from the boundary of any land zoned or used for residential purposes; 
5.  Individual windrows within the composting facility may not exceed six feet in height and ten feet in width as measured from the base. No portion of the composting mound shall be clearly visible from adjacent road rights-of-way; 
6.  Any composting facility operation shall be conducted in accordance with current standards established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Department of Agriculture, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and other applicable government regulatory agencies. A composting facility designed for anaerobic composting shall not be permitted. Storing, discharging or depositing sewage, human wastes, wash water, garbage or other wastes shall be done in a manner which does not transmit disease. Depositing, storing or disposing of garbage, manure or any other wastes shall not attract vermin, insects or other pests or allow the wastes to become a breeding place for mosquitoes, flies or other disease-carrying insects. Offensive odors shall not interfere with the enjoyment of adjacent properties; 
7.  Storing or disposing of composting or compostable materials of any kind shall not pollute a water supply or contaminate surrounding land to the extent that public health is endangered. The surface water detained on the site shall be purified of contaminants before leaving the site or must be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Oakland County Health Division, Environmental Health Department; 
8.  The city may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare from excessive noises, excessive traffic patterns, obnoxious and unhealthy odors, and any detrimental effects from the general operation of the composting facility. 
D.  Garbage, Refuse and Rubbish Transfer Stations or Incineration of Garbage or Refuse. Garbage, refuse and rubbish transfer stations or incineration of garbage or refuse may be allowed with approval by the city council, after recommendation of the planning commission, subject to the following: 
1.  The location, size and layout of the site, and its relation to streets giving access to it, shall be such that traffic to and from the use will not conflict with the normal traffic of the area. 
2.  The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation must be designated to eliminate any possible nuisance that might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of odor, dust, noise, fumes, vibration, smoke or lights. 
3.  Stacking area for a minimum of five vehicles must be provided on site. Any area used for parking or unloading packaged compostable materials must be screened with a six-foot enclosure to prevent materials from leaving the unloading area. 
4.  Overnight storage of any refuse material in the building shall be prohibited and the dumping or storage of any material on the site outside the building at any time shall be prohibited. 
5.  Storing or disposing of any kind shall not pollute a water supply or contaminate surrounding land to the extent that public health is endangered. The surface water detained on the site shall be purified of contaminants before leaving the site or must be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Oakland County Health Division, Environmental Health Department. All storage, processing and disposal areas shall be a minimum of one hundred feet from any wetland, drain or body of water. 
6.  Depositing, storing or disposing of garbage or wastes shall not attract vermin, insects or other pests or allow the wastes to become a breeding place for mosquitoes, flies or other disease-carrying insects. Offensive odors shall not interfere with the enjoyment of adjacent properties. 
7.  The city may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare from excessive noises, excessive traffic patterns, obnoxious and unhealthy odors, and any detrimental effects from the general operation of such transfer station. 
E.  Mini Warehouses and Storage Buildings for Lease. Mini warehouses and storage buildings for lease to the public shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Side and rear yard building setbacks of not less than forty feet shall be provided. Ten feet of width of such yard shall be planted in materials sufficient to screen such yards from abutting uses. Side and rear yards may be reduced to thirty feet of width in those instances where a completely obscuring reinforced masonry wall not less than six feet high is provided along the entire side and rear yards; 
2.  Buildings shall be spaced not less than thirty feet apart; 
3.  Exterior building walls visible from a public right-of-way or nonindustrial district shall be finished with brick or other high-quality masonry material; 
4.  Adequate maneuvering space for fire safety vehicles shall be provided; 
5.  The office and dwelling of a caretaker may be included on-site. 
F.  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of trucks, trailers, equipment, supplies, materials, finished and semi-finished products, building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, contractor's equipment, and supplies and recreational equipment shall be subject to the following: 
1.  All outdoor storage uses shall be located within the rear yard or side yard. 
2.  Outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer than one hundred fifty feet from any street right-of-way. Outdoor storage areas shall comply with building setbacks of the district for all other yards. 
3.  The height of any item stored outdoors shall not exceed twelve feet. The planning commission may increase this standard if the storage area will not have a negative impact on surrounding properties and all storage is in accordance with the fire code requirements. 
4.  All storage facilities shall be enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall on those sides abutting all residential, office or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public street. The extent of the wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. The wall shall not be less than six feet in height, and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. 
5.  Landscaping shall be provided around the exterior boundary of the storage area. All planting plans shall meet the requirements of Section 18.14.020 and shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
6.  All outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of stormwater without negatively impacting adjacent property; the planning commission may approve a gravel surface for all or part of the storage area for low intensity activities, such as landscape materials, upon a finding that neighboring properties and the environment will not be negatively impacted. 
7.  A dedicated fire lane through the storage yard shall be provided for emergency services. 
G.  Major Automotive Repair. Major automotive repair businesses such as engine rebuilding, paint and body shops, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles and collision service shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited. 
2.  Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for more than forty-eight hours unless awaiting repair for which a work order, signed by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to be visible from outside the vehicle. The area to be used for vehicle storage shall be shown on the site plan. 
3.  Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair. 
4.  All vehicle servicing or repair shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
5.  Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view. Used tire storage shall be limited to twenty-five tires and all tires shall be stored inside a building. 
H.  Outdoor Sales and Display. Outdoor sales and display (as a principal or accessory use) of: building/lumber supply, stone, farm implements, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, boats, jet skis, mowing equipment, trucks, construction equipment and similar materials or equipment shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Outdoor sales and display areas shall comply with building setbacks of the district. 
2.  Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent dust or blowing of materials. 
3.  The planning commission may require additional landscaping, screening or ornamental fencing as appropriate to obscure the use from adjacent properties and the street. 
4.  All outdoor sales and display areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of stormwater without negatively impacting adjacent property. The planning commission may approve a gravel surface for all or part of the display or sales area for low intensity activities, upon a finding that neighboring properties and the environment will not be negatively impacted. 
I.  Race Tracks (including Midget Auto and Karting Tracks) and Courses for Motorcycles and Off-Road Vehicles. Race tracks and courses for motorcycles and off-road vehicles may be allowed with approval by the city council, after recommendation of the planning commission, subject to the following: 
1.  Race tracks shall be located on a parcel of land that is abutting land zoned for industrial purposes on all sides of the parcel in question and shall be adjacent to a major thoroughfare (with a right-of-way of one hundred twenty feet wide or greater). The boundaries of the site shall be located a minimum of three hundred feet from any residentially used or zoned property. 
2.  All access to the parking areas shall be provided from streets that have a right-of-way of no less than one hundred twenty feet in width. 
3.  All parking shall be provided as off-street parking within the boundaries of the development. 
4.  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a twenty-foot greenbelt planting and fence or wall so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The planting shall be in accordance with Section 18.14.020. 
5.  Because race tracks develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area and cause noise levels which may project beyond the property, they shall be subject to all other controls the planning commission deems necessary based upon the special land use standards of Chapter 18.18. 
J.  Commercial Recreation Establishments. Commercial recreation establishments, including both indoor and outdoor uses such as but not limited to: batting cages, bowling alleys, courts and fields for activities including football, baseball, soccer, tennis, basketball; driving ranges; indoor archery and shooting ranges; skating rinks and arenas; swimming pools, outdoor splat ball, simulated war games and similar activities, may be allowed with approval by the city council, after recommendation of the planning commission, subject to the following: 
1.  Because it is of primary concern to the city to preserve large areas of industrial property for industrial uses, the city, when considering approval of such a use shall take into account the compatibility of the lighted outdoor commercial sports center with existing and future industrial development. 
2.  The use must be located within eight hundred feet of a major thoroughfare to maintain integrity of industrial parks. 
3.  The front, side and rear yard minimum building setbacks shall be fifty feet, which shall apply to all buildings, recreation activity areas, spectator seating and any other structural appurtenances. 
4.  Parking shall be either on the same lot or on lots under the same ownership and control within three hundred feet of the building or activity area it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building or use entrance to the nearest point of the off-street parking area. 
5.  In determining the number of parking spaces required to accommodate the recreation use, the city may take into account the hours of operation and types of activities conducted upon the site. The planning commission may require that a parking demand study be provided by the applicant. 
6.  The use and parking area shall be screened from adjacent major thoroughfares with berms and other approved landscaping. Internal landscape shall be provided as determined by the planning commission to define circulation routes, provide shade and to buffer and screen adjacent uses from noise, lights and other visual obstructions. 
7.  Devices for the transmission of broadcasting of voices or music shall be so directed as to prevent said sound from being audible beyond the lot lines of the site. 
8.  Whenever any such use abuts a residential district or use, a transitional buffer area shall be provided between all operations, buildings and structures, including fences, and the residential property. Landscaping, walls and/or fences shall be required as part of this buffer as determined by the planning commission. The width of buffer shall be as determined by the planning commission based upon the nature of the use and the noise impact that the use may have on surrounding uses. 
9.  Storage buildings, restroom facilities, facilities for the sale and consumption of food, beverages and refreshments and other similar accessory uses shall comply with all standards of the city and other affected governmental agencies. The accessory facilities shall operate only during the hours of operation of the principal use of the property. 
10.  Any fencing proposed to enclose an activity must be vinyl-coated where visible from road right-of-way. 
11.  Provisions shall be taken to insure that excessive dust, noise, traffic, lighting glare, and trespassing are not inflicted on adjacent properties. 
12.  Lighted outdoor commercial sports centers shall only be permitted on parcels of land zoned M-1 or M-2 that are surrounded by similarly zoned property on all sides, except a side abutting a major thoroughfare of one hundred twenty feet of right-of-way or greater. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be installed so as to be confined within and directed onto the site. 
13.  Outdoor splat ball, simulated war games and similar activities shall not be located within two hundred feet of any residential dwelling or residential district. A setback of fifty feet for all activity areas on the site shall be provided. 
K.  Truck Stops. Truck stops shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Truck stops shall have all driveways to a major business street. Access from a side or residential street shall be prohibited. 
2.  Gasoline pumps and overhead canopies may be located within a yard adjacent to a street, provided that the canopy has a minimum setback of ten feet. 
3.  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle components and parts, supplies, or equipment or other merchandise. 
4.  All restroom doors shall be accessed from inside the building. 
5.  The design and materials of the canopy and support columns shall be compatible with the main building. The canopy clearance shall be a minimum of fourteen feet and shall be noted on the site plan. 
6.  Any signs, logo or identifying paint scheme on the canopy shall be reviewed by the planning commission and considered part of the maximum wall sign permitted. 
7.  Details on the canopy lighting shall be provided to ensure there is no glare on the public streets or adjacent property, and that lighting levels are in accordance with Section 18.14.040. Canopy lighting shall be recessed such that the light source cannot be seen from off site. 
8.  The applicant shall submit a pollution incidence protection plan (PIPP) as part of the site plan. The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by accidental gasoline spills or leakage, such as: special check valves, drain back catch basins and automatic shut off valves. 
9.  Vehicle repair must also meet the requirements of subsection G of this section. 
L.  Commercial Television and Radio Towers and Public Utility Microwaves, and Public Utility TV Transmitting Towers. Radio and television towers, public utility microwaves and public utility TV towers may be allowed with approval by the city council, after recommendation of the planning commission. The towers shall be centrally located on a continuous parcel that is of sufficient size that the tower will be setback from all lot lines a distance equal to one-half the height of the tower unless the tower is certified to collapse in place. This provision does not apply to wireless communication towers, which are subject to Section 18.12.110. 
M.  Retail Uses Accessory to Wholesale and Manufacturing Establishments. Wholesale and manufacturing establishments with limited retail uses shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Products retailed shall be a minor part of the principal use activity and shall not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the ground floor of the building. 
2.  No outdoor advertising of retail sales shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.09.050 - Height and placement requirements. 
    Table 9.05 delineates the height, bulk, and setback requirements pertaining to the zoning districts regulated by this chapter. Notes to the schedule of regulations follow. 
Table 9.05 
Schedule of Industrial Regulations 
Zoning District Maximum Height 
of Structure 
in Feet Minimum Yard Setback in Feet (D, E) Maximum % of Lot Area Covered by Impervious Surfaces (J) Front (A, B, C) Each Side Rear (F, G, H, I,) M-1 Light Industrial 40 50 20 20 75% M-2 General Industrial 60 70 30 20 75%  
A.  Corner Lot Front Yard Setback. There shall be maintained a required front yard setback on each street side of a corner lot for all buildings and parking lots. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
B.  Front Yards Setbacks. Setbacks from the center lines of streets for industrial uses shall be provided as shown in Table 9.05.B. 
Table 9.05.B 
Front Yard Setback Regulations 
Roadway Setback From Centerline Buildings Parking Lot Wixom Road 175 feet 145 feet I-96 Expressway 250 feet 220 feet Grand River 160 feet 130 feet Pontiac Trail 160 feet 130 feet West Road 120 feet 90 feet Beck Road 120 feet 90 feet All other dedicated roads 80 feet 50 feet  
C.  Off-Street Parking in the Front Yard. Off-street parking may be permitted within the required front yard, provided that there is a minimum twenty-foot deep greenbelt between the parking and the front lot line. No more than fifty percent of the front yard area shall be occupied by parking. 
D.  Off-Street Parking in the Side and Rear Yard. Off-street parking and loading shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the side or rear lot line, except where a greater landscape buffer is required by Section 18.14.020. Where shared access or service drive connections are provided between adjacent sites, the parking lot setback can be reduced or waived. 
E.  Setback from Residential. All buildings, off-street parking, loading and storage areas shall be a minimum of fifty feet from any adjacent residential district. 
F.  Loading Area. Loading space shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. No truck well, loading dock or overhead door shall be permitted within fifty feet of a residential district or use. Site circulation must be designed so as to discourage truck traffic access adjacent to the residential district or use. 
G.  Storage. All storage shall be in the rear yard or side yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than six feet high, or with a black vinyl coated chain-link type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent property or public street. Open storage shall be completely screened from view from all public streets. 
H.  Freeway Setback. A minimum fifty-foot setback shall be provided from freeway rights-of-way. The setback shall be unoccupied except for earth berms, screening walls and landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 18.14.020 and shall be installed to provide an effective screening of outdoor storage areas and to screen any service or loading area of any building from the freeway. 
I.  Stream Setback. All structures shall be a minimum of twenty feet from each side of Norton Creek and any other stream or established county drain unless a greater setback is required in this chapter. 
J.  Lot Coverage. All site improvements, such as buildings, accessory structures, parking lots, drives, and public and private roads shall not cover more than seventy-five percent of the total lot area. Total lot area shall be the gross area, including wetland and woodland areas. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.10 - REGULATED USES 
Sections: 

18.10.010 - General requirements for regulated uses. 
A.  Intent. It is recognized that there are some uses, which because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this chapter. Prior to adopting these regulations, the city reviewed studies prepared on these uses, reviewed ordinances and regulations prepared by other municipalities, and reviewed applicable federal and state case law. Based on evidence of the adverse effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Pap's AM v. City of Erie, 529 US 277 (2000); Deja Vu of Nashville v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, 466 G3d 391 (6th Cir. 2006); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 2006 WL 2504388 (WD MI 2006); Van Buren Township v. Garter Belt, 258 Mich. App. 594; 673 NW2d 111 (2003); Bronco's Entertainment v. Charter Township of Van Buren, 421 F3d 440 (6th Cir. 2005), Thomas v. Chicago Park District, 122 S. Ct. 775 (2002), City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); DLS Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); East Brooks Books Inc. v. City of Memphis, 48 F3d 2200 (6th Cir. 1995); Broadway Books v. Roberts, 642 F. Supp. 4867 (E.D. Tenn. 1986); Bright Lights Inc. v. City of Newport, 830 F. Supp. 378 (E.D. Ky. 1993); Richland Bookmart v. Nichols, 137 F3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Richland Bookmart v. Nichols, 278 F3d 570 (6th Cir. 2002); Deja vu of Cincinnati v. Union Township Board of Trustees, 411 F3d 777 (6th Cir. 2005); Deja vu of Nashville v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville, 274 F3d 377 (6th Cir. 2001); Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton, 7923 F2d 470 (6th Cir. 1991); Threesome Entertainment v. Strittmather, 4 F. Supp. 2d 710 (N.D. Ohio 1998); JL Spoons Inc. v. City of Brunswick, 49 F. Supp. 2d 1032 (N.D. Ohio 1999); Triplett Grille Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F3d 129 (6th Cir. 1994); Nightclubs Inc. v. City of Paducah, 202 F3d 884 (6th Cir. 2000); O'Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); Deja Vu of Nashville Inc. et al. v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, 2001 USA App. LEXIS 26007 (6th Cir. Dec. 6, 2001); ZJ Gifts D-2 LLC v. City of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); Connection Distribution Co. v. Reno, 154 F3d 281 (6th Cir. 1998); Sundance Associates v. Reno, 139 F3d 804 (10th Cir. 1998); American Library Association v. Reno, 33 F3d 78 (D.C. Cir. 1994); American Target Advertising Inc. v. Giani, 199 F3d 1241 (10th Cir. 2000); ZJ Gifts D-2LLC v. City of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); ILQ Investments Inc. v. City of Rochester, 25 F3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales Inc. v. Montgomery County, 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1896 (D. Md. Feb. 6, 2002); Currence v. Cincinnati, 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 1258 (3rd Cir. Jan. 24, 2002); and other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S. 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 5636; 134 Cong. Rec. E. 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas - 1997; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio - and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport news, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98; and also on findings from the paper entitled "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the city council finds that sexually oriented businesses as a category of establishments are correlated with harmful secondary effects, and that the foregoing reports are reasonably believed to be relevant to the problems that Wixom is seeking to abate and prevent in the future. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area which would create such adverse effect(s). It is further the intent of these regulations that these uses only be permitted as special land uses. Uses (collectively "Regulated Uses") subject to these controls are as follows: 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses; 
2.  Tattoo establishments; 
3.  Pawnshops; 
4.  Precious metal and gem dealers; 
5.  Adult massage parlors. 
B.  Locational Requirements for Regulated Uses. The planning commission must find that there is not presently more than one such regulated use within one thousand feet of the boundaries of the site of the proposed regulated uses. The planning commission may not waive this location provision for sexually oriented businesses as defined by this title. The planning commission may waive this locational provision for tattoo establishments, pawnshops, and precious metal, and gem dealers, if the following findings are made: 
1.  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of the chapter will be observed. 
2.  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a "skid-row" area in which the homeless, unemployed, transients or others may loiter or congregate for no gainful purpose. 
3.  That the establishment of any additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any plans for future development of the area according to the city of Wixom master plan. 
4.  That all applicable regulations of this title will be observed. 
C.  Conditions of Approval. The planning commission may recommend that the city council impose such conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of the regulated uses, as shall, in its judgment, considering the standards set forth in Chapter 18.18 of this title, be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and interest, except that any conditions imposed on a sexually oriented business as defined in this chapter shall be limited to those conditions necessary to assure compliance with the standards and requirements in Section 18.10.030. Any evidence and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection with the establishment, maintenance and operation of a sexually oriented business shall be fulfilled. 
D.  Time Limits for Review. An application for special land use approval of a regulated use shall proceed before the planning commission for recommendation, and then the city council for final decision. Applications for special use approval of a regulated use, with the exception of a sexually oriented business, shall be processed in the normal course. The following time limits shall apply to the review of an application by the planning commission and city council for special land use approval of a sexually oriented business as defined by Section 18.10.030(B). 
1.  The planning commission will publish notice and hold a public hearing as required for special land use review within sixty days of receiving a technically complete special land use and site plan application as required by Chapters 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures and 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures for a sexually oriented business as defined in Section 18.10.030(B). 
2.  The planning commission will make its recommendation regarding the special land use application for a sexually oriented business at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission following the public hearing held to review the application, unless additional information is required from the applicant. If additional information is required, the planning commission will make its recommendation at the next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the requested additional information, provided the additional information is received no later than fifteen days prior to the meeting. 
3.  The recommendation of the planning commission will be forwarded to the city council within sixty days of the meeting at which planning commission issues its recommendation. The city council will render its decision to grant or deny special land use of the sexually oriented business or to grant approval with conditions, as stipulated by this chapter, at this meeting. 
4.  Failure of the city to act within the above specified time limits shall not be deemed to constitute the grant of special land use to the sexually oriented business. 
E.  Effect of Denial. No application for a regulated use which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions. 
F.  Revocations. In any case where a building permit for a regulated use is required and has not been obtained within six months after the granting of the special land use by the city council, the grant of special land use shall become null and void. 
G.  Reconstruction of Damaged Regulated Uses. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding and continued use of any building or structure, the use of which makes it subject to the controls of this chapter, which is damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, provided that the expense of such reconstruction does not exceed sixty percent of the reconstruction cost of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred, provided that where the reconstruction repair or rebuilding exceeds the above-stated expense, the reestablishment of the use shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and further provided, that the reestablished use complies with the requirements of Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.10.020 - Requirements for precious metal and gem dealer. 
    In addition to the requirements of Section 18.10.010 of this chapter, a precious metal and gem dealer shall also be subject to all of the requirements of the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, and the following requirements: 
A.  Certificate of Registration. A dealer shall be required to obtain a certificate of registration from the city police department and pay a fee of fifty dollars to cover the cost of processing and issuing the certificate of registration. The application shall include all information required by Public Act 95 of 1981 and the city police department. Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the city police department, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of business. Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or address under which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the city police department of the change. 
B.  Record of Transactions. A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each transaction, on record of transaction forms meeting requirements of Public Act 95 of 1981 and the city police department. Each record of transaction form shall be filled out in quadruplicate by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer. One copy of the form shall go to the city police department, one copy shall go to the customer and one copy shall be retained by the dealer. 
1.  At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer or the agent or employee of the dealer shall ensure that the following information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form: 
a.  The dealer certificate of registration number; 
b.  A photograph and general description of the precious item or precious items received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description; 
c.  The date of the transaction; 
d.  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
e.  The name, date of birth, driver's license number or state of Michigan personal identification card number, and street and house number of the customer, together with a photograph of the customer and a thumbprint or fingerprint of the customer. The photograph and thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer, but made available to the police department upon request in accordance with Public Act 95 of 1981; 
f.  The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item or precious items; 
g.  The form of payment made to the customer; check, money order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft; 
h.  The customer's signature. 
2.  The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number 1 and the calendar year. 
3.  Within forty-eight hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the city police department and, if the record of transaction form indicates that the customer resides outside the city, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police agency of the community in which the customer resides. 
4.  The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item received shall be open to inspection by the county prosecuting attorney and the city police department in accordance with Public Act 95 of 1981. 
5.  Each record of a transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after the transaction. 
C.  Retaining Precious Item Prior to Alteration. A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for at least nine calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other than that required to make an accurate appraisal of its value. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.10.030 - Requirements for sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote and protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Wixom and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent a concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. These regulations are intended to control the negative secondary impacts such businesses have been documented to have on the surrounding area and the community. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Likewise, it is not the intent of this title to legitimize activities which are prohibited by city ordinance or state or federal law. 
B.  Definitions. Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 18.24 shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter. 
C.  Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
1.  Adult arcades; 
2.  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
3.  Adult cabarets; 
4.  Adult massage parlors; 
5.  Adult motels; 
6.  Adult motion picture theaters; 
7.  Adult theaters; 
8.  Adult nudity or retail stores; 
9.  Escort and escort agencies; 
10.  Nude model studios; 
11.  Sexual encounter centers. 
D.  Location of Sexually Oriented Business. 
1.  A sexually oriented business shall not be located closer than one thousand feet to the property line of any of the following: 
a.  Church, religious institution, or building used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
b.  Public or private elementary or secondary school, vocational school, special education school, junior college or university; 
c.  Any one-family zoning district, multiple-family zoning district or village center area zoning district; 
d.  Lot or parcel in residential use; 
e.  Public park; 
f.  Existing sexually oriented business; 
g.  Child care facility, nursery or preschool. 
2.  A sexually oriented business site shall only be located within a zoning district where it is listed as an allowable use. 
3.  Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property site boundary of a sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises of any use, district or right-of-way listed in subsection (D)(1) of this section. The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the site or property boundary in which each business is located. Access easements or portions of the parcel that are exclusively used to provide access to the site of the sexually oriented business shall be excluded from the parcel boundary in determining whether the site complies with the required separation. The intent of this exclusion is to allow sexually oriented businesses to comply with the separation requirement from major thoroughfares by means of an access easement or access strip of land from the site to the thoroughfare. 
4.  A person is in violation of this title if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet of another sexually oriented business. 
5.  A person is in violation of this title if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof or the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
6.  All off-street parking areas and entry door areas of a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk until the closing time of the business with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one footcandle of light on all parking surfaces and/or walkways. This requirement is to ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees, and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and other criminal conduct. 
7.  Any business now classified as a sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title that is in violation of Section 18.10.010, 18.10.020 or 18.10.030 shall be deemed a nonconforming use. 
E.  Nude Entertainment Prohibited in Alcoholic Commercial Establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform in any alcoholic commercial establishment, to knowingly permit or allow to be performed therein, any of the following acts or conduct: 
1.  The public performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellations, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
2.  The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals in public; or 
3.  The actual or simulated public displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
    It is unlawful for the owner, operator, agent or employee of an alcoholic commercial establishment to allow any female to appear in an alcoholic commercial establishment so costumed or dressed that one or both breasts are wholly or substantially exposed to public view. Topless or bottomless or totally uncovered waitresses, bartenders or barmaids, entertainers including dancers, impersonators, lingerie shows, or any other form for the attraction or entertainment of customers, is strictly prohibited. "Wholly or substantially exposed to public view" as it pertains to breasts shall mean the showing of the female breast in an alcoholic commercial establishment with less than a fully opaque covering of all portions of the areola and nipple, and the prohibition shall also extend to such events similar to wet t-shirt contests, lingerie shows or bikini shows. 
F.  Exterior Display and Signs. A sexually oriented business is in violation of this chapter if: 
1.  The merchandise or activities of the establishment are visible from any point outside the establishment; 
2.  The exterior portions of the establishment or signs have any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any specified anatomical area or sexually explicit activity as defined in this title; or 
3.  Neon or flashing lights. 
G.  License Required to Operate a Sexually Oriented Business. Special land use and site plan approval shall be granted on the condition that the operator or owner of a sexually oriented business obtains a license to operate the business as required by Title 5 of the city code. 
H.  Enforcement. A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall result, in addition to the remedies provided herein, possible criminal violations consisting of a fine of five hundred dollars or a jail term of ninety days, or both. 
I.  Injunction. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the city, at its option, may commence proceedings in the circuit court under the appropriate court rule or statute to enjoin any activity conducted by a sexually oriented business that is deemed to be in violation of these provisions. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.11 - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Sections: 

18.11.010 - Intent. 
    The planned unit development (PUD) standards are a supplementary list of "overlay" zoning standards which apply to properties simultaneously with one of the other zoning districts established in this title, hereinafter referred to as the "underlying" zoning district. For properties approved for PUD designation, these PUD standards replace the height and placement requirements listed for the underlying zoning districts in Chapters 18.03, Residential Districts, 18.05, Manufactured Home Park District, 18.06, Commercial Districts, 18.07, VCA District, 18.08, Office and Research Districts, and 18.09, Industrial Districts. 
    The PUD standards are provided as a design option, intended to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development; to encourage innovation in land use, form of ownership (such as condominiums), and variety in design, layout, and type of structures constructed; to achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land; to preserve significant natural, historical, and architectural features and open space; to promote efficient provision of public services and utilities; to minimize adverse traffic impacts; to provide better housing, employment, and shopping opportunities particularly suited to residents of the city; to encourage development of convenient recreational facilities; and to encourage the use and improvement of existing sites when the uniform regulations contained in other zoning districts alone do not provide adequate protection and safeguards for the site or its surrounding areas. 
    The standards are intended to accommodate development on sites with significant natural, historical, and architectural features, as noted in the city of Wixom master plan, on land which exhibits difficult development constraints, and/or to provide the opportunity to mix compatible uses or residential types, and/or to allow clustering of residential units to preserve common open space and natural features. The PUD standards shall not be sought primarily to avoid the imposition of standards and requirements of other zoning classifications rather than to achieve the stated purposes herein set forth. 
    In order to encourage PUD developments on specific properties, these standards may allow the city to relax or waive one or more of the requirements of the underlying district. The PUD also allows the developer the opportunity to mix compatible uses or residential types on a single property, allows clustering to reduce construction costs, and may enhance marketability through the preservation of significant natural, historical, and architectural features. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.020 - Permitted uses. 
    Principal uses permitted under the PUD standards are based on the underlying zoning district, as indicated below: 
A.  R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4. All permitted uses of the underlying district shall be permitted. In addition to those uses, low density multiple-family dwellings or a mixture of single- and multiple-family dwellings on a planned basis, through the use of attached dwellings, townhouses, apartment buildings, zero lot line configurations, and/or other similar building configurations; or any combination of these residential uses may be permitted within the PUD. 
B.  RM-1 and RM-2. All permitted uses of the underlying district shall be permitted. The list of permitted uses includes multiple-family dwellings or a mixture of single and multiple-family dwellings on a planned basis, through the use of attached dwellings, townhouses, apartment buildings, zero lot line configurations, and/or other similar building configurations; or any combination of these residential uses. In addition, for sites having a minimum size of twenty acres, up to ten percent of the total site acreage may be developed with uses permitted in the B-1 district. Such uses must front a public street and be developed in conjunction with, or following, development of the residential uses. 
C.  VCA. All business, service, professional office, and other commercial uses, or any combination of these uses, listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning district shall be allowed. In addition, other business, service, and residential uses may be permitted, if determined by the planning commission to be similar to other uses in the surrounding area. 
D.  OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, FS and I-S. All business, service, professional offices, and other commercial uses, or any combination of these uses, listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted. In addition, other business, service, office, and residential uses may be permitted, if determined by the planning commission to be compatible with other proposed PUD uses and surrounding uses. 
E.  IRO, M-1 and M-2. All manufacturing, warehousing, research and development, business, service, professional offices, and other industrial uses, or any combination of these uses, listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted. In addition, other business, service, and office uses may be permitted, if determined by the planning commission to be compatible with other proposed PUD uses and surrounding uses. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.030 - Special land uses. 
    All uses listed as special land uses in the underlying district are considered as special land uses within the PUD designation. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.040 - Qualifying conditions. 
    In order to qualify for PUD approval, the applicant must demonstrate in writing that each of the following criteria will be met by the proposed PUD: 
A.  Demonstrated Benefit. The PUD shall provide two or more of the following benefits not possible under the requirements of another zoning district, as determined by the planning commission: 
1.  Preservation of significant natural or historic features; 
2.  A complementary mixture of uses or a variety of housing types that provides a benefit to the city over conventional development; 
3.  Creative design that cannot be achieved by underlying district standards; 
4.  Common open space for passive or active recreational use; 
5.  Mitigation to offset community impacts; 
6.  Redevelopment of a nonconforming site where creative design can address unique site constraints. 
B.  Availability and Capacity of Public Services. The proposed type and density of use(s) shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the use of public services, public facilities, and utility capacities. 
C.  Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed PUD shall be compatible with the overall goals and recommendations as proposed in the city of Wixom master plan. 
D.  Compatibility with the PUD Purpose. The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the intent of this chapter and spirit of this title. 
E.  Development Impact. The proposed PUD shall not impede the continued use or development of surrounding properties for uses that are permitted in this title. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.050 - Dimensional requirements. 
A.  Base Zoning Regulations. Unless modified by the planning commission, according to the PUD standards, all zoning ordinance requirements for the underlying zoning district shall remain in full force, except as modified by this chapter. 
B.  Regulatory Flexibility. To encourage flexibility and creativity, the planning commission may grant specific departures from the requirement of the zoning ordinance as a part of the approval process. Yard, lot width, and bulk standards may be modified, provided that such modifications result in preservation of open space, enhanced buffering from adjacent land uses, screening along major roadways, preservation of natural features, a more efficient use of land or improved compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
C.  Approval of Modifications. Any regulatory modification shall be approved through a finding by the planning commission that the deviation shall result in a higher quality of development than would be possible using conventional zoning standards. Regulatory modifications are not subject to variance approval of the zoning board of appeals. No part of a PUD plan may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals. This provision shall not preclude an individual lot owner from seeking a variance following final approval of the PUD, provided such variance does not involve alterations to open space areas as shown on the approved PUD site plan or the requirements of the chapter. 
D.  Table of Modifications. A table shall be provided on the site plan which specifically details all deviations from the established zoning district's lot area, height and setback regulations, off-street parking regulations, general provisions, subdivision regulations or other zoning ordinance provisions which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and development proposed in the absence of this PUD chapter. This specification should include ordinance provisions, from which deviations are sought, and the reasons and mechanisms to be utilized for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare in lieu of the regulations from which deviations are sought. Only those deviations consistent with the intent of this title and the city master plan shall be considered. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.060 - Application and review procedure for preliminary and final PUD site plan. 
    The application process for a PUD involves a three step process including review of a preliminary site plan by both the planning commission and city council. Upon approval of the preliminary plan, a final site plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission. The procedures are described below. 
A.  The applicant shall meet with city staff to review the PUD requirements and confirm that application materials are complete. An optional pre-application workshop with the planning commission may be requested by the applicant to discuss the appropriateness of the PUD concept, solicit feedback, and receive requests for additional materials supporting the proposal. An applicant desiring such a workshop shall request placement on the planning commission agenda. 
B.  The applicant shall submit the preliminary PUD site plan, meeting the requirements of Section 18.11.070, at least thirty days prior to the meeting at which the planning commission shall first review the request; twenty-one days for an applicant who has had a pre-application workshop on the proposal within sixty days of the preliminary PUD site plan submittal. 
C.  The planning commission shall review the preliminary PUD site plan, and shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Section 18.21.110. During this review, the planning commission may request additional materials supporting the PUD proposal, or recommend modifications or conditions based on the standards of Section 18.11.080. The planning commission shall then make a recommendation on the preliminary PUD site plan to the city council. The applicant shall incorporate these modifications or conditions recommended by planning commission prior to the review by the city council. 
D.  Following receipt of the planning commission recommendations, the city council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Section 18.21.110 on the preliminary PUD site plan. The city council shall take final action on the preliminary PUD site plan. 
E.  Any conditions imposed upon the approval of the preliminary PUD site plan by the city council shall be made part of the approval and shall be reflected in the final PUD site plan. The city attorney shall prepare a PUD agreement stating the conditions upon which the PUD is based, which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. The applicant shall reimburse the city for all costs related to the preparation of the PUD agreement. The agreement, after approval by the city council, shall be entered into between the city and the applicant and be recorded in the office of the Oakland County Register of Deeds. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with recording the PUD agreement. The agreement must be recorded prior to submitting an application for final site plan approval. 
F.  Approval of the preliminary PUD site plan shall be effective for a period of two years. If a final PUD site plan for at least the first phase of the project is not submitted and approved within two years of the preliminary approval, the preliminary PUD site plan shall terminate and a new application must then be filed and processed. The two-year period for preliminary PUD approval may be extended for not more than one year, if applied for by the petitioner prior to expiration and granted by the city council, based upon a recommendation by the planning commission. 
G.  If the approved preliminary PUD site plan indicated that the proposed development was to occur in phases, final PUD site plan approval may be granted on each phase of the development, provided that each phase contains all the necessary components to insure protection of significant natural, historical, and architectural features, and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the PUD and the residents of the surrounding area. Roads, utilities and other infrastructure for each phase shall be designed to fully operate in accordance with city engineering standards and not be dependent upon the completion of subsequent phases. Subsequent phases shall also follow the process for final PUD site plans outlined in this chapter. 
H.  The applicant shall submit the final PUD site plan, as described in Section 18.11.090, for all, or any phase of, the approved preliminary PUD site plan at least thirty days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the planning commission shall first review the request. 
I.  Upon submission of all required materials and fees, the planning commission shall review the final PUD site plan and shall take final action on the final PUD site plan, in accordance with the standards and regulations of this title. 
J.  If the final PUD site plan was approved with conditions, the applicant shall submit a revised final PUD site plan to the building official for approval prior to the issuance of any building permits. 

(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.070 - Preliminary PUD site plan submittal requirements. 
    The preliminary PUD site plan shall set forth the proposed uses to be developed in the PUD. The following specific information shall be provided in the preliminary PUD site plan submittal: 
A.  Proof of Ownership. Current proof of ownership of the land to be utilized or evidence of a contractual ability to acquire such land, such as an option or purchase agreement with written authorization from the owner. 
B.  Written Documentation. Written documentation that the preliminary PUD site plan meets the standards of Section 18.11.040. 
C.  Application Form and Fees. A completed application form, supplied by the building official, and an application/review fee; a separate escrow deposit shall be required for administrative charges to review the PUD submittal. 
D.  Sheet Size. Sheet size of submitted drawings shall be at least twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches, with graphics at an engineer's scale of one inch equals twenty feet for sites of twenty acres or less; and one inch equals one hundred feet or less (i.e., one inch equals twenty to one hundred feet) for sites over twenty acres. 
E.  Cover Sheet. Cover sheet providing: 
1.  Applicant's name; 
2.  Name of the development; 
3.  Preparer's name and professional seal of architect, engineer, surveyor, and landscape architect as applicable indicating license in the state of Michigan; 
4.  Date of preparation and any revisions; 
5.  Complete and current legal description and size of property in acres; 
6.  Small location sketch of the subject site and area within one-half mile, and scale; 
7.  Zoning and current land use of applicant's property and all abutting properties and of properties across any public or private street from the PUD site. 
F.  PUD Site Plan. A site plan sheet indicating: 
1.  Existing locations of all natural, historical, and architectural features, existing drainage patterns, surface water bodies, floodplain areas, MDEQ designated or regulated wetlands with supporting documentation, nonregulated wetland areas two or more acres in size, and a tree survey indicating the location and diameter (in inches, measured four feet above grade) of existing trees; 
2.  Existing and proposed topography at five-foot contour intervals, and a general description of grades within one hundred feet of the site; 
3.  An aerial photograph of the entire site and all areas within one mile of the site, taken not more than one year prior to the date of the PUD application; 
4.  Dimensions of existing and proposed right-of-way lines, names of abutting public streets, proposed access driveways and parking areas, and existing and proposed pedestrian and/or bicycle paths; 
5.  Existing buildings, utility services (with sizes), and any public or private easements, noting those which will remain and which are to be removed; 
6.  Layout and typical dimensions of proposed lots, footprints, and dimensions of proposed buildings and structures; uses with the acreage allotted to each use. For developments with residential components: the number, type, and density of proposed housing units; 
7.  General engineering information for utilities and drainage; 
8.  General location and type of landscaping proposed (evergreen, deciduous, berm, etc.) noting existing trees and landscaping to be retained; 
9.  Size, type, and location of proposed identification signs; 
10.  North arrow; 
11.  Property lines and dimensions; 
12.  Lot lines and all structures on the property and within one hundred feet of the PUD property lines; 
13.  Location of any vehicle access points on both sides of the street within one hundred feet of the PUD site along streets where vehicle access to the PUD is proposed. 
G.  PUD Development Agreement. A draft written PUD development agreement specifying all the terms and understandings of the PUD development. The content of the agreement shall be based on the extent of the proposed development, but shall at a minimum provide the following: 
1.  A survey of the acreage comprising the proposed development; 
2.  The manner of ownership of the developed land; 
3.  The amount, manner of the ownership and proposed method of dedication or mechanism to protect any areas designated as common areas or open space; 
4.  Land use description including list of proposed uses, residential density, dwelling types, lot dimensions, setbacks and other dimensional standards; 
5.  Description of improvements to common areas, recreational facilities and nonmotorized pathways; 
6.  General description of any improvements to roads or utilities. The cost of installing and maintaining all streets and the necessary utilities shall be assured by a means satisfactory to the city; 
7.  Provision assuring that open space areas shown on the plan for use by the public or residents of the development will be irrevocably committed for that purpose. The city may require conveyances or other documents to be placed in escrow to accomplish this; 
8.  Provisions for the future financing of any improvements shown on the plan for site improvements, open space areas and common areas which are to be included within the development and that maintenance of such improvements is assured by a means satisfactory to the city; 
9.  Provisions to ensure adequate protection of natural features; 
10.  Financial assurances to guaranty the completion of all improvements; 
11.  An acknowledgement by the applicant that the terms and conditions of any approval are fair, reasonable, and equitable, and that the applicant shall be bound by each and every condition and provision of the development agreement; 
12.  The preliminary PUD site plan shall be incorporated by reference and attached as an exhibit. 
H.  Multi-Phased PUD. If a multi-phase PUD is proposed, identification of the areas included in each phase; for residential uses identify the number, type, and density of proposed housing units within each phase. 
I.  Additional Information. Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the planning commission or city council to assist the city in determining the appropriateness of the PUD such as, but not limited to: market studies; impact on public primary and secondary schools and utilities; traffic impact study; impact on significant natural, historical, and architectural features and drainage; impact on the general area and adjacent property; description of how property could be developed under the regulations of the underlying district; preliminary architectural sketches; and estimated construction cost. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.080 - Preliminary PUD site plan standards for approval. 
    Based upon the following standards, the planning commission may recommend denial, approval, or approval with conditions, and the city council may deny, approve, or approve with conditions the proposed preliminary PUD site plan. 
A.  The PUD shall meet the qualifying conditions of Section 18.11.040. 
B.  The PUD must be consistent with the city of Wixom master plan. 
C.  The uses must have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare, or convenience, on present and future potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed must not adversely affect the public utility and circulation system, surrounding properties, or the environment. The public benefit shall be one which could not be achieved under the regulations of the underlying district alone or that of any other zoning district. 
D.  Any modifications to the dimensional standards of this title, such as lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required facilities, buffers, open space, permitted sign area, and other similar dimensional standards shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. 
E.  Any increase in the density requirements of the underlying zoning district must be approved by the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission and be included under review of the preliminary PUD site plan. 
F.  The number and dimensions of off-street parking shall be sufficient to meet the minimum required by Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. However, where warranted by overlapping or shared parking arrangements, the planning commission or city council may reduce the required number of parking spaces in accordance with Section 18.15.010(G). 
G.  All streets and parking areas within the PUD shall meet the minimum construction and other requirements of city ordinances, unless modified by city council. 
H.  Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the site shall be provided. Drives, streets, and other elements shall be designed to discourage through traffic, while promoting safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. 
I.  Landscaping shall be preserved and/or provided to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. Plantings and other landscape features shall be consistent with or exceeding the standards of Section 18.14.020. 
J.  Judicious effort shall be used to preserve significant natural, historical, and architectural features and the integrity of the land, including MDEQ regulated and nonregulated wetlands. 
K.  Public water and sewer facilities shall be available or shall be provided by the developer as part of the site development. 
L.  Building design shall be of a high quality, be consistent with or exceeding the standards of Section 18.14.010. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.090 - Final PUD site plan submittal requirements. 
    The final PUD site plan shall include all the following information, unless the building official determines that some of the required information is not reasonably necessary for the consideration of the PUD: 
A.  All information required for site plan submittal in accordance with Section 18.17.030. 
B.  Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the planning commission to assist in determining the impacts of the proposed PUD site plan, including, but not limited to, economic or market studies; impact on public utilities; traffic impacts; impact on significant natural, historical, and architectural features and drainage; impact on the general area and adjacent property; and estimated construction cost. 
C.  A written draft of PUD design guidelines specific to the PUD. Such document shall include provisions for site layout, access, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, screening, building design and architecture, landscaping, open space, lighting, and signage. The design guidelines shall also include any variations to the dimensional standards of this title, such as density, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required facilities, buffers, open space, permitted sign area, and other similar dimensional standards. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.100 - Final PUD site plan standards for approval. 
    The planning commission shall use the standards for approval of Section 18.17.040, and any design requirements developed specifically for the PUD by the city council, in reviewing the final PUD site plan. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.110 - Deviations from approved final PUD site plan. 
A.  Deviations and amendments from the approved final PUD site plan and associated design guidelines shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Section 18.17.090. 
B.  Should the planning commission determine that the modifications to the final PUD site plan significantly alter the intent of the preliminary PUD site plan, a new submittal illustrating the modification shall be required and must be approved by the city council as a new preliminary PUD site plan. 
C.  Any deviation from the approved final PUD site plan, except as authorized in this section, shall be considered a violation of this chapter and treated as a misdemeanor. Further, any such deviation shall invalidate the PUD designation. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.11.120 - Appeals and variances. 
    Appeals and variances related to a PUD cannot be taken to the zoning board of appeals. Modifications can only be granted by the planning commission when it is determined that the requested amendments are in keeping with the overall intent of a PUD, as identified in Section 18.11.010. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.12 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

18.12.010 - Uses per lot. 
A.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, no lot may contain more than one principal building, structure, or use. 
B.  Groups of multiple-family buildings, site condominiums, retail business buildings, multi-tenant offices, leased industrial space, or other groups of buildings contained within a single integrated complex are deemed to be a principal use collectively. To be considered as an integrated complex, the site shall share parking, signs, access, or other similar features, which together form a unified function and appearance. 
C.  In cases where there is more than one use, the use comprising the greatest floor area shall generally be considered the principal use, except in cases where a use comprising a secondary amount of floor area is considered to have greater impact in terms of traffic generated, noise levels, disruption of views, and similar impacts. 
D.  Wireless communication facilities may be located on a lot that contains another use, except one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.020 - Lot area allocation. 
A.  No portion of a lot can be used more than once for determining compliance with the provisions for lot area and yard dimensions for construction or alteration of buildings. 
B.  No lot, adjacent lots in common ownership, required yard, parking area, or other required open space shall be created, divided, or reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements of this title. If already less than the minimum requirements of this title, a lot, adjacent lots in common ownership, required yard, parking area, or other open space shall not be divided or reduced in dimensions or area so as to increase its noncompliance with the minimum requirements of this title. Lots or yards created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.030 - Lots adjoining alleys. 
    In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area and setback requirements of this title, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.040 - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this title shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal, school, or other public election. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.050 - Height limit. 
    The building height restrictions of all zoning districts shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Parapet walls and cornices not exceeding four feet in height. 
B.  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, grain elevators, silos, stacks, stage towers and scenery lofts, water tanks, public monuments, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, and penthouses or roof structures housing necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.060 - Projections into required yards. 
    Certain architectural features may project the following distance into the required yard setbacks as follows: 
Table 12.06 
Permitted Projections Into Required Yards 
Projection Front Yard Rear Yard Interior Side Yard Corner Side Yard Arbors and trellises Permitted up to 3 feet from any lot line Awnings and canopies 3 ft. 5 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. Architectural features 3 ft. 3 ft. 2 inches per foot of setback Barrier-free ramps and other facilities integrated into landscape design 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. Bay windows 3 ft. 5 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. Decks, open or enclosed See Section 18.13.030 Porches and Decks Eaves, overhanging 3 ft. 5 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. Fences and walls See Section 18.13.050 Flagpoles Permitted no closer than 3 feet from any lot line Gardens and landscaping Permitted in all yards Gutters 3 ft. 5 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. Laundry drying equipment - 5 ft. 3 ft. - Light standard, ornamental Permitted in any yard Mechanical equipment such as HVAC - 5 ft. A - Paved terraces Permitted no closer than 3 feet from any lot line Unroofed porches, stoops, stairways and steps 10 ft. 10 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. Approved signs See Chapter 18.16 Window air conditioning units - 3 ft. 3 ft. -  
A.  Central air conditioning, heating and water filtration equipment installed outside of one-family or two-family dwellings and their attached structures shall be located to the rear of the principal building, not less than three feet in from the extreme sides of the principal structure and in no cases less than fifteen feet from adjoining one-family and two-family dwellings. 
1.  The building official may allow an alternate location and may reduce distance spacing in those instances where such alternate location does not adversely impact an abutting dwelling. 
2.  Screening of the equipment with appropriate landscaping or other solid material to reasonably conceal the equipment from view is required. 
B.  Open patios shall not be considered a portion of the structure. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.070 - Frontage on a public street. 
A.  No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this title unless such lot abuts a public street, unless otherwise provided for in this title or in Ordinance 80, codified in Title 16 of the Wixom Municipal Code. 
B.  Front yard requirements along rights-of-way shall be measured from the public road right-of-way line, private road access easement line or the curb of any access road, drive, or internal driveway where no right-of-way or easement exists. 
C.  Corner lots and through lots in all zoning districts must provide the required front yard setback on each side of the lot which abuts a public street, private road, or access drive. All references to front yard requirements include the exterior side yard of corner lots unless otherwise noted, except as approved. 
D.  On curvilinear streets, the minimum front yard setback is measured along a curve parallel to the front lot line. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.080 - Corner clearance. 
A.  No fence, wall, structure, or planting shall be erected, established, or maintained on any lot that will obstruct the view of drivers in vehicles approaching the intersection adjacent to a corner lot or a driveway on any lot. 
B.  Fences, walls, structures, or plantings located in the clear vision triangle, as depicted below, shall not be permitted to exceed a height of twenty-four inches above the lowest point of the intersecting street(s). The unobstructed triangular area is described as follows: 
1.  The area formed at the corner intersection of two street right-of-way or easement lines, the two sides of the clear vision triangle being twenty-five feet in length measured along abutting public right-of-way lines, and third side being a line connecting these two sides; or 
2.  The area formed at the corner intersection of a street right-of-way, easement, or alley and a driveway, the two sides of the triangular area being fifteen feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and edge of the driveway, and the third side being a line connecting these two sides. 

(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.090 - Building grades. 
    All new buildings and structures constructed on vacant lots adjacent to and in between existing buildings shall be constructed at the elevation of the average grade unless otherwise approved by the planning commission or building official. New grades shall not be established that would permit an increase in the runoff of surface water onto adjacent properties. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.100 - Essential services. 
A.  Essential services, as defined in Chapter 18.24, Definitions, shall be permitted as authorized under any franchise in effect within the city, subject to regulation as provided in any law of the state of Michigan or in any ordinance of the city. 
B.  It is the intent of this section to ensure conformity of all structures and uses to the requirements of this title wherever such conformity shall be practicable and not in conflict with the specific requirements of such franchise, legislation or other city ordinance. In the absence of such conflict, the zoning ordinance shall prevail. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the requirements of Section 18.12.110. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.110 - Wireless communication facilities and services. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The regulations of this section are intended to conform to federal laws and administrative rules governing facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems and to set forth procedures and standards for review and approval for the location of such facilities within the city of Wixom. 
1.  It is the city's intent to reasonably regulate the location and design of such facilities to retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the city. 
2.  Given the increase in the number of wireless communication facilities requested as a result of the new technology and the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the city that all users should colocate attached wireless communication facilities and wireless communication towers, where practicable. Collocation is proposed in order to assure the most economic use of land and to prevent the proliferation of duplicative services. 
3.  In recognition of the city's concern that technological advances may render certain wireless communication facilities obsolete or unnecessary in the future, requirements are set forth for the removal of unused or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner and provide security for removal. 
4.  These regulations do not apply to accessory antennas addressed in Section 18.13.090. 
B.  Zoning Districts and Approval Process for Wireless Communication Facilities. Wireless communication facilities may be located within the city as follows: 
Table 12.11 
Wireless Communication Facilities 
Type/Location of Wireless Communication Facility Districts Permitted Approval Procedure Attached Wireless Communication Facilities on Existing Structures Attached to an existing building or structure that will not be materially altered or changed in appearance All districts, except on lots occupied by a one-family residential use Administrative site plan Attached to an existing utility structure that will not be modified or materially alter the structure, impair sight lines, or compromise safety All nonresidential districts Administrative site plan, provided letter of acceptance is provided by the utility company Collocation upon an existing wireless communication facility All districts Administrative site plan New Wireless Communication Tower Monopole any height M-1, M-2 districts or located on a municipally owned site, or public park in any district Special land use and site plan by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission in accordance with Chapters 18.17 and 18.18 Lattice tower where it can be demonstrated that a monopole is not feasible M-1, M-2 districts Special land use and site plan by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission in accordance with Chapters 18.17 and 18.18  
C.  Application Requirements-Collocation. The following information shall be provided with the application, in addition to other administrative site plan submittal requirements, as required in Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures, for an attached wireless communication facility colocated on an existing structure: 
1.  The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises; 
2.  The owner and/or operator of the existing tower or structure; 
3.  Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable); 
4.  Elevation drawings and construction details of all existing and proposed wireless communication facilities including accessory structures and equipment shelters; 
5.  The reason or purpose for the wireless communication facility with specific reference to the provider's coverage, capacity and/or quality needs, goals and objectives; 
6.  Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the city and within one mile of the city; 
7.  The structural capacity and whether it can accommodate the facility, as proposed or modified; 
8.  Limits and type of fencing, the method of screening and illumination; 
9.  A description of compliance with this section and all applicable federal, state or local laws; 
10.  A description of performance guarantee to be posted upon issuance of a building permit to ensure removal of the facility if it is abandoned or is no longer needed. This amount shall be a minimum of five thousand dollars or as determined upon resolution by the city council. 
D.  Application Requirements for New Wireless Communication Tower. The following information shall be provided with the application to construct any new wireless communication tower, in addition to the submittal requirements in subsection C of this section and the items required in Chapter 18.18, Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures: 
1.  A description of the guarantee to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it is abandoned or is no longer needed. The applicant shall demonstrate that funds will be available to the city for removal of any structure used for wireless communication in an amount which reasonably reflects the cost of removal of the facility and restoration of the property or structure upon which the facility is located or placed. Adequate funds shall also be provided to cover the city's administrative costs in the event that the applicant or its successor does not remove the wireless communication facility in a timely manner. 
    The guarantee shall meet the requirements of Section 18.21.100. An agreement establishing a promise of the applicant and owner of the property, or their successors, to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this section of the ordinance shall be submitted with the application and upon approval recorded at the office of the Oakland County Register of Deeds in a form approved by the city attorney. The written agreement would include the ability of the city to assess the costs as a lien against the property if not paid. The applicant, owner or successor shall be responsible for payment of any costs or attorney fees incurred by the city in securing removal. 
2.  Inventory all existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. 
3.  In recognition of the city's policy to promote collocation, a written agreement between the applicant and the city, transferable to all assessors and assigns, that the operator shall make space available on the facility for collocation. Any tower one hundred fifty feet or more in height must be made available for a minimum of four carriers. 
4.  A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide services through the use of the proposed new tower. 
5.  Prior to issuing a building permit, a signed certification by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Michigan shall be provided to the city that describes the manner in which the proposed structure will fall in the event of damage, accident or injury (i.e., "fall zone"), and that the setback area provided shall accommodate the structure should it fall or break and provide a reasonable buffer in the event the structure fails. 
E.  Design Standards Applicable to All Facilities. All wireless communication facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the surrounding areas. 
2.  Fencing shall be provided for protection of the tower and associated equipment and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access the facilities. All fencing shall be black vinyl-coated chain link fencing or a brick wall. 
3.  Landscaping shall be provided to screen the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure from adjacent uses and public rights-of-way. The city may permit an eight-foot tall brick screening wall in locations where landscaping may not survive. 
4.  All accessory buildings shall be constructed of brick, provided the planning commission may waive this requirement for a building that is located in the M-1 or M-2 industrial district and is not visible from a public right-of-way or nonindustrial zoning district. This provision shall not apply to equipment cabinets that are not visible from the property line. 
5.  Any nonconforming situations on the site, such as, but not limited to, outdoor storage, signs, inadequate landscaping, unpaved parking, lack of a sidewalk, improper lighting or similar conditions, shall be brought into conformance prior to the erection of the wireless communication facility. Collocation may be permitted on existing buildings or structures that are not in conformance with the current zoning standards; however, additional landscaping shall be provided to reduce the impact of the nonconformity and the wireless facility. 
6.  Accessory buildings shall be a maximum of fourteen feet high and shall be set back in accordance with the requirements for principal buildings in that zoning district. 
7.  All attached wireless communication facilities proposed on the roof of a building shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory building. If proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform with all district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks. 
8.  The plans shall contain a notation that the plans comply with all the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission. Any aviation hazard lighting shall be detailed on the plans. 
9.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
F.  Design Standards Applicable to New Towers. In addition to the design standards in subsection E of this section, all wireless communication towers shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Feasible Collocation. A permit for the construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted until the applicant demonstrates a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs. 
2.  Collocation Agreement. All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed to accommodate collocation, with a written agreement between the applicant and the city, in a format approved by the city attorney. 
3.  Height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the requested height of the new or modified tower and antenna shall be the minimum height necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant, including additional height to accommodate future collocation where appropriate. The height of the tower shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred fifty feet. Taller towers shall require approval from the zoning board of appeals in accordance with subsection H of this section. 
4.  Tower Setbacks. The wireless communication tower shall be setback from all property lines a distance determined by a professional engineer in accordance with subsection (D)(5) of this section. 
5.  Accessory Structure Setback. Accessory structures must satisfy the minimum zoning district building setback requirements. 
6.  Access. There shall be unobstructed access to the tower for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes which may be provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the site. 
7.  Soils Report. The tower shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer licensed in the state of Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of the foundation design relative to soil conditions for the proposed use. 
8.  Color. Towers shall be constructed of galvanized steel or painted a neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
9.  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
10.  Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower. 
G.  Collocation. 
1.  Statement of Policy. 
a.  It is the policy of the city of Wixom to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and towers within the city by encouraging the use of existing structures. 
b.  If a provider fails or refuses to permit collocation on a facility owned or controlled by it, where collocation is feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be required, in contradiction with city policy. Collocation shall be required unless an applicant demonstrates that collocation is not feasible. 
2.  Antennas on Existing Towers. An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the building official and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following: 
a.  A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the building official allows reconstruction as a monopole. 
b.  An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed thirty feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate the collocation of additional carriers if the provisions of this chapter for fall zone and foundation stability are met. 
2.  Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops. Wireless communication antennas placed on the roofs of buildings may be approved by the building official, if the principal use is a conforming use and the building is a conforming structure. The antenna shall not exceed the height of its supporting structure by more than twelve feet. This does not apply to residential buildings. 
3.  Antennas Mounted on Utility Structures. Wireless communication antennas attached to utility structures such as water towers or electrical transmission line towers may be approved by the building official. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance with the city building code and this title regarding accessory structures in the zoning district in which it is located. 
H.  Variances. The zoning board of appeals may consider a variance from the standards of this section, based upon a finding that one or more of the following factors exist, as appropriate for the type of variance requested: 
1.  Location. The applicant must demonstrate that a location cannot reasonably meet coverage or capacity needs if constructed in accordance with the standards of this section. 
2.  No Collocation. The applicant must demonstrate that a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs because existing structures cannot support the facility, that collocation would result in unreasonable interference, or that reasonable financial terms are not available for collocation. 
3.  Tower Setback. The applicant has provided engineering information that documents that the tower is self-collapsing and that the setback area provided shall accommodate the structure should it fall or break and provide a reasonable buffer in the event the structure fails. 
4.  Height. The height requested is necessary to compensate for signal interference due to topography, tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions, or would reduce the number of towers to the benefit of the city. 
5.  Mitigation. The applicant has proposed means to mitigate any negative impacts through provision for future collocation, if found to be appropriate by the city, and special design of the facility and site. 
6.  Design. The wireless communication and accessory facilities shall be designed to be compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general area such as a steeple, bell tower, or similar form. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.120 - Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds and clearing of trees. 
A.  The grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds, or clearing of trees within an area of less than one hundred square feet, shall be permitted activities on any lot provided such activity is incidental to the uses on the lot and in accordance with applicable city, county, and state regulations. 
B.  Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds, or tree clearing within an area over one hundred square feet may be permitted after review and approval of an administrative site plan in accordance with Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures and with applicable city, county, and state regulations. 
C.  Excavation and site preparation for building foundations is excepted from the excavating provisions of this section provided that such work is considered incidental to building construction and all necessary permits have been obtained. 
D.  Excavation required for swimming pools is excepted from excavating provisions of this section provided that all necessary permits are obtained and the pool is completely constructed within six months of the excavation. 
E.  Any clearing of trees on lots of over one hundred square feet prior to site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures shall be prohibited unless a tree removal permit from the building department has been issued. 
F.  The use of land for dumping or disposal of refuse, ash, garbage, rubbish, waste material or industrial byproducts or the storage, collection or accumulation of used construction materials shall not be permitted in any district. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.130 - Performance standards. 
    No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy and operation, which standards are established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within the area: 
A.  Smoke. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a density greater than that density described as No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart, provided that the following exceptions shall be permitted: 
1.  Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than No. 3 on the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods aggregating four minutes in any thirty minutes. 
2.  Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than No. 3 on the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods aggregating three minutes in any fifteen minutes, when building a new fire or when breakdown of equipment occurs such as to make it evident that the emission was not reasonably preventable. 
    Method of Measurement. For the purposes of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines which is made a part of this title shall be the standard. However, the umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringlemann Chart. 
B.  Dust, Dirt and Fly Ash. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating while using said process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gas-borne or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with said process, furnace or combustion device so that the quantity of gas-borne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of five hundred degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Method of Measurement. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices, these conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed fifty percent at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the A.S.M.E. Test Code of dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The building official may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and fly ash have been made. 
C.  Glare and Radioactive Materials. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
D.  Fire and Explosive Hazards. 
1.  In the M-2 general industrial district, the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the fire chief, is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards above-mentioned. 
2.  The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials, goods or products ranging from free-to-active burning to intense burning, as determined by the fire chief, is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and performance standards previously mentioned, and provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having noncombustible exterior walls, which meet the requirements of the building code of the city. 
b.  All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Association. 
c.  The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gases and explosives shall comply with the rules and regulations as established by Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended. 
E.  Noise. 
1.  The emission of measurable noises from the premises shall not exceed sixty decibels as measured at the boundary property lines. This provision shall apply in all districts except as specified in this section for the M-1 and M-2 industrial districts. A sound level meter shall be used to measure the level of the sound or noise. Sounds of very short duration, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter, shall be measured by an impact noise analyzer. 
2.  M-1 District. In the M-1, light industrial district, the measurable noise emanating from the premises used for activities permitted shall not exceed seventy decibels during the normal work periods of between the hours of six a.m. and ten p.m. and shall not exceed sixty-five decibels during the sleeping hours of between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. as measured at the property lines. Noises shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or high frequency. 
3.  M-2 District. In the M-2, general industrial district, the measurable noise emanating from the premises used for activities permitted shall not exceed seventy-five decibels during the normal work period or between the hours of six a.m. and ten p.m. and shall not exceed seventy decibels during the sleeping hours of between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m., as measured at the property lines. Noises shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or high frequency. 
F.  Vibration. Machines or operations which cause vibration shall be permitted in industrial districts, but no operation shall cause a displacement exceeding 0.003 of one inch as measured at the property line. 
G.  Odors. Creation of offensive odors is prohibited. 
H.  Wastes. All discharges to the city's publicly owned treatment works (sanitary sewer system) shall conform to appropriate regulations in the city wastewater disposal standards and regulations for the city's sewage disposal system as included in Ordinance No. 135, codified in Chapter 13.08 of Wixom Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.140 - Off-road vehicles and motorcycles. 
    The off-road use of motorcycles and other types of off-road vehicles shall be prohibited except on an approved racetrack or course for motorcycles and off-road vehicles in the M-1 district. This provision shall not apply to the lawful use of licensed vehicles on streets, roads, driveways or parking lots. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.150 - Street names and house numbers. 
A.  Street Names. All streets shall be known and designated by the names applied thereto on the map of the city known as the street address guide, filed with the building department. The naming of any street or the changing of the name of any street shall be done by administrative approval of the building official. 
B.  Street Numbers. All premises shall bear a distinctive street number on the front or near the front entrance of such premises in accordance with and as designated upon the street address guide on file in the building department. 
C.  Numbering Buildings. The owners and occupants of all buildings in the city shall cause the correct numbers to be placed thereon in accordance with such street address guide. Such numbers shall be not less than three inches high, shall be facing the street and adjacent to the principal entrance, and in such position as to be plainly visible from the street. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.12.160 - Medical marihuana activities. 
    Medical marihuana activities shall be subject to the following limitations: 
A.  Medical marihuana activities are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, RM-2 and MHP zoning districts. Medical marihuana activities are expressly prohibited in all other zoning districts. 
B.  All medical marihuana activities shall be conducted in full compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, as amended. 
C.  All medical marihuana activities shall be conducted in full compliance with all applicable building and fire codes. 
D.  Medical marihuana dispensaries, cooperatives, or other shared growing facilities are expressly prohibited. 
E.  Except for the use of medical marihuana, medical marihuana activities shall not be conducted in accessory structures. 
( Ord. No. 2014-01, § 3, 1-28-2014 ) 
Chapter 18.13 - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES 
Sections: 

18.13.010 - Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this title, shall be subject to the following regulations. 
A.  Relation to Principal Building. 
1.  Accessory buildings, structures, and uses are permitted only in connection with, incidental to and on the same lot with, a principal building that is occupied by a use permitted in the particular zoning district. 
2.  No accessory building, structure, or use shall be occupied or utilized unless the principal structure to which it is accessory is occupied or utilized. 
3.  Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the principal building. 
B.  Locations for Detached Accessory Buildings. 
1.  Detached accessory buildings and structures shall only be located in the yards listed in Table 13.01. 
Table 13.01 
Accessory Building Locations and Setbacks 
Locations Permitted Minimum Setback from Lot Line Front Yard Not permitted Side Yard District setback Rear Yard 3 feet from rear lot line 3 feet from side lot line 1 foot from alley Corner lot side-street yard Front yard setback of zoning district  
2.  Accessory buildings shall not be located within a dedicated easement or right-of-way. 
C.  Rear Yard Lot Coverage Limit. A total of the combined buildings accessory to a residential building shall not exceed the ground floor area of the principal building. The total area of all structures on the lot shall not exceed the lot coverage limits of the district. 

D.  Height Limitations. The maximum height of detached accessory buildings shall be one story but not to exceed fourteen feet. 
E.  Use. Accessory buildings shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Accessory buildings shall not be used for a home occupation. 
F.  Appearance. The design and building materials of any accessory building shall generally be consistent with the character of the principal building on the property (e.g., material, color), as determined by the planning commission or building official. 
G.  Attached Garages. Garages that are structurally attached to a principal building by connection of walls or a roof shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this title applicable to the principal building, including setbacks and lot coverage, and not the regulations of this section. Attached garages shall not exceed the height of the living portion of the dwelling. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.020 - Lots having water frontage. 
A.  Those residential lots or parcels having water frontage and abutting a public thoroughfare shall maintain the yard on the water side as an open unobscured yard, excepting that a covered and/or uncovered boat well shall be permitted. 
B.  Accessory structures shall be permitted after review and approval of plans by the zoning board of appeals. 
C.  Accessory structures shall be permitted in the yard between the abutting street right-of-way and the principal building, provided the accessory building meets the front yard setback as required for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.030 - Porches and decks. 
A.  Front Yard. 
1.  Uncovered Porches. An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch or terrace may project into a required front yard setback for a distance not exceeding ten feet. 
2.  Covered Porches. Porches or terraces sheltered partially or wholly by a permanent or temporary canopy, awning, metal, lattice, pergola or any other material shall be considered covered. Covered porches and decks may project into a required front yard setback for a distance not exceeding eight feet. 
3.  Enclosed Porches. Porches that are covered and enclosed by walls or windows are subject to the front yard setback applicable to the main structure, as set out in the applicable zoning district. 
B.  Side Yard. A deck or porch must not be closer to a side lot line than the minimum required side yard setbacks that apply to the main structure on the property, as set out in the applicable zoning district. 
C.  Rear Yard. Decks and open, unenclosed and uncovered porches, including those constructed on the ground and/or constructed of brick, concrete or pavers, are permitted to extend into the minimum required rear yard setback providing the following standards are met: 
1.  In no case shall any deck or porch be less than twenty feet from the rear lot line. 
2.  No more than fifteen percent of the area of the required rear yard, as determined by applying the standards set out in the applicable zoning district, shall be covered by a first-story deck, a ground-level deck, or a deck located above a walk-out basement. 
3.  No portion of the deck or porch located in the required rear yard shall contain covered structures such as gazebos, screened or covered porches. 
a.  Decks or porches sheltered partially or wholly by a permanent or temporary canopy, awning, metal, lattice, pergola or any other material shall be considered covered. 
b.  If covered structures are installed on a deck or porch they shall be subject to the standards applicable to the main structure and in the applicable zoning district. 
4.  Covered and enclosed structures intended for use during three or four seasons of the year (e.g., sunroom, screened porches, enclosed gazebos) are also subject to the requirements of Section 18.03.030(C). 
D.  Second-Story Decks. 
1.  Second-story decks, including any walkway connecting the second-story deck to a first-story deck, a ground-level deck, or a deck located above a walk-out basement, may extend into the rear yard setback, provided it does not extend more than fourteen feet from the rear of the dwelling. 
2.  The area of a second-story deck shall not count toward the permitted lot coverage for accessory buildings and structures. 
3.  If covered or enclosed, a second-story deck is subject to the minimum setbacks that apply to the main structure on the property, as set out the applicable zoning district. 
E.  Privacy Fences and Screens. Any privacy fence or privacy screen attached to a deck or porch shall be permitted in the rear yard, provided that it does not exceed six feet in height, measured from the floor of the deck or porch. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.040 - Pools and hot tubs. 
A.  Location. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and similar devices shall not be located in any front yard or easement. 
B.  Pool Setback. Swimming pools shall be set back as follows: 
Table 13.04 
Pool Setback Requirements 
Feature Minimum Setback Interior side or rear lot line 5 ft. Building wall 10 ft. Electrical, telephone cable or gas lines, overhead or underground 10 ft. Private well 25 ft. Semi-public well 75 ft. Sewer 3 ft. Septic tank 10 ft.  
C.  Hot Tub Setbacks. Spas, hot tubs and similar facilities shall be set back at least ten feet from the rear lot line and meet the side yard setback of the district. 
D.  Security Fencing. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and similar devices that contain twenty-four inches or more of water in depth at any point shall provide a permanent security fencing and closable gate that meets the requirements of the city building code. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.050 - Fences and walls. 
A.  All Districts. 
1.  Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this title, fences and walls located within the side yard or rear yard in any district shall not exceed a height of six feet. 
2.  Fences and walls shall not be erected within any public right-of-way. 
3.  Fences or walls shall not be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct the vision of motorists exiting driveways. 
4.  Fences may be located along a property line. 
5.  Fences that enclose historically designated property shall not exceed four feet in height and must be of material and construction consistent with the historical character of the property. 
6.  All exposed horizontal and vertical structural members of a fence shall be located on the inside of the property they are intended to fence. 
7.  Electronic fences buried beneath the ground for the control of pets are permitted in all districts. 
8.  Fences on lots of record shall not contain barbed wire, electric current or charge of electricity unless otherwise provided in this section. 
9.  Fences shall be constructed of quality, durable material such as wood, vinyl, aluminum, wrought iron, or chain link. 
B.  Front Yard Fences in Residential Districts. 
1.  Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this title, fences or walls located within the front yard or exterior side yard shall: 
a.  Not exceed three and one-half feet in height; 
b.  Be in excess of forty-nine percent solid or impervious; and 
c.  Be of a decorative nature as determined by the building official. 
2.  Parcels having a lot area in excess of two acres and a frontage of at least two hundred feet are excluded from the regulations of subsection B of this section. 
C.  Nonresidential Districts. 
1.  Fences and walls shall not be permitted in the front yard in a nonresidential district, except where specifically provided for below. 
2.  A chain link fence in the front yard of an industrial district may be permitted if enclosing a retention or detention pond approved by the planning commission. Any chain link fence used to enclose a retention or detention pond must be black vinyl coated. 
3.  Fences in the industrial district shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
4.  Barbed wire in not more than three strands mounted in a wye at the top of the fence shall be permitted in the industrial districts, provided such wye is located to project over the property being fenced. 
5.  Landscaping to obscure the visual impact of the fencing in the situations as noted above is required unless waived by the planning commission. 
D.  Screen Walls. 
1.  Requirements. For those use districts and uses listed below, in addition to the buffer zone required by Section 18.14.020(C), there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district, a screen wall constructed of brick or other suitable quality masonry material approved by the planning commission. 
Table 13.05 
Wall Requirements 
Use Requirements Off-street parking areas 4-foot high wall MHP, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, FS, I-S and IRO districts 6-foot high wall Institutional uses 6-foot high wall M-1 and M-2 districts 6-foot to 8-foot high wall (height shall provide the most complete obscuring possible) Outdoor storage areas, loading or unloading areas, service areas 6-foot to 8-foot high wall (height shall provide the most complete obscuring possible) Utility and essential public service buildings and uses 6-foot high wall  
2.  Waivers and Modifications. The planning commission may waive or modify the wall requirement between nonresidential and residential districts under the following conditions: 
a.  The requirement for a screen wall may be waived where the developed portion of the nonresidential site, including all buildings, pavement, storage and structures will be set back more than two hundred feet from the residential district. 
b.  The requirement for a screen wall may be waived where the residential district is considered to be an area in transition that will become nonresidential in the future, based upon the city of Wixom master plan. 
c.  Where conditions are such that a more effective and harmonious development with abutting or neighboring land uses would result, the planning commission may allow or require an earth berm and evergreen plantings to serve as the complete and continuous screen wall. The starting size of evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and irrigation shall be provided. 
d.  The planning commission may approve a reduction in wall requirements if material being stored is less than six feet in height. 
3.  Location. Walls shall be placed on the property line. In cases where underground utilities interfere with placement of the wall on the property line, the wall may instead be placed on the utility easement line located nearest the property line. In those instances where the wall may interfere with the maintenance of water or sewer utilities, the property owner is responsible for the cost of the removal and replacement of the wall, as determined by the city. 
4.  Materials. 
a.  All walls shall be constructed of brick or other quality masonry material that matches the primary masonry of the principal building on the site approved by the planning commission or building official. 
b.  Construction materials must be durable, weather-resistant, and rustproof. 
c.  Standard concrete block walls and poured or precast concrete walls are not permitted. 
d.  Required walls shall be similarly finished on all sides. 
5.  Maintenance. All walls shall be maintained by the property owner or tenant at all times equal in condition to the completed structure at the time of initial installation. The city may require that a suitable maintenance guarantee be provided for the continued maintenance of walls required under this title. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.060 - Entranceways. 
    In all zoning districts, entranceway structures, including but not limited to walls, columns and gates marking entrances to one-family subdivisions, multiple-family housing projects, business centers and industrial and office parks may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in Section 18.12.080. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.070 - Solar panels. 
    Freestanding solar panels shall be considered an accessory building and shall be subject to the requirements for such, together with all other applicable building codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.080 - Wind generators. 
    Wind generators may be permitted in rear yards when the following conditions are met: 
A.  The highest point of any portion of the generator shall not exceed thirty-five feet above the average grade of the lot. 
B.  The generator device shall be placed no closer to any side or rear lot line than the total distance between the grade of the lot at the base of the tower and the highest point of any portion of the generator. 
C.  The maximum diameter formed by a circle encompassing the outermost portions of the blades or other wind activated surfaces shall not exceed thirty percent of the distance between the ground and the highest point of any portion of the wind generator. The generator shall be so located that no portion of the structure would penetrate the vertical plane of any adjacent property line it if were to topple over in its normally assembled configuration. 
D.  The construction of the tower, blades, base structure, accessory building and wiring shall meet all applicable city building code and ordinances. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.090 - Antennas. 
    Television and radio antennas, including satellite dish antennas and transmission or reception antennas, may be permitted as an accessory use in any district subject to the following conditions. Conventional television antennae and satellite dishes less than 3.3 feet (one meter) in diameter for a residential use and 6.6 feet (two meters) in diameter for a nonresidential use shall be exempt from the regulations of this section, provided the equipment is not located in the front yard or on the portion of the building facing the front lot line. Wireless communication facilities, such as cellular phone towers, wireless internet antenna and commercial broadcasting antenna, shall be subject to the requirements of Section 18.12.110. Satellite dishes shall be located on the building roof or ground. 
A.  Building-Mounted. 
1.  The receiving portion of a building-mounted reception antenna shall not exceed a dimension of seven square feet of wind resistance surface in any residential district. 
2.  The receiving portion of a building-mounted reception antenna shall not exceed a dimension of fifty square feet of wind resistance surface in any nonresidential district. 
3.  Reception antenna shall not exceed a height of more than three feet above the highest point of the roof on which it is mounted in any residential district. 
4.  In any nonresidential zoning district, the total height of the reception antenna and the building that it is mounted on shall not exceed the maximum height requirements for the district in which it is located. 
5.  Roof-mounted reception antenna shall be placed on a section of the roof in the rear yard. 
6.  Reception antenna shall be designed to withstand a wind force of eighty-five miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires. 
7.  Reception antenna shall not be linked, physically or electronically, to a receiver which is not located on the same zoning lot as is the television reception antenna. 
B.  Ground-Mounted. 
1.  The receiving portion of a ground-mounted antenna shall not exceed a dimension of fifty square feet of wind resistance surface. 
2.  The reception antenna shall be constructed to the rear of the principal building and is not permitted in any front or side yard. 
3.  The reception antenna, including its concrete base slab or other substructure, shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line or easement in any residential district and a minimum of five feet from any property line or easement in any nonresidential district. 
4.  Reception antenna shall be constructed with appropriate landscaping to reasonably conceal the antenna from view. 
5.  Reception antenna shall be located on the same lot as the receiver or an adjacent contiguous lot that is owned or managed by the same person and/or company. 
6.  A reception antenna shall not exceed a height of fourteen feet. 
7.  Wiring between a reception antenna and receiver shall be placed at least four inches beneath the surface of the ground within rigid conduit. 
8.  Reception antenna shall be designed to withstand a wind force of seventy-five miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires. 
C.  General. 
1.  No advertising or identification display shall be placed on any portion of an antenna or tower, including a satellite dish antenna, except for the name of the manufacturer and serial number. 
2.  No more than three antennas shall be located on the same lot as a principal building. Antennae are permitted only in connection with, incidental to, and on the same lot as a principal building, structure, or use. 
3.  The color of the antennae shall be of tones similar to the surroundings. 
D.  Temporary Permits for Mobile Units. Mobile reception antenna units may be granted temporary permits for periods not to exceed seventy-two hours by the building official. The unit shall be located in accordance with location requirements for a permanent installation or as nearly thereto as possible. In those instances where a front yard installation may be required, the temporary installation shall not be permitted to exceed a twenty-four-hour period. Locations for temporary installation shall be established prior to issuance of a permit for such installation. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.100 - Backyard play structures and skateboard ramps. 
    Play structures such as swing sets, tree houses, jungle gyms and skateboard ramps, on residential lots shall be permitted as accessory structures and shall be subject to the requirements for such, together with all other applicable building codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.110 - Storage of recreational equipment. 
A.  A resident may store recreational equipment they own on their individual lot in garages or other accessory structures or within the confines of the non-required side or any rear yard and shall further comply with the accessory building requirements for distances from principal structures, setbacks from lot lines and easements. 
B.  All recreational equipment parked or stored shall not be connected to sanitary facilities and shall not be occupied. 
C.  On waterfront lots, boats may be stored on the waterfront side of a lot from October 1st through May 1st of any year. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.120 - Sale and maintenance of vehicles. 
A.  Sale of Vehicles. 
1.  A resident of a dwelling unit may have not more than one motorized vehicle for sale on the site of such dwelling unit at any time. 
2.  In no instance shall vacant lots or parcels be utilized for the sale of vehicles. 
3.  In no instance shall a vehicle for sale be displayed in a front yard other than on the driveway portion of the yard. In those cases where a driveway of a residence is not more than twelve feet in width, the vehicle for sale may be parked within an area adjacent to the driveway not to exceed fifteen feet in width as measured from the side edge of the driveway. 
B.  Maintenance of Vehicles. A resident may repair vehicles of the resident on the property of the resident's dwelling unit; however, in no instance shall a resident repair the vehicles of other than a resident of the dwelling unit on said property. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.130 - Commercial vehicles. 
A.  No commercial vehicle weighing in excess of ten thousand pounds gross vehicle weight or meeting the definition of a commercial vehicle shall be parked on any residentially zoned property or residential street in the city for any purpose or length of time other than the following: 
1.  For expeditious loading and delivery or pick-up and unloading of materials, goods, or merchandise; or 
2.  For the purpose of carrying on a principal use permitted on the property on which the vehicle is parked, as otherwise provided in this title. 
B.  The owner of residentially zoned property shall not permit a commercial vehicle to remain on such property in violation of the provisions of this title. 
C.  In any proceeding for violation of this title where a motor vehicle displays commercial license registration plates, such registration shall constitute a prima facie presumption that it is a commercial vehicle at the time of any alleged violation. 
D.  In any proceeding for violation of the weight limitation provision of this chapter, the weight indicated on the vehicle's registration shall constitute a prima facie presumption of the weight of the vehicle at the time of any alleged violation. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.13.140 - Common use waterfront lots. 
A.  Where a parcel of land contiguous to a natural body of water is proposed for residential development, a commonly owned area bordering on the body of water may be dedicated for recreational purposes. 
1.  The common area shall be dedicated for the use of owners and occupants of dwellings contained in the development. 
2.  Deed restrictions and bylaws shall restrict the use of the common waterfront area to the owners and occupants of dwellings within the development. The deed restrictions and bylaws shall be approved by the planning commission with the development. 
B.  Common use waterfront lots shall not be used for public marinas, public beaches or commercial recreational use operated for profit. 
C.  The design, operation and use of the common waterfront lot shall not impair the natural appearance of the land, overcrowd the lake surface or produce unreasonable noise or annoyance to surrounding properties. 
D.  A common waterfront lot shall contain a minimum of three hundred linear feet of water frontage and one hundred fifty feet in depth. 
1.  For the purpose of computing the length of water frontage, the measurement shall be along the water's edge at the normal high water mark of the lake as determined by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources or other applicable state agency or department; or if the department has not made such a finding, the normal high water mark location shall be determined at the discretion of the city. 
2.  Moreover, the measurement shall be made only along a natural shoreline, and shall not include any man-made channel, lagoon, canal or the like. 
E.  The maximum number of boats that can be docked, moored, stored or launched from an individual residential lot or a common waterfront lot shall be determined by zoning district and shall not exceed the following: 
Table 13.14 
Boat Limits 
District Number of Boat Wells/Feet of Lake Frontage R-1 and R-2 2 boats/90 feet R-3 2 boats/80 feet R-4 2 boats/60 feet RM-1 and RM-2 2 boats/60 feet  
    Nonmotorized watercraft less than eighteen feet in length such as canoes and kayaks shall not be counted towards the above maximum number of boats. 
F.  All boats that are moored, stored or launched from an individual residential lot shall be the property of the occupant of the dwelling on the same lot. Mooring, storage or launching of boats by persons who do not reside on the same lot shall be prohibited. 
G.  In those instances where lakefront lots or parcels are created, the water frontage lot width, measured at the water's edge at the normal high water mark of the lake, shall not be less than the front yard lot width requirement of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
H.  In no instance shall a waterfront parcel, lot, or tract of land in a residential zone be utilized as a principal use of property for the launching, docking or storage of boats or other watercraft. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.14 - GENERAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

18.14.010 - Architectural and design requirements. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a set of exterior building wall material standards, the intent of which is to enhance the visual environment of the city. Furthermore, the review of exterior building wall design and the consistent administration of standards can help to maintain the city's sense of place by encouraging consistent quality and character when structures are built or redeveloped. All development shall utilize quality architecture to ensure that a building protects the investment of adjacent landowners, blends harmoniously into the streetscape, and maintains a positive image for the city's various commercial shopping districts. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  This section shall apply to the exterior building walls of all construction, except one-family detached and two-family residential structures and their associated accessory buildings. 
2.  Architecture shall be reviewed by the planning commission as a part of site plan review under the requirements of this section. Within the VCA district, the architectural requirements contained in Chapter 18.07, Village Center Area District shall apply instead of this section. 
3.  Where additions or remodeling of existing buildings is proposed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  Where a new wall material is proposed for an existing building wall, only that portion of the building being altered shall be subject to the standards of this section. However, in considering the proposed alteration, the planning commission may modify the material requirements of the section so it will be consistent with the architecture of the entire building. 
b.  Where an addition is proposed to an existing building, the planning commission may allow the use of existing wall materials for the addition provided that the design of the alteration is consistent with the existing building wall design. 
C.  Exterior Building Design. 
1.  Buildings shall possess architectural variety, but enhance the overall cohesive community character. All commercial and office buildings should provide architectural features, details, and ornaments such as archways, colonnades, recesses, projections, wall insets, arcades, window display areas, peaked roof lines, decorative cornices or towers. 
2.  Building walls and roofs over fifty feet in length shall be broken up with varying building lines, windows, gables, and/or architectural accents such as pilasters, columns, dormers, and awnings. 
3.  Window area shall make up at least twenty percent of the exterior wall area facing the principal street(s) from which access is gained. Bars shall not be put over windows and doors that are visible from the street. 
4.  In addition, a portion of the on-site landscaping shall abut the walls so that the vegetation combined with the architectural features significantly reduce the visual impact of the building mass as viewed from the street. Additional landscaping requirements of this title must also be satisfied. 
5.  Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential district. The planning commission or building official can modify this requirement upon a determination that there is no reasonable alternative and the visual impact will be moderated through use of building materials, architectural features and landscaping beyond that required in Section 18.14.020. 
6.  Additions to existing buildings must complement the current building design with regard to height, proportions, scale, materials, and rhythm of openings. 
D.  Building Materials. 
1.  Durable building materials which provide an attractive, quality appearance must be utilized. 
2.  The predominant building materials should be quality materials that are characteristic of Michigan such as earth-toned brick, decorative tilt-up panels, wood, native stone, and tinted/textured concrete masonry units, glass products or other similar material as determined by the planning commission. 
3.  Other materials such as smooth-faced concrete block, undecorated tilt-up concrete EFIS (exterior finish insulation system) panels, or prefabricated steel panels should only be used as accents and not dominate the building exterior of the structure. 
4.  Metal roofs may be allowed if deemed by the planning commission to be compatible with the overall architectural design of the building. 
5.  All building materials shall be durable, weather-resistant and shall be maintained by the property owner or tenant at all times. 
E.  Building and Sign Colors. 
1.  Exterior colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors such as neon, metallic, or fluorescent for the facade or roof of the building are prohibited except as approved by the planning commission or building official for building trim. 
2.  The use of trademark colors not meeting this requirement shall require approval by the planning commission. 
3.  Mechanical and service features such as gutters, ductwork, service doors, etc., that cannot be screened must be of a color that blends in with the color of the building. 
F.  Roof Design. 
1.  Roofs shall be designed to reduce the apparent exterior mass of a building, add visual interest, and be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. 
2.  Variations in architectural style are highly encouraged. Visible roof lines and roofs that project over the exterior wall of a building enough to cast a shadow on the ground are highly encouraged, with a minimum overhang of twelve inches. 
3.  Architectural methods shall be used to conceal flat rooftops and mechanical equipment. 
4.  Overhanging eaves, peaked roofs, and multiple roof elements are highly encouraged. 
G.  Customer Entrances. Clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances shall be included in the design. Features such as canopies, porticos, arcades, arches, wing walls or integral planters shall be used to identify such entrances. 
H.  Community Amenities. Community amenities such as patio/seating areas, water features, artwork or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian plazas with park benches, or other features located adjacent to the primary entrance to the building(s) are highly encouraged and may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirement. 
I.  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.16, Signs. All sign bases shall be constructed of materials compatible with the architecture of the building(s) located on the premises. 
J.  Natural Features. Buildings shall be sited to protect existing natural areas such as steep natural grades, trees, significant groupings of healthy vegetation (shrubs and trees), and rock outcroppings. To the extent practical, these areas shall be incorporated into the overall site plan. 
K.  Building Location and Orientation. New buildings shall have at least one principal building entrance visible from the front lot line. 
L.  The planning commission may waive the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.14.020 - Landscaping requirements. 
A.  Purpose. The following section is intended to establish minimum standards for the design, installation and maintenance of landscaping, greenbelts and buffer zones. Landscaping, greenbelts, and buffer zones are necessary for the continued protection and enhancement of all land uses, enhance the visual image of the city, preserve natural features, improve property values, and alleviate the impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction. Buffer zones protect less intense uses from noise, light, traffic, litter and other impacts. These landscaping requirements are applicable for uses described in Section 18.17.020 and not intended for one-family or two-family dwellings on a single lot of record. 
B.  Required Greenbelt along Street Frontage. 
1.  All nonresidential sites shall provide a greenbelt along the front lot line within the minimum required front yard setback along each public or private street right-of-way. The greenbelt shall be landscaped with a minimum of one canopy tree, one ornamental tree, and six shrubs, rounded upward, for every forty linear feet of frontage. The planning commission may approve substitution of evergreen trees for up to fifty percent of the required trees. 
2.  All residential subdivisions, condominiums and multifamily developments shall provide a twenty-foot deep greenbelt along all public road frontages that form the exterior boundary of the development. For subdivisions and site condominiums, the greenbelt may be an easement over the lots, provided the required setbacks for individual lots shall be measured from the greenbelt. The greenbelt shall be landscaped with a minimum of one canopy tree, one evergreen tree, one ornamental tree, and six shrubs, rounded upward, for every forty linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Greenbelts shall not be required within the VCA district, provided the street tree requirements contained in Chapter 18.07, Village Center Area District are met. 

C.  Required Buffer Zones. The following buffer zones shall be required where a proposed use shares a common lot line with an adjacent use. Buffer zones shall apply in addition to the obscuring wall requirements of Section 18.13.050. The buffer zone required and the required landscaping therein shall be as described in Tables 14.02 and 14.02.B. 
Table 14.02 
Buffer Zone Required 
District that Proposed Use is Adjacent to: Proposed Use R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 RM-1, RM-2, MHP OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, FS, VCA, IRO, I-S M-1, M-2 One/two-family residential None None C C Multifamily residential B None C C Mobile home park B B C C Office B C None None Commercial B B C None Industrial A A B None Institutional A A B B Public/recreational B B None None Planned unit development Determined during PUD plan approval using above as a guide  
Table 14.02.B 
Requirements for Buffer Zones 
Buffer Type Minimum Width (1) Minimum Plant Materials A 50 feet 1 canopy tree, 2 evergreen trees and 4 shrubs per each 20 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward B 20 feet 1 canopy tree, 1 evergreen tree and 4 shrubs per each 30 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward C 10 feet 1 canopy or evergreen tree or 4 shrubs per each 20 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward  
1.  The planning commission may waive buffer zone requirements between adjacent compatible uses where the district allows a lesser or zero side yard setback or a reduction in parking lot setbacks where shared access and circulation is provided between uses. 
D.  Parking Lot Screening. 
1.  Parking lots which are visible from a public right-of-way (excluding a public alley) shall have the following landscaping between the parking lot and right-of-way: 
a.  A landscaped strip of at least ten feet in width. 
b.  One tree for every forty feet or fraction thereof of street frontage to the parking lot. 
c.  A hedgerow planted with two-foot tall evergreen shrubs spaced two and one-half feet on center, or a three-foot tall masonry wall or berm. 
2.  Off-street parking areas containing ten or more parking spaces shall be provided with landscaping at the rate of one canopy tree and one hundred square feet of landscaped area per ten parking spaces. 
a.  A minimum of one-third of the trees shall be placed on the interior of the parking area and the remaining may be placed surrounding the parking lot within ten feet, as illustrated. 
b.  The landscaped areas shall be located in a manner that breaks up the expanse of paving throughout the parking lot. 
c.  There shall be at least one deciduous tree for each one hundred square feet or fraction thereof of interior landscaped area. Each individual landscaped area shall contain at least one tree. 
3.  All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised standard or rolled concrete curb, except where landscape islands are being utilized as part of a stormwater detention or conveyance system. 

E.  Required Detention/Retention Pond Landscaping. Detention/retention ponds shall be landscaped to provide a natural setting in open space areas. 
1.  Where possible, ponds or basins shall be "free form" following the natural shape of the land to the greatest practical extent. Side slopes shall not exceed one foot vertical for every four feet horizontal. 
2.  One deciduous shade or evergreen tree and ten shrubs shall be planted for every fifty linear feet of pond perimeter as measured along the top of the bank elevation. The required trees and shrubs shall be planted in a random pattern or in groupings. The placement of required landscaping is not limited to the top of the pond bank if the plant species is adapted to saturated soil conditions. 
3.  Detention and retention ponds shall be landscaped in character with properties and shall be required to provide lawn areas, shrubs and trees to accomplish a suitable appearance compatible with development on the property and on nearby properties. Landscaping shall be required on all areas disturbed by grading to establish detention/retention ponds. 
F.  Residential Street Trees. 
1.  For all new one- and two-family residential dwelling construction, one street tree for every fifty feet of street frontage shall be provided for each lot or parcel. 
2.  Existing trees within street rights-of-way or trees in the front yard that meet size requirements may be utilized as street trees. 
3.  The trees shall be provided within the front yard on each lot or site condominium development for one-family residential projects. For detached or attached condominium projects, the trees shall be provided within the front yard area of the units. Where the installation of trees is deferred until after construction of housing units, the city shall require a performance guarantee for tree planting. Landscaping shall be required within cul-de-sacs, road medians and at development entrances. 
G.  Plant Material Spacing and Size. 
1.  Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered. 
2.  Evergreen trees shall not be less than eight feet in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced an average of twenty feet on center. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced an average of twelve feet on center. 
3.  Narrow evergreen trees shall not be less than five feet in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced an average of ten feet on center. When planted in rows, they shall be planted an average of five feet on center. 
4.  Shrubs shall not be less than thirty inches in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced an average of six feet on center. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced an average of four feet on center. 
5.  Spreading shrubs shall not be less than thirty inches in spread. They shall be planted an average of four feet on center. 
6.  Large deciduous trees shall not be less than two and one-half inches in caliper. The landscape plan shall also note the tree's diameter at breast height (DBH), measured at a height of fifty-four inches. When placed informally, they shall be planted an average of thirty feet on center. 
7.  Small ornamental trees shall not be less than two inches in caliper. The landscape plan shall also note the tree's DBH, measured at a height of fifty-four inches. When planted informally, they shall be spaced an average of fifteen feet on center. 
H.  Plant Material Species. 
1.  A mixture of plant materials (evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs) is suggested in all landscape plans as a protective measure against disease and insect infestation. All landscape nursery stock must be native to the state of Michigan. 
2.  Plant materials recommended as part of landscape plans within the city are listed in Table 14.02.C. 
Table 14.02.C 
Recommended Plant Materials 
Trees Evergreen Trees Fir, Spruce, Pine, Hemlock, Douglas Fir Narrow Evergreen Trees Red Cedar, Arborvitae, Juniper Large Deciduous Trees Oak, Hard Maple, Beech, Linden, Ginkgo (male only), Honey locust (seedless and thornless varieties), Birch Ornamental Trees Flowering Dogwood, Hawthorn, Redbud, Magnolia, Hornbeam, Russian Olive, Flowering Crabapple (disease-resistant varieties) Large Shrubs Deciduous Honeysuckle, Lilac, Border Privet, Sumac, Buckthorn, Pyracantha, Flowering Quince, Barberry, Forsythia, Cotoneaster (Peking, Spreading), Sargent Crabapple, Dogwood (Red Osier, Grey) Evergreen Irish Yew, Hicks Yew, Mugo Pine, Pfitzer Juniper, Savin Juniper Small Shrubs Deciduous Compact Burning Bush, Regal Privet, Fragrant Sumac, Japanese Quince, Cotoneaster (Cranberry, Rockspray), Potentilla Evergreen Spreading Yews (Dense, Brown's, Ward, etc.), Low Spreading Junipers (Andora, Hughes, Tamarack, etc.), Dwarf Mugo Pine, Big Leaf Wintercreeper  
  
3.  Plant materials prohibited within the city are listed in Table 14.02.D. 
Table 14.02.D 
Prohibited Plant Materials 
Trees Not Permitted Ash Horse Chestnut (nut-bearing) Box Elder Poplar Catalpa Soft Maple (Red and Silver) Elm (except cultivars not susceptible to Dutch Elm) Tree of Heaven Willow Honey locust  
I.  Installation and Maintenance Provisions. 
1.  The landscape plan submitted with the site plan shall include a cost estimate for all plant material. At the time of issuing a building permit, a performance guarantee shall be provided for the landscaping shown on the site plan. The city shall retain the performance guarantee for two years to ensure that the landscaping either survives the first growing season or is replaced. 
2.  All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and orderly state free from refuse and debris. Any dead or diseased plants shall be removed and replaced within six months. 
3.  Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass, living ground cover or mulch. 
4.  Irrigation shall be provided for all landscaped areas. 
5.  Trees required on the site plan must be maintained to remain in compliance with the site plan. Unhealthy vegetation must be replaced. Required landscaping shall not be removed unless approved as a site plan amendment. 
6.  Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns on site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for safety of ingress or egress. 
7.  Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining the lawn area and any landscaping within the road right-of-way that abuts the lot's frontage in good condition, including any road ditch. 
J.  Landscape Planting Plan Review and Field Inspection. 
1.  Whenever plantings are required in this title, a plan for planting and landscaping shall be provided showing materials, their locations, spacing, size and number as required by this section and other sections. 
2.  In developments providing open space such as multiple housing developments, open space subdivisions and cluster housing developments, a plan for landscaping shall include the development proposals for the open space as well as proposals for planting. 
3.  Review fees for landscaping and planting plans shall be charged to the applicant in accordance with fees established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
4.  Upon completion of landscape improvements and planting, the applicant shall notify the city and request a field inspection by the city. 
5.  Field inspection fees for review of landscape improvements and planting shall be charged to the applicant in accordance with fees established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
K.  Waiver from Landscaping and Screening Requirements. During site plan review, the planning commission may determine that existing landscaping or screening intended to be preserved is adequate. The planning commission may also determine that dimensional conditions unique to the parcel would prevent development of off-street parking area landscaping, greenbelts or buffer zones. If such a determination is made, the planning commission may waive, in whole or in part, the landscaping provisions of this section. Criteria which shall be used when considering a waiver shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Existing natural vegetation and trees; 
2.  Topography; 
3.  Existing and proposed building placement; 
4.  Building heights; 
5.  Adjacent land uses; 
6.  Distance between land uses; 
7.  Dimensional conditions unique to the parcel; 
8.  Traffic sight distances. 
L.  There may be instances or situations where the city may determine that trees regulated under Chapter 17.12, Woodlands, have been or will be removed, and the planting of trees under Chapter 18, Landscaping Requirements, is not possible due to site limitations. In such instances, funds in lieu of tree planting shall be paid into the city tree fund by the landowner in an amount established by the city council. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2016-03, § 2, 6-28-2016 ) 
18.14.030 - Sidewalks and nonmotorized pathways. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be provided on all major thoroughfares, including state trunklines, arterials and collector roads, unless payment, in lieu of construction as determined by the city engineer, has been provided. 
B.  Sidewalks and bike paths shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 12.04, Sidewalks and Bike Paths, of the Wixom Municipal Code and the Wixom master bike path plan as follows: 
1.  Concrete paved sidewalks not less than five feet wide shall be required in all subdivisions, site condominium and cluster housing developments, and planned unit developments within the city. 
2.  Concrete paved sidewalks shall be required along all access drives in multiple-family developments. 
C.  Crosswalks shall be provided at arterial and collector street crossings and shall be delineated with white pavement markings as specified by the city. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.14.040 - Lighting regulations. 
A.  Photometric Plan. All site plans submitted must be accompanied by a photometric plan, prepared by a licensed engineer or qualified lighting specialist, and containing the following information: 
1.  Lighting plan showing light fixture locations and type designations. 
2.  Photometric plan showing horizontal luminance levels in a point-by-point format with contour lines. Canopy lighting will also be included in luminance levels. 
3.  Lighting equipment specifications and data sheets. 
4.  Any other presentations required to convey the intent of the design. 
B.  Lighting Intensity. 
1.  Lighting shall not exceed one-half footcandle at a residential lot line. 
2.  Light shall not exceed one footcandle at a nonresidential lot line, except along the street frontage. 
3.  The maximum light level on the site shall be ten footcandles. 
4.  Additional lighting intensity for canopies may be allowed by the planning commission where it is determined necessary for safety reasons, provided it is recessed into the canopy and does not exceed twenty-two footcandles anywhere underneath. 
C.  Lighting Uniformity. The uniformity ratio between the average and minimum illumination within the developed portion of the site containing buildings, drives and parking lots shall not exceed four to one. Lighting levels may be reduced to a uniformity ratio of not more than ten to one after midnight, or after established hours of operation. 
D.  Light Fixtures. 
1.  All fixtures shall be metal halide or LED. 
2.  Outdoor lighting in all zoning districts shall be directed toward and confined to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots except as noted elsewhere in this section and shall not cause glare on adjacent properties. 
3.  Lighting shall utilize cutoff fixtures that are recessed sufficiently such that the light source is not visible from off site. 
4.  Bollard lights are permitted to light driveways and pedestrian areas. Floodlight type fixtures shall not be permitted except for building accent and sign lighting. 
E.  Fixture Height. 
1.  Light fixtures shall have a maximum height of twenty feet within three hundred feet of a residential district. 
2.  Light fixtures shall have a maximum height of thirty feet where more than three hundred feet from a residential district. 

F.  Building Lighting. 
1.  All lighting in nonresidential districts used for the external illumination of buildings, so as to feature said buildings, shall be placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent highways or adjacent property. The planning commission may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures will improve the appearance of the site. 
2.  Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings, including along the roof line, eaves and around windows. The planning commission may approve internally illuminated architectural bands when it can be shown that the treatment will enhance the appearance of the building or is necessary for security purposes. 
G.  Signs. Illumination of signs shall be directed or shielded downward so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on the adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
H.  Constant Light. All illumination of signs and any other outdoor feature shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. Artificial light shall be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
I.  Entrance Lighting. Lighting shall be provided to illuminate commercial driveways for traffic safety. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.14.050 - Waste receptacles. 
A.  Scope. The regulations of this section shall apply to all uses that have their refuse removal needs serviced by collective refuse containers. 
B.  Location. 
1.  Waste receptacles, including dumpsters with enclosures, shall be located in the rear yard or nonrequired side yard, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
2.  For nonresidential uses adjoining a residential district, the waste receptacle enclosure shall be as far as practical, and in no case be less than twenty feet away from any adjacent residential district. 
3.  Waste receptacles shall be easily accessed by refuse vehicles without potential to damage automobiles parked in designated parking spaces or interfering with the normal movement of vehicles on or off the site. 
4.  The waste receptacle must be oriented to not directly face a street or driveway, unless approved by the planning commission. 
C.  Enclosure Materials and Screening Required. 
1.  All waste receptacles, including dumpsters and compactors, must be enclosed on three sides with a six-foot high masonry enclosure with exterior finish matching the primary building materials of the principal building on the site. 
2.  All waste receptacles, associated enclosures and receptacle contents must be screened from public view. 
3.  Supplemental landscaping to screen the waste receptacle enclosure shall be provided. 
4.  The enclosure shall also include a gate, made of wood or other high quality material, as determined by the planning commission, on the fourth side. If the waste receptacle is a dumpster it must have an enclosing lid or cover. 
D.  General. 
1.  The waste receptacle base shall be at least nine feet by six feet in area, constructed of six inches of reinforced concrete pavement. 
2.  The base shall extend six feet beyond the waste receptacle pad or gate to support the front axle of a refuse vehicle. 
3.  Posts, bollards or bumpers shall also be provided to protect the enclosure from damage. 
4.  The shared use of receptacles shall be allowed by adjoining businesses where sharing will not create a health or safety concern and where it does not result in the accumulation of visibly excessive quantities of waste. Necessary shared use agreements are required. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.14.060 - Mechanical equipment. 
    Any mechanical equipment or utilities and similar equipment associated with a commercial, industrial or other nonresidential use, including water and gas meters; elevator housings; stairways; tanks; heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment; electrical transformers; television, telephone and cable cabinets; and other similar equipment, shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Roof-Mounted Equipment Screening. 
1.  All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened by a solid wall or architectural feature that is constructed of the same material and is compatible in appearance with the principal building. 
2.  Roof-mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of ten feet above the surrounding roof surface. 
B.  Ground-Mounted Equipment. All ground-mounted equipment shall be screened by a solid wall, fence or landscaping. Landscaping must create a continuous screen with the starting size of the plant material equal to or greater than the height of the equipment at the time of planting. 
C.  Building-Mounted Equipment. All building-mounted equipment for multiple-family residential developments and for any nonresidential use shall be screened with landscaping, a solid wall or architectural feature, or integrated into the design of the building. 
D.  Residential Buffering. In a nonresidential district, ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be located within twenty feet of any residential district. Where adjacent to any residential district, all roof-mounted mechanical units must be set back a minimum of twenty feet from the side of the building facing the residential district and screened using solid architectural materials. Noise from mechanical equipment shall not exceed sixty decibels as measured at the residential property line. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.14.070 - Cluster mailboxes. 
    Where provided, cluster mailboxes containing over eight mailboxes must comply with the following: 
A.  Location. The location of the mailboxes shall not cause conflict between pedestrian and vehicular traffic. In addition, the mailboxes shall be integrated into the overall site plan, the site's architecture and other site elements. 
B.  Access. Access to cluster mailboxes shall be provided by a parking lane located between the mailboxes and the adjacent street. The parking lane shall be constructed as an extension of the street and be a minimum of seven feet in width for a length of at least twenty-four feet in addition to tapers before and after the mailbox location as specified by the city engineer. 
C.  Screening. Landscaping or a decorative enclosure may be required by the planning commission on the backside of the mailbox clusters to help integrate the structure into the overall site layout. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.15 - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

18.15.010 - Off-street parking requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any principal building or structure, automobile off-street parking spaces with adequate access to all spaces. 
A.  Schedule of Parking Requirements. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with Table 15.01. 
Table 15.01 
Schedule of Parking Requirements 
Use Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measure Residential One-family and two-family residential 2 spaces for each dwelling unit Multiple-family residential 1.5 spaces per each efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling unit, 2.0 spaces per each unit with 2 or more bedrooms Manufactured home park 2 spaces for each manufactured home unit or site, 1 for each employee of the manufactured home park, and 1 space for each 3 manufactured homes for visitor parking Senior Housing Independent senior housing 1.25 spaces per unit Dependent senior housing including assisted living and convalescent/nursing homes 1 space per 2 rooms, plus 1 space for each employee during the peak shift Institutional Churches and similar places of worship 1 space for each 3 seats or 6 ft. of pews in the main unit of worship Governmental offices or other governmental uses, post office, public utility offices, exchanges, transformer stations, pump storage 1 space per 250 sq. ft. usable floor area Elementary and middle schools 1 space for each 1 teacher, employee, or administrator in addition to the requirements for auditorium or stadium Senior high schools, colleges and vocational and commercial schools 1 space for each teacher, employee, and administrator, and 1 space for each 10 students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium or stadium, whichever seats more Auditoriums and assembly halls 1 space per each 3 seats plus 1 for each 2 employees Stadium, sports arena or similar place of outdoor assembly 1 space for each three seats or 5 ft. of benches Public recreation centers including gymnasiums and martial arts instruction 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area Private clubs, lodge halls, union halls, fraternal orders, civic clubs and similar uses 1 space for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by the Fire or Building Code Library 1 space for each 350 sq. ft. of usable floor area Child day-care centers 2 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 8 children of licensed authorized capacity Adult foster care facilities 1 space per 4 clients plus 1 space per each employee Office Banks, credit unions or savings and loans, including drive-through facilities 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area, plus 2 spaces for each "walk-up" ATM. Drive-up windows shall be provided 5 stacking spaces for each window Business offices or professional offices except medical offices 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of usable floor area Medical offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area Emergency medical clinics, outpatient centers, 24-hour urgent care centers, etc. 2 spaces per exam or outpatient procedure/operating room, plus, 1 space per laboratory or recovery room, plus 1 space for each 2 rooms for employee parking Hospitals 2 spaces per inpatient bed plus 1 space per each 200 sq. ft. of office or outpatient area Retail Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of usable floor space Shopping centers with multiple tenants 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of usable retail floor area for the first 50,000 sq. ft. 1 space for each 275 sq. ft. for the next 50,000 to 450,000 sq. ft. of usable retail floor area. 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. for that area in excess of 450,000 sq. ft. of usable retail floor area. Nonretail uses such as restaurants, bars and theaters shall be calculated separately based upon their respective requirements Furniture/carpet stores 1 space per 800 sq. ft. of usable floor area Grocery store/supermarket 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area Automobile sales or showroom 1 space per 200 sq. ft., plus 3 spaces per each auto service bay Recreational vehicle, boat, mobile home and similar sales 1 space per 800 sq. ft., plus 2 spaces per each vehicle sales service bay Open-air business, outdoor display, sales and storage accessory to a permitted retail business, such as nurseries and home improvement items 1 space for each 800 sq. ft. of land area being used for display Wholesale establishments 1 space per each 500 sq. ft. of usable floor area Restaurants and Bars Cocktail lounge/night club 1 space per each 60 sq. ft. of usable floor area or 1 space per two seats, whichever is greater Drive-in restaurant 1 space for each employee in addition to the spaces provided for customer service spaces, plus any parking required for indoor seating Drive-through restaurant 1 space per 70 sq. ft. of usable floor area or 0.5 space per seat, whichever is greater, plus 3 designated drive-through short term waiting spaces, plus 10 stacking spaces for drive-through service which do not conflict with use of required spaces, plus at least 2 longer spaces designated for recreational vehicles and semi-trucks Carry-out restaurant 4 spaces or 1 space for each employee plus 1 per 60 sq. ft. of usable floor area, whichever is greater Coffee house 1 space per 70 sq. ft. of usable floor area Open front restaurants such as: dairy bars and fruit and vegetable stands 10 spaces plus 1 space per employee Standard sit-down restaurants without liquor license 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of usable floor area or one for each 2 seats, whichever is the greater, plus up to 5 longer spaces designated for recreational vehicles and semi-trucks Standard sit-down restaurants with liquor license/taverns 1 space for each 70 sq. ft. of usable floor area or 1 per two seats, whichever is greater Commercial Services Gasoline service station 2 spaces per each service bay, plus 2 spaces per employee, plus 1 space per each tow truck, plus 1 space for each 500 sq. ft. devoted to sales of automotive goods or convenience items Minor automotive repair businesses such as muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, tire stores, undercoating shops and minor engine repair shops 2 spaces per each service bay, plus 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per each tow truck Automobile quick oil change 2 stacking spaces for each service stall, rack or pit plus 1 space for each employee Automobile wash Automatic 1 space per employee plus 5 stacking spaces for each 20 foot of car wash length Self-service or coin operated 2 spaces per stall, excluding the stall itself Barber shop/beauty salons 2.5 spaces per each barber or beautician's chair/station Dry cleaners 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of usable floor area Self-service laundromats 1 space for each 2 washing machines Funeral homes 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of service parlors, chapels and reception area, plus 1 space per each funeral vehicle stored on premise Motels/hotels 1 space per guest room plus any required parking for conference rooms, exhibit space or banquet rooms Motels/hotels with restaurant or lounge 1 space per guest room, plus 12 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of restaurant/lounge space Banquet halls or conference rooms, exhibit halls and similar uses without fixed seats 1 space per every 2 persons of capacity authorized by the Building Code, or 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of usable floor area, whichever is greater, plus any required parking for other uses, such as restaurants, gift shops, etc. Self-storage mini-warehouse Minimum of 6 spaces Video rental establishments 1 space per 150 sq. ft. of usable floor area Recreational Health fitness centers, athletic clubs, martial art schools and other similar uses 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area Bowling centers 4 spaces per lane plus 25% of the required parking for any restaurant or lounge Commercial outdoor recreation uses such as batting cages, miniature golf courses, etc. 2 spaces for each batting cage, archery range, miniature golf hole, or similar activity Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, ice or roller skating rinks 1 space for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by the Building Code or 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area, whichever is greater Golf course driving ranges 2 spaces per each 3 tees Golf courses 3 spaces per each course hole, plus any required parking for other uses such as a banquet hall, gift shop or lounge. Public swimming pools 1 space per each 3 persons of capacity authorized by the Building Code Indoor racquetball/tennis facilities 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of usable floor area or 6 spaces per court, whichever is greater Theaters 1 space for each 3 seats plus 1 space for each employee Amusement arcades 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of usable floor area, with a minimum of 6 spaces required Industrial Light industrial, manufacturing, testing labs, research and development facilities, and related accessory offices 1 space per each 1.2 employees in the largest shift, or 1 space per 700 sq. ft. of usable floor area, whichever is greater, plus 1 space for each corporate vehicle stored on site Warehousing 1 space per each 1,500 sq. ft. usable floor area, or 1 space per employee at peak shift, whichever is greater; plus 1 space for each corporate vehicle (separate standard provided for mini-storage)  
B.  Floor Area, Usable. For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of "floor area, usable" in Chapter 18.24, Definitions shall govern. 
C.  Fractional Spaces. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
D.  Uses Not Listed. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a use that the building official considers is similar in type. 
E.  Maximum Allowed Parking. In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement which reduces aesthetic standards and contribute to high rates of stormwater runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by more than twenty percent shall only be allowed with approval by the planning commission. In granting such additional space, the planning commission shall determine that such parking will be required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
F.  Collective or Shared Parking. Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately, except as provided for below. Where the two uses are on separately owned lots, a legal agreement for shared parking shall be filed and recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds and a copy provided to the city. 
G.  Reduction of Parking Requirements. The planning commission may reduce the parking requirements based upon a finding that there will be a lower demand for parking due to one or more of the following: 
1.  Shared parking by multiple uses where there will be a high proportion of multipurpose visits or uses have peak parking demands during differing times of the day or days of the week. Pedestrian connections shall be maintained between the uses. Where uses are on separate lots, the lots shall be adjacent to each other. Pedestrian and vehicular connections shall be maintained between the lots and shared parking agreements shall be filed and recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds and a copy provided to the city. 
2.  Expectation of walk-in trade due to sidewalk connections to adjacent residential neighborhoods or employment centers. The site design shall incorporate pedestrian connections to the site and on-site pedestrian circulation shall provide safe and convenient access to the building entrance. 
3.  Availability of other forms of travel such as transit. The planning commission may require that the site design incorporate transit stops, pedestrian connections to nearby transit stops or bicycle parking facilities. 
H.  Land Banked Parking. Where the conditions of subsection G of this section are not met, but an applicant demonstrates that the parking requirements for a proposed use would be excessive, the planning commission may defer some of the parking, provided the following: 
1.  The site plan designates portions of the site for future construction of the required parking spaces. 
2.  Areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained in a landscaped appearance and not used for building area, storage, or other accessory use. 
3.  The deferred parking shall be required to meet ordinance requirements if constructed and may not occupy required greenbelts. 
4.  Construction of the deferred parking area to add parking spaces may be initiated by the owner or required by the building official, based on parking needs or observation, and shall require administrative approval of an amended site plan. 
I.  Existing Parking. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than that required in this chapter for a similar new building or new use. 
J.  Location. Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within three hundred feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown on all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
K.  Residential Parking. Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and are subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.13, Accessory Buildings and Uses. In R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts, parking is subject to the following: 
1.  Parking is not permitted in a front yard except on an improved driveway with a concrete, asphalt, gravel or stone surface. 
2.  Driveways shall not utilize more than thirty-five percent of the front yard. All existing dwellings shall be exempt from this requirement. 
3.  Required off-street parking for one-family dwellings may be provided in a stacking configuration in a driveway or garage or combination thereof. 
4.  Lawn and yard areas, other than designated parking areas, shall not be utilized for off-street parking. 
L.  Storage in Parking Lots Prohibited. The open storage of merchandise, materials, trucks, trailers, construction trailers, recreational vehicles and equipment is prohibited in areas of the property which are designed to accommodate the off-street parking requirements of the site. 
M.  Sales in Parking Lots Prohibited. The placement of materials, merchandise, motor vehicles, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles or equipment in off-street parking areas of a property for the purpose of sale, rental or repair is prohibited, except as may be provided in this title. 
N.  Barrier Free-Accessible Parking. Off-street parking facilities required for physically handicapped-accessible buildings shall be based on Table 15.01.B. 
Table 15.01.B 
Barrier Free-Accessible Parking Requirements 
Total Parking in Lot Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1000 2 percent of total 1001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.15.020 - Off-street parking facility design. 
A.  Applicability. Whenever the off-street parking requirements in this chapter require the building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations. 
B.  Access. 
1.  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles per the requirements of Section 18.15.050. 
2.  Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than one-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for one-family residential use. 
3.  Each entrance to and exit from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than one-family residential use shall be at least twenty-five feet from adjacent property located in any one-family residential district. 
C.  Maneuvering Lanes. All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street is prohibited. All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the ninety degree pattern may permit two way movement. 
D.  Minimum Dimensional Requirements. Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements of Table 15.02 except as modified by the Michigan Department of Labor and Economic Growth, Barrier Free Design Section of the Bureau of Construction Codes (parking space width requirement of not less than twelve feet). 
Table 15.02 
Minimum Dimensional Requirements 
Parking Pattern Maneuvering Lane Width Parking Space One-Way Two-Way Width Length 0º (parallel parking) 12 ft. 1 24 ft. 8 ft. 23 ft. 30º to 53º 12 ft. 24 ft. 8 ft. 6 in. 18 ft. 54º to 74º 15 ft. 24 ft. 8 ft. 6 in. 18 ft. 75º to 90º 20 ft. 24 ft. 9 ft. 18 ft.  
1 Will be required to be increased in those instances where fire or safety apparatus is required to utilize maneuvering lane. 
E.  Parking Abutting Sidewalk. Where a parking space abuts a sidewalk, the minimum sidewalk width shall be seven feet. Where parking spaces overhang a seven-foot wide sidewalk or a curbed landscape area, two feet may be deducted from the required length of the parking space. 
F.  Stacking Spaces. Required stacking spaces shall be a minimum nine feet wide and twenty feet in length. 
G.  Pavement. All driveways and parking lots, with the exception of those serving detached one-family homes, shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or asphalt and shall have concrete curbing on all sides. Bumper blocks shall not be used in parking lots except where the planning commission determines they are necessary. The planning commission may approve alternative paving materials, such as permeable/grass pavers, for overflow, seasonal or low usage parking. 
H.  Drainage. All parking lots shall be graded or drained to dispose of stormwater runoff. The planning commission may permit openings in the curbing for drainage purposes. No surface water from a commercial or industrial parking lot shall be permitted to drain directly onto adjoining property unless a drainage easement has been obtained. Discharge of drainage into a public right-of-way or municipal storm sewer shall require written approval of the county drain commission, the appropriate road agency and the city. Parking lot pavement, curbing and drainage shall be in accordance with city specifications. 
I.  Snow Storage. Areas for snow storage must be provided and illustrated as such on the site plan. 
J.  Illumination. All illumination of parking lots or display areas shall be designed, installed and/or shielded to prevent spillover onto adjacent properties, and shall be arranged to prohibit adverse effect on motorist visibility on adjacent public streets. Parking lot lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section 18.14.040. 
K.  Screening Wall. Where an off-street parking or loading area is adjacent to a residential use or zoning district, a continuous and obscuring wall shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.13.050. 
L.  Landscaping. The parking area shall provide screening, greenbelts, buffers and parking lot landscaping in accordance with Section 18.14.020. 
M.  Waiver of Parking Lot Setbacks with Shared Access. Side or rear parking lot setbacks may be reduced or waived by the planning commission where a shared access driveway, connected parking lots, frontage road, or rear service drive is provided. Parking lots shall provide for cross circulation between adjacent sites where the planning commission determines that it will be beneficial for traffic circulation between sites in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.15.050. 
N.  Construction and Maintenance. 
1.  Plans. Plans and specifications for parking areas shall be submitted and approved following the site plan review requirements of Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures. 
2.  Installation. Required parking lots shall be installed and completed before issuance of an occupancy permit. The building official may grant a single extension for an additional six months in the event of adverse weather conditions or unusual delays beyond the control of the property owner. 
3.  Maintenance. Pavement shall be maintained in good condition. The visibility of pavement markings delineating parking spaces and directional control shall be maintained. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.15.030 - Off-street loading requirements. 
    On-premise space for standing, loading and unloading vehicles shall be provided for each use involving the receipt or distribution of goods. Where loading and unloading is not proposed, the applicant shall include a notation stating such on the site plan. The planning commission may permit central loading areas to be shared by multiple uses, such as in a retail shopping center or office park. 
A.  Traffic Flow. The size of the loading area shall be sufficient to prevent undue interference with adjacent required parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, or traffic flow on public streets. 
B.  Alleys. Where an alley exists at the rear of the building, the required loading area may be computed from the centerline of the alley. 
C.  Location. Loading/unloading areas and docks shall not be provided in the front yard. Where possible, loading areas shall be integrated into the design of the building to minimize visibility. 
D.  Screening. Loading docks and loading areas facing a residential district or a public street shall be adequately screened by a wall and/or landscaping. 
E.  Not Included with Parking. Required loading areas shall not be included in calculations for off-street parking space requirements. 
F.  Size. The size of all required loading/unloading spaces shall be at least ten feet by fifty feet or five hundred square feet in area, with a clearance of at least fourteen feet in height. The planning commission may modify this requirement for uses that will involve smaller delivery trucks such as offices. 
G.  Pavement. Loading dock approaches shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete with a base sufficient to accommodate expected vehicle weight. 
H.  Number. The minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 15.03: 
Table 15.03 
Off-Street Loading Requirements 
Institutional, Commercial and Office Uses Up to 5,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space 5,001-60,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space, plus 1.0 space per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. GFA 60,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 3 spaces, plus 1.0 space per each additional 50,000 sq. ft. GFA Industrial Uses up to 1,400 sq. ft. GFA 0 1,401-20,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space 20,001-100,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space, plus 1.0 space per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. GFA in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. 100,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 5 spaces  
I.  Exceptions. For office uses that will not require large truck deliveries, loading may take place in undesignated places in parking lots provided such loading is of a short-term nature. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.15.040 - Truck maneuvering, access and circulation standards. 
A.  Truck Access. All site plans submitted under Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures must indicate the type and volume of truck traffic anticipated at the site, include dimensions of all truck access and circulation lanes, and indicate all truck loading/unloading areas. Driveways and streets of commercial and industrial facilities anticipated to receive truck traffic must be designed to adequately accommodate that traffic (see Figure 15.04). The minimum driveway curve radius shall be thirty-five feet. 
Figure 15.04 Typical Driveway Standards for Truck Access 

B.  Truck Circulation Plan. Site plans must include a diagram with the dimensions of trucks anticipated at the site and show all existing and proposed truck circulation patterns, including the direction and flow of truck traffic on the site (see Figure 15.04.B.) and dimensions of all truck service drives, berths and dock approaches. 
Figure 15.04.B Truck Circulation 

C.  Turning Radius. Trucking, warehouse, and industrial facilities and other uses with loading docks shall be designed to include larger turning radii and added maneuvering space to accommodate trucks with a WB-62 design standard or another standard specified by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.15.050 - Driveway access management. 
A.  Driveway Location in General. 
1.  All driveways serving multiple-family, commercial, office, institutional or industrial uses, hereafter referred to as "commercial driveways," shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
2.  Driveways for nonresidential uses shall be located so as to minimize interference with the free movement of traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway grade. 
3.  Driveways, including the radii but not including right turn lanes, passing lanes and tapers, shall be located entirely within the right-of-way frontage, unless otherwise approved by the road commission for Oakland County or the city and upon written certification from the adjacent property owner agreeing to such encroachment. 

B.  Driveway Spacing Standards. 
1.  Minimum spacing requirements between a proposed commercial driveway and an intersection either adjacent or on the opposite side of the street may be set on a case-by-case basis but in no instance shall be less than the distances listed in Table 15.05. The following measurements are from the near edge of the proposed driveway, measured at the throat perpendicular to the street, to the near lane edge of the intersecting street or pavement edge for uncurbed sections. 
Table 15.05 
Minimum Commercial Driveway Spacing From Street Intersections 1, 2 
Location of Driveway Minimum Spacing for a Full Movement Driveway Minimum Spacing for a Channelized Driveway Restricting Left Turns Along major thoroughfare, intersecting street is a major thoroughfare 250 feet 125 feet Along major thoroughfare, intersecting street is not a major thoroughfare 200 feet 125 feet Along other streets 75 feet 50 feet  
Footnotes: 
1 Major thoroughfares include: 12 Mile Road, Beck Road, Charms Road, Grand River Avenue, Loon Lake Road, Maple Road, Pontiac Trail, Potter Road, West Road, Wixom Road and any other County Primary Roads, State trunklines or streets with a right-of-way of at least eighty-six feet. 
2 For sites with insufficient street frontage to meet the above criterion, the planning commission may require construction of the driveway along a side street, a shared driveway with an adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line farthest from the intersection or require a service road. 
2.  Minimum spacing between two commercial driveways shall be determined based upon posted speed limits along the parcel frontage. The minimum spacing indicated in Table 15.05.B. are measured from centerline to centerline. 
Table 15.05.B 
Minimum Commercial Driveway Spacing From Another Driveway 
Posted Speed Limit (MPH) Minimum Driveway Spacing (In Feet) 25 125 30 155 35 185 40 225 45 300 50 and higher 330  
3.  To reduce left-turn conflicts, new commercial driveways shall be aligned with those across the street where possible. If alignment is not possible, driveways shall be offset a minimum of two hundred fifty feet along arterial streets and one hundred fifty feet along collector and local streets from those on the opposite side of the street. These standards may be reduced by the planning commission where there is insufficient frontage and shared access with an adjacent site is not feasible. Longer offsets may be required depending on the expected inbound left-turn volumes of the driveways. 
4.  In the case of expansion, alteration or redesign of an existing development where it can be demonstrated that preexisting conditions prohibit adherence to the minimum commercial driveway spacing standards, the planning commission may modify the driveway spacing requirements. Such modifications shall be of the minimum amount necessary, but in no case shall spacing of a full-access driveway be less than sixty feet, measured centerline to centerline. 
C.  Number of Commercial Driveways. 
1.  The number of commercial driveways serving a property shall be the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access and access for emergency vehicles, while preserving traffic operations and safety along the public street. 
2.  Access shall be provided for each separately owned parcel. This access may be an individual driveway, shared driveway or via a service drive. Additional driveways may be permitted for property only as follows: 
a.  One additional driveway may be allowed for properties with a continuous frontage of over three hundred feet, and one additional driveway for each additional three hundred feet of frontage, if the planning commission determines there are no other reasonable access opportunities. 
b.  The planning commission determines additional access is justified without compromising traffic operations along the public street. 
D.  Commercial Driveway Design. 
1.  All commercial driveways shall be designed according to the standards of the city, the road commission for Oakland County or Michigan Department of Transportation, as appropriate. 
2.  For high traffic generators, or for commercial driveways along streets experiencing or expected to experience congestion, the planning commission may require two egress lanes. 
3.  Where a boulevard entrance is desired by the applicant or planning commission, a fully curbed island shall separate the ingress and egress lanes. The radii forming the edges on this island shall be designed to accommodate the largest vehicle that will use the driveway. The minimum area of the island shall be one hundred eighty square feet. The planning commission may require landscaping on the section outside the public right-of-way. Such landscaping shall be tolerant of street conditions. 
E.  Shared Driveways, Frontage Roads and Service Drives. 
1.  Where noted above, or where the planning commission determines that reducing the number of access points may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety while preserving the property owner's right to reasonable access, a shared commercial driveway, frontage road or rear service drive connecting two or more properties or uses may be required. In particular, service drives may be required near existing traffic signals or near locations having potential for future signalization; along major arterial streets with high traffic volumes; and along segments with a relatively high number of accidents or limited sight distance. 
2.  Shared commercial driveways and service roads shall be within an access easement recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds. A draft of the access easement shall be provided to the city for review prior to filing. 
    The number of accesses along a service road shall be according to the standards of this section. The planning commission may allow temporary access where the service road is not completed if a performance bond or other financial guarantee is provided which assures elimination of the temporary access upon completion of the service road. Building permits shall not be issued until such financial guarantee has been submitted to the city. 
3.  Service Road Design Standards (see Figure 15.05). 
a.  Location. Service roads shall generally be parallel or perpendicular to the front property line and may be located either in front of, adjacent to, or behind principal buildings. In considering the most appropriate alignment for a service road, the planning commission shall consider the setbacks of existing buildings and anticipated traffic flow for the site. 
b.  Access Easement. The service road shall be within an access easement permitting traffic circulation between properties. This easement shall be sixty-six feet wide, except an access easement parallel to a public street right-of-way may be forty feet wide, if approved by the planning commission. The required width shall remain free and clear of obstructions, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
c.  Construction and Materials. Service roads shall have a base, pavement and curb with gutter in accordance with Oakland County road commission standards for public streets, except the width of the service road shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty-six feet. 
d.  Parking. The service road is intended to be used exclusively for circulation, not as a parking maneuvering aisle. The planning commission may require the posting of "no parking" signs along the service road. In reviewing the site plan, the planning commission may permit temporary parking in the easement area where a continuous service road is not yet available, provided that the layout allows removal of the parking in the future to allow extension of the service road. 
Figure 15.05 Service Drives 

e.  Access to Service Road. The planning commission shall approve the location of all accesses to the service road, based on the driveway spacing standards of this section, provided the planning commission may allow additional driveways if approved by the road commission for Oakland County or the Michigan Department of Transportation, and consistent with the purpose of this chapter. 
f.  Temporary Access. The planning commission may approve temporary accesses where a continuous service road is not yet available and a performance bond or escrow is created to assure elimination of temporary access when the service road is continued. Building permits shall not be issued until monies have been deposited with the city. 
g.  Elevation. The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the service road at the property line and the city shall maintain a record of all service road elevations so that their grades can be coordinated. 
h.  Landscaping. The area between a service road and the public street right-of-way shall be planted as a landscaped greenbelt as specified in Section 18.14.020. 
i.  Maintenance. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the easement and service drive. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.16 - SIGNS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of June 24, 2014 , amended former Ch. 18.16, §§ 18.16.010-18.16.160, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, adopted in 2008. 

18.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to permit and regulate signs and to minimize outdoor advertising within the city so as to protect public safety, health and welfare; minimize abundance, nature, type and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss of sight distance; promote public convenience; preserve property values; support and complement land use objectives as set forth in the City of Wixom Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance; and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the city. The standards contained herein are intended to be content-neutral. 
    These objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction, illumination, and other aspects of signs in the city so as to: 
A.  Protect the public right to receive messages, including noncommercial messages such as religious, political, economic, social, philosophical and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
B.  Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and nonmotorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces desired uniform traffic flow, and creates potential for accidents. 
C.  Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or disrepair. 
D.  Reduce visual pollution and physical obstructions caused by a proliferation of signs or a magnitude of illumination which would diminish the city's image, property values and quality of life. 
E.  Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs should be for identification of an establishment on the premises, and not for advertising special events, brand names, or off-premises activities; alternative channels of advertising communication and media are available for advertising which do not create visual blight and compromise traffic safety. 
F.  Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and placement of signs. 
G.  Prevent placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses. 
H.  The regulations and standards of this chapter are considered the minimum necessary to achieve the substantial government interests for public safety, aesthetics, protection of property values, and are intended to be content-neutral. In other words, the intent of the city is to regulate the size, location, etc. of a sign rather than the content. 
I.  Prevent off-premise signs from conflicting with other allowed land uses. 
J.  Maintain and improve the image of the city by encouraging signs of consistent size which are compatible with and complementary to related buildings and uses, and harmonious with their surroundings. 
K.  Prohibit portable commercial signs in recognition of their significant negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics. 
L.  Preserve and enhance the image of the Village Center Area (VCA). 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.020 - Context of wording. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.030 - Wall, canopy, and projecting sign definitions. 

    "Awning" or "canopy sign": A non-rigid fabric marquee or awning-type structure which is attached to the building by supporting framework, which includes a business identification message, symbol and/or logo. See "wall sign.'' 
    "Incidental sign": A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. Examples of incidental signs include credit card signs, signs indicating the hours of business, no smoking signs, signs used to designate bathrooms, and signs providing information on business affiliations. 
    "Mansard": A sloped roof or roof-like facade. Signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. 
    "Marquee": A permanent roof-like structure or canopy, supported by and extending from the face of the building. A marquee sign is a sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. 
    "Nameplate": A non-electric, on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    "Projecting sign": A sign, other than a wall sign, that is affixed to any building or wall and whose leading edge extends more than twelve inches beyond such building or wall. 
    "Roof sign": Any sign that extends above the roofline or is erected over the surface of the roof. 
    "Wall sign": A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than twelve (12) inches from the wall of a building. Painted signs, signs which consist of individual letters, cabinet signs, and signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. Permanent signs which are not affixed directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the outside, shall also be considered wall signs. 
    "Window sign": A sign located in or on a window which is intended to be viewed from the outside. Permanent window signs which are on the inside of a building and not affixed directly to a window, or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the outside, shall be considered wall signs. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.040 - Ground Sign Definitions. 

    "Directional sign": A sign which assists motorists in determining or confirming a correct route such as, enter, exit and parking signs. 
    "Entranceway sign": A sign which marks the entrance to a subdivision, apartment complex, condominium development, senior housing complexes, manufactured housing communities, office and industrial parks and similar uses. 
    "Ground or monument sign": A three dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted freestanding identification sign, consisting of two (2) or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message, business, group of businesses or center name is affixed. 
    "Off-premises advertising sign": A sign which identifies a use or advertises products and services not available on the site or parcel on which the sign is located; a sign which directs travelers or provides a message unrelated to the site on which the sign is located, e.g., billboards. Off-premise advertising signs also include video signs, digital signs and similar technologies. 
    "Pylon" or "Pole sign": A sign supported on the ground by a pole or braces, without a monument base, and not attached to any building or other structure. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.050 - Temporary sign definitions. 
    "Temporary sign": A sign not constructed or intended for long-term or permanent use. Examples of temporary signs include: announcement signs; construction signs; real estate signs; community, civic event or project signs; or other special events that occur for a limited period of time such as a garage, yard or estate sales, or feather signs. 
    "Construction sign": A temporary sign identifying the name(s) of project owners, contractors, developers, realtors representing developers, architects, designers, engineers, landscape architects, and financiers of a project being constructed or improved; and not including any advertising of any product or announcement of availability of leasing space. 
    "Portable sign": A sign designed to be moved from place to place, whether or not it is permanently attached to the ground or structure. This includes hot-air and gas-filled balloons, pennants, streamers, festoons, ribbons, tinsel, pinwheels, non-government flags, and searchlights and signs mounted on a portable structures including those with wheels. 
    "Real estate development sign": A sign that is designed to promote the sale or rental of lots, homes, or building space in a real estate development (such as a subdivision or shopping center) which is under construction on the parcel on which the sign is located. 
    "Real estate open house sign": Temporary signs which advertise and direct the public to an open house for a building which is available for sale or lease, with the event held on a specific day. 
    "Real estate sign": An on-premise temporary sign advertising the property or structure's availability for sale or lease. 
    "Sandwich board sign": A moveable nonpermanent sign placed within the pedestrian public right-of-way of a public sidewalk during regular business hours consisting of an "A" frame or "inverted T" frame or other temporary style, with not more than two flat surfaces containing messages, and not permanently affixed to any structure or to the sidewalk itself. 
    "Snipe sign": A snipe sign is a sign made on any material and attached to any object and having no application to the premises where located. 
    "Vehicle business sign": Signs affixed to a parked vehicle or truck trailer which is being used principally for advertising purposes, rather than for transportation purposes. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.060 - Miscellaneous sign definitions. 
    "Animated sign": A sign which uses lights, moving parts, or other means to depict movement, motion, action, the impression or appearance thereof, or create an image of a living creature or person. This definition would include signs using video or other similar technology. 
    "Changeable message sign": A sign on which the message is changed mechanically, electronically or manually, including time/temperature signs and gasoline price signs. 
    "Device sign": Permanent signs on vending machines, gas pumps, ice containers and similar items indicating only the contents of such devices. 
    "Flashing sign": A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
    "Illegal sign": A sign which does not meet the requirements of this Chapter and does not have legal non-conforming status. 
    "Message": A piece of information that is presented on a sign. 
    "Moving sign": A sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves or revolves. A "rotating sign" is a type of moving sign. This definition does not include "changeable message signs." 
    "Non-conforming sign": A sign that does not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter, but was lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as non-conforming. 
    "Obsolete sign": A sign that advertises a product that is no longer made or that advertises a business that has closed. 
    "Regulatory sign": A sign installed by a public agency to direct traffic flow, regulate traffic operations and provide information in conformance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    "Sign": Any device, structure, fixture, figure, symbol, banner, pennant, flag, balloon, logo, or placard consisting of written copy, symbols, logos and/or graphics, designed for the purpose of conveying, bringing attention to, identifying or advertising an establishment, product, goods, services, or other message to the general public. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition of "sign" includes interior and exterior signs which are visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or public property, but not signs which are primarily visible to and directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.070 - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in all districts: 
A.  Signs which obstruct free access or egress from any building, including those that obstruct any fire escape, required exit way, window, or door opening or that prevent free access to the roof by firefighters. 
B.  Moving signs and signs having moving members or parts. 
C.  Animated signs. 
D.  Inflatable signs. 
E.  Signs which in any way simulate or could be confused with the lighting of emergency vehicles or traffic signals; there shall be no flashing, oscillating or intermittent, or red, yellow, or green illumination on any sign located in the same line of vision as a traffic control system, nor interference with vision clearance along any highway, street, or road or at any intersection of two or more streets. 
F.  Signs which obstruct or impair the vision of motorists or non-motorized travelers at any intersection, driveway, within a parking lot or loading area. 
G.  Snipe signs, including non-regulatory signs placed in any public right-of-way, as well as those attached to a utility pole, affixed to a tree, street furniture, fences, or waste receptacle. 
H.  Off-premise signs, including video signs or similar technologies. 
I.  Roof signs unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter. 
J.  Portable signs, as defined, not provided for in this chapter. 
K.  Pylon or pole signs not provided for in this chapter. 
L.  Illegal signs. 
M.  Obsolete signs and any sign or sign structure which: 
1.  Is structurally unsafe. 
2.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment. 
3.  Is capable of causing electric shock to person who come in contact with it. 
4.  Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts, missing letters, or non-operational lights. 
N.  Flashing signs. 
O.  Any sign which makes use of the words "Stop", "Look", or "Danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols, or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
P.  No signs shall be allowed in a public right-of-way or public easement, unless prior approval is obtained from the city. The city manager, or his/her designee, may administratively approve signs in the public right-of-way or public easement. The city manager, in his/her sole discretion, may refer any request for signs in the public right-of-way or public easement to the city council for approval. In addition, signs shall not be attached to trees or utility poles in a public right-of-way or public easement. 
Q.  Any sign not expressly permitted. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.080 - Exemptions to permitting. 
    The following signs shall not require a permit provided such signs are outside of the public street right-of-way, are located to ensure adequate sight distance, and meet the requirements of Section 18.16.090(B): 
A.  Address signs: 
1.  In all single family zoning districts, such sign shall not exceed two square feet in area. 
2.  In all other zoning districts, such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
B.  Community entrance or welcome signs. 
C.  Construction signs meeting the size requirements for temporary signs under Section 18.16.100. 
D.  Temporary signs meeting the requirements of Section 18.16.100. 
E.  Device signs with the following conditions: 
1.  Sign area of each device shall not exceed three square feet in area. 
2.  Limit of one sign per device, such as vending machines, gas pumps or ice containers. 
F.  Directory signs. A building with business occupants on the upper floors or the interior space on the first floor of a building may have a directory sign plaque not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area at the street entryway. 
G.  Employment signs. "Help wanted" signs soliciting employees for the place of business where posted, provided that the maximum area for all such signs shall be six square feet with a maximum height of four feet. 
H.  Essential service signs denoting utility lines, hazards and precautions or other similar information. 
I.  Flags: 
1.  Not to exceed three per zoning lot; and 
2.  Not to exceed four feet by six feet. 
J.  Historic markers. 
K.  Incidental signs shall not exceed a total of two square feet, a total of two signs per business. indicating acceptance of credit cards, the location of public telephones, restrooms, restrictions on smoking and restrictions on building entrances or describing business affiliations and are attached to a permitted sign, exterior wall, building entrance, or window. 
L.  Interior signs including any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building, and which is not visible from outside the building or which is primarily directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located. 
M.  Memorial signs or tablets shall not exceed four square feet in area, having the name of the building and/or the date of erection and cut, cast or engraved into a masonry or metal surface and made an integral part of the structure. 
N.  Nameplates. 
O.  Regulatory signs including traffic control and street identification signs. 
P.  Warning signs that are publicly authorized, such as no trespassing, warning of electrical currents or animals provided such signs do not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
Q.  This section is not intended to regulate free expression or speech under the First Amendment but instead control the time, manner and placement of signs. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.090 - General standards for permitted signs. 
    Signs which are permitted as on-premise accessory uses serving a commercial or informational purpose may be permitted subject to the requirements of this Chapter; provided, that no such sign shall be erected or altered until approved by the Building Official and until a sign permit has been issued. 
A.  Sign Setbacks. 
1.  All signs, unless otherwise provided for, shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public or private street right-of-way line or access drive in all districts. This distance shall be measured from the nearest edge of the sign, measured at a vertical line perpendicular to the ground to the right-of-way. 
2.  Side yard setbacks for signs shall be the same as that required for the main structure or building, provided that all nonresidential signs shall be set back at least one hundred feet from any residential district. 
B.  Clear Vision Area. In order to ensure adequate sight distance for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians, a minimum clear vision area shall be maintained between a height of twenty-four inches and six feet within a triangular area measured twenty-five feet back from intersection of public right-of-way lines. Furthermore, signs shall not be permitted where they obstruct motorist vision of regulatory signs, traffic-control devices or street signs. 
C.  Design and Construction. Signs, as permitted in the various zoning districts, shall be designed to be compatible with the character of building materials and landscaping to promote an overall unified and aesthetic effect in accordance with the standards set forth herein. Signs shall not be constructed from materials that are remnants or manufactured for a different purpose. 
D.  Illumination. 
1.  Signs may be illuminated, but only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign or internal to it. 
2.  Use of glaring undiffused lights, including bare bulbs, neon, or flames, is prohibited. 
3.  Lighting shall be shielded and/or pointed downward so as not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares. 
4.  Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs not attached to a building. 
E.  Maintenance and Construction. 
1.  Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in a manner consistent with the building code provisions and maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved including all metal, wood or other materials used for parts and supports. 
2.  All signs erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials so that they shall be able to withstand wind pressure of at least twenty pounds per square foot or seventy-five mph. 
F.  Measurement. 
1.  Sign Area. Sign area per side of sign shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Where a sign consists of a generally flat surface or sign face on which lettering and other information is affixed, the sign area shall be computed by measuring the entire face of the sign. 

b.  Where a sign consists of individual letters and logo affixed directly to a building, the area of the sign shall be computed by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the lettering and logo. 
c.  The area of a cylindrical ground sign shall be computed by multiplying the diameter of the cylinder by its height. 
2.  Sign height: The height of the sign shall be measured from the average grade to the upper-most point of the sign. Average grade shall be measured fifty (50) feet along the frontage from both sides of the sign. Placing a sign on top of a berm is permitted only if the berm is long enough to meet the average grade requirement and landscaping is provided on the berm. 

( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.100 - Specific sign standards. 
    The number, display area, and height of signs within the various zoning districts are provided in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table and its accompanying footnotes. Additional standards for specific types of signs are given below. 
Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations WALL, CANOPY, OR 
PROJECTING SIGN GROUND SIGN (d) TEMPORARY SIGNS (c) DISTRICT Number 
# Max. Size Number 
# (b) Max. Size per sign face Max. 
Height Max. Size per sign Total Area per Parcel Max. Height R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, RM-2, MHP - 10% of front facade for all uses other than single-family residential units, duplexes, and attached condominiums 1 24 square feet 6 feet 6 square feet 14 square feet 4 feet All non-residential districts 1 per business (a) 10% of front façade or 100 square feet, whichever is less (a) 1 72 square feet (d) 6 feet 24 square feet 48 square feet 6 feet  
  
Footnotes to the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table 
 (a)  Wall Signs. One wall sign shall be allowed per business, in addition to any other allowed ground signs. Businesses located on a corner lot shall be allowed up to two wall signs, one for each front façade. The maximum wall sign area shall not exceed ten percent of the front facade of the building (any facade which faces a public street), per use or business establishment. However, for a commercial structure containing one use or business establishment, as determined by the planning commission, the size of the wall sign may be increased up to the maximum square footage as follows: 
201-400 linear feet of building frontage facing a public street and having a public entrance 150 square feet Greater than 400 linear feet of building frontage facing a public street and having a public entrance 200 square feet  
  
   (1)  Window Signs. Window signs are permitted but shall not exceed 25% of the window area of the façade. Window signs shall be placed so as to maintain clear vision into the building for public safety reasons. 
   (2)  No wall sign shall extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is attached by more than one foot and all electrical conduits and boxes must be hidden. 
   (3)  Logo Sign. A logo sign can be considered part of a wall sign when located within five feet of the primary sign. 
 (b)  Ground Signs. Only one ground sign is permitted per use, including uses which occupy more than one parcel and business centers containing more than one business or use, with additional signs permitted according to the following table, however, no site shall have more than two ground signs, regardless of the number of street frontages or the amount of frontage. Single uses on a single parcel do not qualify for this consideration: 
Frontage along 2 or more rights-of-way 1 sign up to the maximum sign face area shall be allowed along 2 frontages 300 feet of frontage along 1 right-of-way 1 ground sign along that frontage Greater than 300 feet of frontage along 1 right-of-way 2 ground signs  
;em> 
 (c)  Temporary Signs. 
   1.  All temporary signs must comply with the sign size and height standards as specified in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table. 
   2.  Location of Temporary Signs shall comply with the following: 
     a.  Temporary signs shall not be attached to any utility pole, tree, fence, or be located within any public right-of-way. 
     b.  Temporary signs shall not be located closer than two feet to the edge of the traveled portion of the roadway, and in no case shall they be located within the public right-of-way, unless prior approval is obtained from the city. The city manager, or his/her designee, may administratively approve signs in the public right-of-way or public easement. The city manager, in his/her sole discretion, may refer any request for signs in the public right-of-way or public easement to the city council for approval. In addition, the city manager, or his/her designee, may administratively approve temporary signs for community events or special events, or in his/her sole discretion, refer requests for these temporary signs to the city council for approval. 
     c.  Temporary signs shall not be erected in such a manner than they will or may reasonably be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic. 
     d.  Temporary signs cannot be placed or constructed so as to create a hazard of any kind. 
     e.  Temporary signs may not be posted on private property without first obtaining the permission of the property owner. 
     f.  Signs shall not be located within any clear vision triangle, as described in Section 18.16.090(b). 
   3.  Each temporary sign shall be removed within sixty days of placement. Furthermore, no sign may be erected on a single parcel for more than sixty calendar days out of every one hundred twenty calendar days. Although a permit is not required for temporary signs, property and business owners must maintain a log of dates when temporary sign(s) have been in place showing compliance with the above standard. However, signs expressing First Amendment speech, including political signs, shall be exempt from this time limitation. 
 (d)  Ground Signs on Major Thoroughfares. Due to high speed limits on major thoroughfare roads, ground signs are permitted to have a maximum height of eight feet and area of one hundred square feet on the following roads: 
   1.  Wixom Road from Grand River Ave. to Pontiac Trail; 
   2.  Beck Road from I-96 to Pontiac Trail; and 
   3.  Grand River Ave. 
;em> 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.110 - Additional sign standards. 
A.  Directional Signs. No more than one directional sign shall be permitted for each approved driveway, with a maximum sign area of four square feet per sign, and a maximum height of four feet. Any directional sign which includes a business name, symbol or logo shall be calculated as part of the allowable ground sign square footage, as specified in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table. 
B.  Off-Premise Advertising Signs. The city currently has five existing outdoor advertising signs along I-96 which were erected pursuant to a consent judgment. The city has determined that it has no demonstrated need for any additional outdoor advertising signs. The city has also determined that these existing outdoor advertising signs negatively reflect on the aesthetics of the community. The city has therefore concluded that no further outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted to be erected. The existing outdoor advertising signs can be replaced pursuant to the consent judgment. The existing outdoor advertising billboards shall only be replaced with static billboards, and digital, video or other electronic faces are specifically prohibited. This section is not intended to prohibit First Amendments views, and any lawful message can be displayed on the existing billboards. 
C.  Projecting, Awning and Canopy Signs. Projecting signs, awnings and canopy signs may be used as an alternative to wall signs listed in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table, provided that they meet the following standards: 
1.  Any sign area on a canopy shall be included in calculations of maximum wall sign square footage. 
2.  Projecting, awning or canopy signs, other than those in the VCA District, shall have a minimum ground clearance of ten feet, shall be set back at least six feet from any adjacent public right-of-way, nor project over an alley or private access lane. A projecting sign shall not extend for more than two feet from the building to which it is attached. 
3.  No awning, canopy or projecting sign shall extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is attached by more than one foot. 
4.  Wood posts or supporting arms shall not be used in conjunction with any projecting sign, unless it is decorative in nature and part of the character of the sign. 
5.  Projecting signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area or three feet in width. The area of such sign shall be in addition to any permitted sign provided for herein. 
6.  Canopy signs shall not be internally illuminated and must be blackened out on the underside. 
D.  Entranceway Signs. One permanent sign per vehicular entrance identifying uses such as subdivisions, apartment complexes, condominium communities, senior housing complexes, manufactured housing communities, office and industrial parks and similar uses, provided that the sign is set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line or public right-of-way is permitted. 
E.  Changeable Message Signs. Changeable message signs may be permitted as a portion of, and accessory to, a ground or monument sign in the B-1, B-2, B-3, F-S, I-S, OS-1, IRO, and M-1 Districts, in accordance with the following: 
1.  The message may be changed electronically or manually. 
2.  The area of a changeable message sign shall not exceed one-third the total area of the sign. 
3.  Illumination shall be concentrated within the face of the sign to prevent glare upon adjoining properties and thoroughfares. 
4.  Electronic messages shall not flash, fade in or out, or scroll. 
5.  Electronic messages shall be displayed for at least five minutes, and changes shall take less than one second. 
6.  Any voids or burned out bulb in an electronic display shall be replaced within seven days and an automatic shutoff must be provided in the event any signs malfunction. 
7.  Electronic changeable message signs shall be at least one hundred feet from any residential district or use. 
8.  Electronic changeable message signs shall use only one color of lighting or bulbs to prevent nuisances and distractions upon adjoining properties and thoroughfares. 
9.  The luminance and contrast of a sign shall be adjusted at all times in direct relation to the ambient outdoor light and the following luminance limits shall apply: 
a.  Daytime (dawn to dusk): five thousand nits (candelas per square meter). 
b.  Nighttime (dusk to dawn): one hundred nits (candelas per square meter). 
c.  The luminance of a sign shall be determined by the city by averaging the brightness/luminance measured in nits (candelas per square meter) at a minimum of four different points on the sign measured at any time. 
F.  Sandwich Board Signs. Sandwich board or portable A-frame signs are permitted in the B-1, B-2 and B-3, F-S, and I-S Districts at the customer building entrances to businesses subject to the following requirements: 
1.  One sign per customer entrance shall be permitted regardless of the number of tenants on the premises. 
2.  The sign is permitted only during operating business hours and must be stored inside when the establishment is not open to the general public. 
3.  Each sign shall not exceed an overall height of forty-two inches and an overall width of twenty-four inches. 
4.  The sign must be located adjacent to the building, no more than ten feet from the customer entrance to the business, be a minimum of two feet from the edge of the curb, and be located so that at least a six foot wide sidewalk is maintained. 
5.  No sign shall be located in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or visibility. 
6.  All signs must be constructed or weather-proof, durable material and kept in good repair. 
7.  The sign shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
8.  Sandwich board signs within the public right-of-way may be moved/removed by the city for municipal purposes (i.e. code enforcement, snow removal, traffic issues, maintenance, etc 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.120 - Sign regulations for nonresidential properties in the VCA district. 
A.  Regardless of other provisions of this chapter, only the following signs and regulations for the signs are applicable to nonresidential properties in the VCA district. Residential properties are subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Types of Signs. Permitted types of signs include: wall signs, projecting signs, window signs, awning/canopy signs, and sandwich board/A-frame signs. These signs are allowed in accordance with the regulations in the following table and other regulations set forth in this section. No box signs (i.e., a rectangular wall sign with a flat surface) or signs resembling a box sign shall be permitted. Permits shall be required for signs in accordance with Section 18.16.090. 

Sign Regulations for Nonresidential Properties in the VCA District Sign Maximum Size & Height Permit 
Required Additional Requirements Wall Sign 10% of front façade or 100 square feet, whichever is less yes 1)  Individual letters and logos are to be no taller than 18 inches 
2)  Sign to be no closer than 2 feet from edge of building 
3)  Wall signs shall extend no more than 8 inches from the exterior face of the wall to which it is attached 
4)  One sign per building façade facing a street, except 2 signs for buildings on corner of 2 streets Projecting Sign 12 square feet per side yes 1)  To be at least 8 feet from ground level 
2)  One sign permitted per business, except 2 signs for buildings on corner of 2 streets Window Sign 25% of window yes 1)  One sign permitted per window Awning/Canopy Sign 33% of face of canopy yes 1)  Area of sign counts towards permitted wall sign area 
2)  One sign per awning Sandwich Board/A-frame Signs 7 square feet per side 
3.5 feet tall yes 1)  One sign per business 
2)  The sign location is limited to the frontage of address to which the permit was issued Temporary Signs 16 square feet per side no 1) One per street frontage  
  
C.  Illumination. In addition to the provisions of Section 18.16.090(d), the following provisions apply to the illumination of signs in the VCA District: 
1.  Lighting intensities for illuminated signs shall range from eight (8) to ten (10) footcandles, measured at four (4) feet perpendicular to any part of the sign surface. 
2.  Bright neon colors or shocking bright shades shall be prohibited and no neon lighting shall be allowed on any exterior signs. 
3.  There shall be no flashing, blinking, changing of colors, changing of illumination intensity, or any other visual effect associated with lighted signs (e.g., LED reader boards) 
4.  Projecting signs may not be backlit but may have light sources directed at the sign to light it from the front. 
5.  When internally illuminated letters, logos or other message components are used, they shall be mounted directly to the wall of the building and no raceway channel is to be used. Individual internally illuminated letters no larger than eighteen (18) inches high shall be used. Backlit logos or other message components shall be no larger than eighteen (18) inches high. 
6.  Creative design or the use of halo lighting is required to ensure that backlit logos or other message components do not have the appearance of a box sign. 
7.  A window sign is not to be illuminated, although up to fifty percent (50%) of the sign may be constructed of neon. 
8.  Neon is not to be used for other purposes such as outlining windows or as general accent lighting on the building. The neon must be integral to the sign itself. Signs that propose to include neon lighting must be submitted to Planning Commission for its review and approval. 
9.  Awnings shall not be internally illuminated. Signs on an awning may only be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed downward. 
D.  A-Frame and Sandwich Board Signs. A-Frame and sandwich board signs may be permitted on a sidewalk, provided that such signs are securely anchored and installed in a manner that prevents pedestrian congestion, as follows: 
1.  The sign shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
2.  The sign is permitted only during operating business hours and must be stored inside when the business is not open. 
3.  The sign must be constructed of weatherproof, durable material and kept in good repair. 
E.  Design and Materials. All signs shall be of a design and character that reinforces the VCA district's intended traditional downtown design. The use of materials such as wood, brass, vintage painting and symbolic design are highly encouraged. Plastic or PVC may be used for internally illuminated letters, logos or other message components provided their appearance (color, design, shape, etc.) contributes to the VCA district's intended traditional downtown design. Where any uncertainty exists, the proposed sign shall be referred to the planning commission for review and approval. 
F.  Window Signs. The sign is to be affixed directly to the window surface or installed so it is immediately adjacent to the window. 
G.  Incidental Signs. Incidental signs such as open/close, hours of operation, payment method signs, are permitted provided the aggregate size of the signs is two square feet or less. 
H.  Awning/Canopy Signs. Signage shall be permitted on awnings or canopies that are approved as part of a building's design, subject to the following: 
1.  Letters, logos or other message components shall occupy no more than thirty percent of the awning or canopy's face panel area. 
2.  Letters, logos or other message components shall not be located on the end panels of the awning or canopy. 
3.  Letters, logos or other message components installed on the front of an approved canopy or awning may be front lit, provided such lighting does not generate excessive glare. The underside of awnings and canopies shall not be illuminated or backlit. 
4.  All awnings are to be constructed of canvas or other similar material approved by the building official and shall comply with the VCA Design Guidelines and Section 18.16.120. 
I.  Rear Entrances. A sign shall be permitted to identify a rear entrance to a business. The sign must be no larger than twelve square feet in area per side for a public entrance or six square feet in area per side for a service entrance. The rear entry sign may be a wall sign or projecting sign and may be front lit only, with the use of a gooseneck or other approved indirect light fixture. 
J.  Nameplates. Nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area denoting only the name and profession of the occupants in a commercial, public or other institutional building shall be permitted in addition to the wall sign for the building, provided the area of these nameplates shall count towards the total wall sign area of the building. 
K.  The requirements of this section may be modified by the planning commission where the objectives and intent of the VCA district is better served by such modifications, rather than through the strict application of the requirements contained therein. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.130 - Non-conforming signs. 
    Nonconforming signs are those signs that do not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter, but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. It is the intent of this chapter to bring about, in an expeditious and timely manner, the eventual elimination of signs and their supporting structures that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The following provisions apply to nonconforming signs, including the replacement of nonconforming signs with less nonconforming signs to encourage a quicker upgrade. A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as described elsewhere in this chapter, however, the following alterations are regulated: 
A.  A nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign unless the change shall make the sign conforming. 
B.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign with the exception of pole signs, which can be replaced with a ground or monument sign that is not in compliance with the requirements for ground signs in this chapter, subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
C.  A nonconforming sign shall not be re-established after damage or destruction when the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the building official or if fifty percent or more of the face of the sign is damaged or destroyed. 
D.  A nonconforming sign shall not have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is designed for periodic change of message. 
E.  Signs having a construction design that permits a complete change of the face portion of the sign display area shall not have any faces changed unless the change does not prolong the life of the total sign structure or alter the shape and size of the sign display area. 
F.  A nonconforming sign shall not be re-established after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for a period of ninety days or longer as defined in Section 18.16.140, Dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
G.  Nonconforming and illegal freestanding pole signs that are replaced with conforming, freestanding monument signs within two years of adoption of this ordinance shall be granted an additional twenty percent of sign area above the maximum permitted. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.140 - Dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
A.  Dangerous Signs. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be deemed a nuisance per se and may be immediately removed by the city without notice and the cost thereof charged against the owner of the property on which it was installed. 
B.  Unsafe Signs. Any sign that becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe but not considered an immediate danger by the building official to the health or safety of the public shall be removed or repaired within thirty days after written notice from the city building official. 
C.  Abandoned Signs. Any sign that advertises a business that has been discontinued for at least ninety days or that advertises a product or service that is not longer offered shall be deemed abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended by a change in ownership or management shall not be deemed abandoned unless the structure remains vacant for at least six months. An abandoned sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises within ten days after written notice from the city building official. 
D.  Illegally Erected Signs. Any sign erected or displayed illegally in violation of this chapter shall be removed or made to comply with this chapter within ten (10) days after written notice from the City Building Official 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.150 - Permits and application procedures. 
A.  Required. Except as expressly provided in Section 18.16.040, relating to signs allowed without a permit, and Section 18.16.060(C) relating to temporary signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, or maintain any sign or other structure designed to display a message without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city and payment of a fee provided for in this section. 
B.  Application. Applications for permits to erect, construct, maintain, use, display, alter, convert, repair a sign shall be made upon forms provided for by the city, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, property owner(s), and if applicable, the tenant(s) and occupant(s); 
2.  Location of building, structure, or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
3.  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, and property lines; 
4.  Two drawings of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground; 
5.  Copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary by the building official, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure in accordance with regulations adopted by the city; 
6.  Name and address of the person erecting the structure and any applicable licenses; 
7.  Any electrical permit required and issued for such sign; 
8.  Insurance policy or bond as required by this chapter; 
9.  Such other information as the Building Official, or his or her designee, may require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable laws of the city and the state; 
10.  In the discretion of the building official, or his or her designee, when in his or her opinion the public safety requires it, the application containing the material required by this section shall, in addition, bear the certificate or seal of a registered architect or engineer as a condition to the issuance of a permit; 
11.  In all applications for entranceway signs, the building official, or his or her designee, shall require that appropriate provisions have been made to ensure continued maintenance of the sign. 
C.  Fees. A application, permit, review and inspection fees shall be paid to the city for each permanent permit and each temporary permit required by this chapter as shall be set by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
D.  Ordinary Maintenance. No permit is required for the ordinary servicing or repainting of an existing sign message, the cleaning of a sign, the changing of information on a directory sign, or the changing of advertising on a permitted sign specifically designed for regular change of message without change in structure. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.160 - License and insurance. 
    Every person who engages in the business of erecting, altering or dismantling signs in the city shall first submit proof of appropriate licenses and a liability insurance policy that indemnifies the city and its prior, present and future officials, representatives and employees from all damage suits or actions of every nature brought or claimed against the erector for injuries or damages to persons or property sustained by any person or persons through any act of omission or negligence of said erector, his servants, agents or employees. said policy shall contain a clause whereby it cannot be canceled or changed until after written notice has been filed with the city building department at least thirty days prior to the date of cancellation. The building official shall issue a permit for the sign upon determining that the proposed sign meets the provisions, standards and regulations of this chapter and any other applicable city ordinance and after payment of the prescribed fees and deposit. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.170 - Administration, enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
A.  Generally. The regulations of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city building official or his or her designee, unless otherwise stated herein. 
B.  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, use, display, enlarge, alter, convert, repair, or move, any sign in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions, standards and regulations of this chapter. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  Public Nuisance Per Se. Any sign erected, constructed, maintained, used, displayed, enlarged, altered, converted, repaired, or moved in violation of any of the provisions, standards, and regulations of this chapter, including the failure to remove a sign when directed under the authority of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction, 
D.  Municipal Civil Infraction. Any person, firm or corporation determined to have violated or been in violation of the provisions, standards or regulations of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the penalties and provisions contained in Section 13.04.810, Violations and penalties, of the city's code of ordinances. 
E.  Other Relief. 
1.  In addition to the remedies otherwise provided for, the city may remove and dispose of an unlawful sign on public property. 
2.  In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this chapter. 
3.  In addition to any remedies provided for by the code of ordinances, any equitable or other remedies available may be sought and granted. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.180 - Appeals and variances. 
A.  Appeals. Appeal from the ruling of any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, including the building official, concerning the enforcement of the provisions, standards and regulations of this chapter may be made by any aggrieved party within thirty days of the ruling to the zoning board of appeals. 
B.  Variances. The zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to grant variances from the requirements of this chapter according to the criteria in Section 18.22.030(E). In making a decision on whether a practical difficulty exists, the board may also consider the following for sign variance requests: 
1.  In determining whether a variance is appropriate, the zoning board of appeals shall study the sign proposal, giving consideration to any extraordinary circumstances, such as those listed below, that would cause practical difficulty in complying with the sign standards. The presence of any of the circumstances listed may be sufficient to justify granting a variance. 
2.  In granting or denying a variance, the zoning board of appeals shall state the grounds and findings upon which it justifies granting or denying the variance based on the following criteria: 
i.  Permitted signage could not be easily seen by passing motorists due to the configuration of existing buildings, trees, or other obstructions. 
ii.  Permitted signage could not be seen by passing motorists in sufficient time to permit safe deceleration and exit. In determining whether such circumstances exist, the zoning board of appeals shall consider the width of the road, the number of moving lanes, the volume of traffic, and speed limits. 
iii.  Existing signs on nearby parcels would substantially reduce the visibility or identification impact of a conforming sign on the subject parcel. 
iv.  Construction of a conforming sign would require removal or severe alteration to natural features on the parcel, such as but not limited to: removal of trees, alteration of the natural topography, filling of wetlands, or obstruction of a natural drainage course. 
v.  Construction of a conforming sign would obstruct the vision of motorists or otherwise endanger the health or safety of passers-by. 
vi.  Variance from certain sign regulations would be offset by increased building setback, increased landscaping, or other such enhancements, so that the net effect is an improvement in appearance of the parcel, compared to the result that would be otherwise achieved with construction of a conforming sign. 
vii.  A sign which exceeds the permitted height or area standards of this chapter would be more appropriate in scale because of the large size or frontage of the parcel or building. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.190 - Substitution clause. 
    Notwithstanding any provision, standard, or regulation in this chapter to the contrary, a noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any commercial message on any sign permitted pursuant to this chapter. If a noncommercial message is substituted, the sign must still comply with the provisions, standards, and regulations of this chapter applicable to the original sign prior any substitution. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech or messages over noncommercial speech or messages. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
18.16.200 - Severability clause. 
    If any provision, standard, or regulation of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall be found invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portion or application, or validity of the remaining provisions, standards, or regulations of this chapter as a whole, provided such remaining portions are not determined by the court to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted, had such invalid provision not been included. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014 ) 
Chapter 18.17 - SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

18.17.010 - Intent. 
A.  It is the intent of this chapter to require site plan review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit for certain buildings, structures and uses to ensure that the arrangement, location, design and materials within a site are consistent with the character of the city and the goals and design guidelines in the city of Wixom master plan. In particular, the standards herein are intended to minimize negative impacts on natural resources, utility systems, public service delivery, traffic operations, adjacent neighborhood or district character and the character of future development. 
B.  It is further the intent of this chapter to bring existing sites that do not conform with current standards of this title into greater conformity when uses change or an exterior renovation or expansion is proposed. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.020 - Uses requiring site plan review. 
    Construction and uses that require site plan, sketch plan or permit approval are listed in Table 17.02. Uses requiring site plan or sketch plan approval shall also be required to obtain a building permit, where required by the building code. A building permit shall not be issued until a site plan is approved in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth herein and all necessary review, inspection and permit fees have been fully paid. Certain construction shall also require review as specified by the city's engineering standards. 
Table 17.02 
Uses Requiring Site Plan Review 
PC - Planning Commission Site Plan Approval Sketch Plan Approval Building Permit Only CC - City Council BO - Building Official New Construction Construction of any building or structure in any zoning district for a nonresidential use PC Construction of any building or structure containing 3 or more dwelling units in any zoning district PC Utilities and essential public service buildings or structures PC Erection of a wireless communication tower PC/CC Collocation of a wireless communication facility BO Establishment of a new special land use (see Chapter 18.18) PC Planned unit development (see Chapter 18.11) PC/CC Establishment of a condominium PC/CC Home occupations BO Construction, reconstruction, erection and/or expansion of a one-family or two-family dwelling on a single lot or parcel BO Expansion/Modification to Existing Building A cumulative expansion of more than 1,000 square feet to the building, structure or use subject to site plan review PC A cumulative expansion of no more than 1,000 square feet to the building, structure or use subject to site plan review BO Construction solely on the building interior that does not increase usable floor area BO Upgrades to building facade to meet architectural standards of Section 18.14.010 BO Expansion of an existing special land use (see Chapter 18.18) Section 18.18.070 Modifications to nonconforming buildings, structures and uses Chapter 18.20 Nonconforming Upgrades to improve barrier-free design or compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act or other federal, state or county regulations BO Change in Use Any change of use in land or building to a more intensive use, as determined by the building official, that may involve substantial change in such features as parking, traffic flow, hours of operation, public services, or effluent discharge, that may entail substantial alteration of an important physical aspect of the site PC Change in use to a special land use (see Chapter 18.18) PC Reuse of an existing building where no building expansion is proposed only if the building official determines the new use is similar or less intense than the past use in terms of parking, traffic generation, drainage, utility needs, noise, aesthetics and other external impacts BO Residential care facilities (family homes; 6 or fewer residents) BO Residential care facilities (group homes; 7 to 20 residents) PC Residential care facilities (congregate care for more than 20 residents including day care and housing for the elderly) PC Accessory Structures, Uses and Site Improvements Nonresidential accessory structures 1,000 square feet or more PC Nonresidential accessory structures less than 1,000 square feet BO Construction of a new parking lot BO Paving or expansion to an existing parking lot BO Construction or erection of signs, retaining walls, fences, screen walls, waste receptacles, sidewalks, antennas, lights, poles, cooling/heating or other mechanical equipment BO Development entranceways BO Permitted accessory buildings and structures which are accessory to a one-family or two-family dwelling in any zoning district BO Temporary uses, building and structures ZBA Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds, clearing of trees (areas less than 100 square feet) BO Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds, clearing of trees (areas greater than 100 square feet) BO Keeping of animals BO  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.030 - Site plan review procedures. 
A.  Site Plan Review. When a site plan review is required in accordance with Section 18.17.020, an application shall be submitted to the building department, in accordance with the submittal schedule as provided by the building official. Upon submittal of the site plan, city staff will conduct a preliminary review for completeness and technical compliance of the application and compliance with zoning ordinance standards. The applicant shall have the opportunity to revise the site plan prior to review by the planning commission. 
B.  Site Plan Application. The application shall include: 
1.  A completed application form, available at the building department; 
2.  Thirteen copies of the site plan; 
3.  An application fee; 
4.  Proof of ownership or evidence of a contractual ability to acquire the subject property; 
5.  Information contained in Table 17.03. 
Table 17.03 
Site Plan Submittal Requirements 
Site Plan Descriptive and Identification Data Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development, drawn to an engineer's scale of not less than 1 inch = 50 feet for property less than 3 acres, or one inch = 100 feet for property 3 acres or more in size Sheet size shall be 24 x 36 inches Name of development Location map drawn to a separate scale with north-point, showing surrounding land uses, water features and streets within a quarter mile "Not to be Used as Construction Drawings" must be noted on the site plan Legal and common description of property Net acreage (minus rights-of-way) and total acreage Property lines and dimensions Aerial photograph showing the site and all areas within 150 feet of the site Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels Use of parcel and abutting parcels Identification and seal of registered or licensed architect, civil engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect or community planner who prepared drawings Site Data Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site Where grading is proposed, topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at one-foot contour intervals, referenced to a U.S.G.S. benchmark Proposed lot lines, lot dimensions, property lines, setback dimensions, structures and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, rivers and MDEQ regulated and nonregulated wetlands with elevations Location of existing trees and woodlands areas in accordance with Chapter 17.12 Woodlands of the Municipal Code All existing and proposed easements Details of exterior lighting including locations, height, fixtures (manufacturer's specification sheets), method of shielding and a photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall lighting intensity of the site (in footcandles) Location of waste receptacle(s) and mechanical equipment and details of screening Location, size, height and lighting of all proposed freestanding and wall signs Location, size, height and material of construction for all walls or fences with cross sections Location, outside dimensions and height and of all outdoor storage or display areas and facilities Access and Circulation Dimensions, curve radii and centerlines of existing and proposed access points, streets, and street rights-of-way or access easements Driveways and intersections within 250 feet of site and distances between existing driveways and proposed Cross section details of existing and proposed roads, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks and pathways illustrating materials, width and thickness Limits of curbing Dimensions of acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes A truck circulation plan in accordance with Section 18.15.040 Dimensions of parking spaces, islands, circulation aisles and loading zones Radii for driveways and parking lot islands Calculations for required number of parking and loading spaces Designation of fire lanes Traffic regulatory signs and pavement markings Shared parking or access easements, where applicable Sidewalks along street frontage and internal walks Landscape Plans Prepared and Sealed by a Registered Landscape Architect The general location, type and size of all existing plant material, with an identification of materials to be removed and materials to be preserved Limits of grading and description of methods to preserve existing landscaping The location of proposed lawns and landscaped areas Landscape plan, including location, of all proposed shrubs, trees and other plant material Location of utility easements on the landscape plan to verify no conflicts with plantings Tree inventory, as required by Chapter 17.12 of the Municipal Code and woodlands preservation and replacement plan must be superimposed on the landscape plan Planting list for proposed landscape materials with caliper size or height of material, spacing of species, botanical and common names, and quantity Calculations for required greenbelts, buffer zones, parking lot trees, detention ponds and interior landscaping Method of installation and proposed dates of plant installation Method of irrigation Landscape maintenance program Building and Structure Details Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed buildings or structures Building floor plans and total floor area Details on accessory structures and any screening Building facade elevations for all sides, drawn at an appropriate scale and matching floor plans Method of screening for all ground-, building- and roof-mounted equipment Description of exterior building materials including colors (samples must be provided at the planning commission to be retained by the city until a certificate of occupancy is issued) In the VCA, a perspective rendering of the building and adjacent buildings or a virtual image of the building superimposed on digital imagery of the street and adjacent buildings. Master signage concept plan Information Concerning Utilities, Drainage and Related Issues Location of sanitary sewers and septic systems, existing and proposed Location and size of existing and proposed water mains, water service, storm sewers and drains, and fire hydrants Stormwater retention and detention ponds, including grading, side slopes, depth, high water elevation, volume and outfalls including 100-year flood calculations Location of above and below ground gas, electric and telephone lines and easements, existing and proposed Location of utility boxes Storage areas Additional Information Required for Residential Development The type, number and location of each type of residential unit Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling units per acre) Garage and/or carport locations and details, if proposed Mailbox clusters Entranceway details Location, dimensions, floor plans and elevations of common building(s) (e.g., recreation, laundry, etc.), if applicable Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of fence, if applicable Location, nature, and size of recreation and open space areas Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for recreation area Delineation of general/limited common elements Miscellaneous A use statement including a general operations plan with a description of the nature of the proposed use or activity, noise impacts, hours of operation, the number or employees, etc. Assessment of potential impacts from the use, processing, or movement of hazardous materials or chemicals, if applicable For additions and expansions, a clear distinction between existing buildings, structures and impervious surface areas and any proposed development must be made For condominium projects, a master deed that shall contain provisions describing the responsibilities of the condominium association, condominium owners, and public entities, with regard to maintenance of the property. The master deed shall further establish the means of permanent financing for required maintenance and improvement activities which are the responsibility of the condominium association. Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the planning commission to assist in determining the compliance with site plan or special land use standards, such as but not limited to: cross sections which illustrate impacts on views and relationship to adjacent land uses, photographs, traffic impact studies, parking demand studies, market studies and environmental impact studies. If additional materials are requested, such information shall be prepared by a qualified individual or firm with experience in the specific discipline.  
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.040 - Standards for site plan approval. 
    Based upon the following standards, the planning commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions the site plan: 
A.  Use. The proposed use must be permitted in the zoning district. 
B.  Site Design Characteristics. All elements of the site plan shall be designed to take into account the site's topography, the size and type of lot, the character of adjoining property, the type and size of buildings, and the traffic operations of adjacent streets. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this chapter. The site shall be designed to conform to all provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Building Design. The building design shall relate to the surrounding environment in regard to texture, scale, mass, proportion and color. High standards of construction and quality materials will be incorporated into the new development in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.14.010. 
D.  Preservation of Significant Natural Features. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, alteration to the natural drainage courses, and the amount of cutting, filling and grading. Insofar as practical, natural features and the site topography shall be incorporated into the proposed site design. 
E.  Streets. All public and private streets shall be developed in accordance with the city of Wixom engineering design standards. 
F.  Access, Driveways and Circulation. Safe, convenient, uncongested and well defined vehicular circulation within and to the site shall be provided and shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Drives, streets, parking and other elements shall be designed to discourage through traffic, while promoting safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. The planning commission may require a traffic impact study for uses that are anticipated to generate more than one thousand trips per day or more than one hundred trips during the peak hour. 
2.  All driveways shall meet the design and construction standards of the city. 
3.  Access to the site shall be designed to minimize conflicts with traffic on adjacent streets, particularly left turns into and from the site. 
4.  For uses having frontage and/or access on a major thoroughfare, the number, design, and location of access driveways and other provisions for vehicular circulation shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
G.  Vehicle Access. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be arranged so as to permit emergency vehicle access as required by the fire department and police department. Cross circulation in the form of shared driveways, service drives or parking lot connections shall be provided with adjacent uses where required by Section 18.15.050. 
H.  Sidewalks, Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. Nonmotorized circulation shall be as provided in Section 18.14.030. 
I.  Parking. The number and dimensions of off-street parking shall be sufficient to meet the minimum required by Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
J.  Loading and Outdoor Storage. All loading and unloading areas and outdoor storage areas, including waste receptacles, shall be accessed and screened in accordance with Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
K.  Waste Receptacles. Waste receptacles shall be provided, accessed and screened as required in Section 18.14.050. 
L.  Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided and arranged in accordance with Section 18.14.040. 
M.  Mechanical Equipment and Utilities. Mechanical equipment and utilities, including roof-, building- and ground-mounted, shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.14.060. 
N.  Landscaping. Landscaping, landscape buffers and greenbelts shall be provided and designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.14.020. 
O.  Utilities and Storm Water Management. Public water and sewer facilities shall be available or shall be provided for by the developer as part of the site development. All utilities and stormwater management facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
P.  Noise. The site shall be designed, buildings so arranged, and activities/equipment programmed to minimize the emission of noise, particularly for sites adjacent to residential districts, and to comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
Q.  Other Agency Reviews. The applicant shall provide documentation of compliance with other appropriate agency review standards, including, but not limited to, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and other federal, state and county agencies, as applicable. 
R.  The city may require that other studies be provided, such as traffic impact studies, community impact statements or marketing studies if it is deemed necessary to properly evaluate the application and the proposed development's impact on the community. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.050 - Conditions of site plan approval. 
A.  As part of an approval to any site plan, the planning commission may impose any additional conditions or limitations as may be necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity. 
B.  Conditions may also be imposed to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Such conditions shall be considered necessary by the planning commission to ensure compliance with the review standards, and necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
C.  The conditions imposed on approval of a site plan run with the property and not with the owner of such property. 
D.  A record of conditions imposed shall be recorded on the site plan and maintained by the city. The conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the site plan is approved by the planning commission. 
E.  The building official shall require that the applicant revise and resubmit a site plan in compliance with the conditions imposed by the planning commission. Should resubmittal be required, all modifications shall be highlighted on the plan in such a manner that the modifications are easily identified. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.060 - Administrative sketch plan review. 
A.  This section provides for an administrative review and approval by the building official of sketch plans for minor construction as noted in Section 18.17.020. 
B.  The minimum contents of a sketch plan submitted for administrative review as required by Section 18.17.020 include: 
Table 17.06 
Administrative Sketch Plan Submittal Requirements 
Cover Sheet Completed application form and fee Title block with sheet number/title; name, address and telephone number of the applicant and firm or individual who prepared the plans; and date(s) of submission and any revisions (month, day, year) Scale and north-point Location map drawn to a separate scale with north-point, showing surrounding land use, water features and streets within a quarter mile Legal and common description of property including net acreage Identification and seal of registered or licensed architect, engineer, land surveyor, community planner or landscape architect who prepared drawings Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels A use statement including a general operations plan with a description of the nature of the existing and/or proposed use or activity, noise impacts, hours of operation, the number or employees, etc. A note on each plan sheet stating "Not to be Used as Construction Drawings" Buildings and Structures Existing and proposed buildings and parking lots with dimensions and setbacks Floor plan indicating existing and proposed uses Building elevations including materials and colors for all sides with proposed changes Parking and Access Existing and proposed parking calculations Existing and proposed driveways Site Data Existing and proposed landscaping illustrated on the plan and described in a plant list Proposed changes to grading and other natural features Existing and proposed lighting and screening Proposed changes to utilities Any other items requested by the building official to assist in the sketch plan review  
C.  If the administrative review consists of a review of an approved site plan with conditions by the planning commission, the complete site plan must be submitted with all revisions highlighted in such a manner that all modifications are easily identified. 
D.  The building official may waive some of the above submittal requirements where not deemed necessary to determine compliance with the standards of this chapter. 
E.  The building official may require additional information or a complete site plan for review by the planning commission, particularly for sites which do not comply with previously approved site plans, sites with parking deficiencies, sites abutting residential districts or sites experiencing significant problems with drainage, traffic, noise, aesthetics or other general health and safety issues. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.070 - Condominium developments. 
    All condominium plans must be provided in accordance with Chapter 16.12, Subdivision Procedure of Title 16, Subdivisions of the Municipal Code. Any additional information as required by this chapter shall also be provided. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.080 - Validity of approved site plan. 
A.  Start of Construction. Site plan approval is valid for a period of one year from the date of planning commission approval. A building permit must be issued and physical construction must commence within the one year period. 
B.  Extensions. Upon written application prior to expiration, the planning commission may authorize an extension of the time limit of the site plan approval for a period not to exceed one year. The extension shall be based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a likelihood of commencing construction within the extension period. The planning commission may require compliance with any amendments to the zoning ordinance since the site plan was originally approved. 
C.  Expiration of Site Plan Approval. In cases where actual physical construction of a substantial nature of the structures authorized by a site plan approval has not commenced within one year of site plan approval and a written application for extension of the approval has not been filed as provided above, the site plan approval shall automatically become null and void and all rights thereunder shall terminate. 
D.  Phased Development. For a development that is being constructed in phases, construction of subsequent phases must be diligently carried on towards completion. Where a phase is completed and receives a certificate of occupancy, then construction on the next phase must be initiated within one year of the certificate of occupancy on the previous phase for the site plan approval to remain valid. Extensions may be granted as provided for in subsection B of this section. Inactivity on developing future phases for more than one year shall without an extension shall result in expiration of the site plan approval and any further activity shall require a new site plan review and approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.090 - Amendment to approved site plans. 
    Amendments to the approved site plan may occur as follows: 
A.  An applicant or property owner who has been granted site plan approval shall notify the building official of any proposed amendments to an approved site plan. 
B.  Minor site plan amendments may be approved by the building official upon certification in writing to the planning commission that the proposed revision does not alter the basic design, compliance with the standards of this chapter, or any specified conditions of the plan as agreed upon by the planning commission. 
C.  Should the building official determine that the requested modification to the approved site plan is not minor, a new site plan in accordance with the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.100 - Property maintenance after approval. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property for which site plan approval has been granted to maintain the property in accordance with the approved site design on a continuing basis until the property is razed, or until new zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which site plan approval was based, or until a new site design is approved. This maintenance requirement includes landscaping, walls, fences, pavement, pavement markings, building exterior, drainage facilities and all other elements of the approved site plan. 
B.  Any property owner who fails to properly maintain an approved site plan and site design shall be deemed in violation of this title and the approved site plan and shall be subject to the penalties appropriate for a violation. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.17.110 - Compliance required. 
A.  The requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to all uses, lots, sites and parcels that are developed, expanded or otherwise modified. Landscape plans shall be submitted as part of site plan review in accordance with Table 17.02. 
B.  For changes of use and site alterations or building expansions, the planning commission shall determine the extent of improvement required in relation to the extent of change proposed. In particular the planning commission may require changes to improve public safety, closure or redesign of driveways, redesign or resurfacing of parking and loading areas, installation of curbing, replacement or additions to landscaping or screening, upgrades to lighting, relocation and enclosure of waste receptacles, and upgrades to the building exterior. 
C.  A written development agreement specifying all the terms and understandings of the site plan approval shall be signed by the applicant and recorded with the city as a condition of approval. The content of the agreement shall be based on the extent of the proposed development, but shall at a minimum provide the following: 
1.  A legal description for the site; 
2.  General description of any improvements to roads or utilities. The cost of installing and maintaining all streets and the necessary utilities shall be assured by a means satisfactory to the city; 
3.  Agreement to protect and maintain any landscaping, natural features or open space areas designated on the site plan; 
4.  Agreement to comply with all conditions of site plan approval; 
5.  The approved site plan shall be incorporated by reference and attached as an exhibit; 
6.  Agreement by the applicant that the approval and any conditions imposed in the approval are legitimate, related to a need or burden imposed by the development, and are based on legitimate governmental interests; 
7.  An agreement that the applicant shall obtain insurance required by the city, in an amount set by the city, and further indemnify the city with respect to the development and development activities; 
8.  Costs associated with the agreement are the responsibility of the applicant and no building permits will be issued unless all costs have been paid for in full by the applicant. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.18 - SPECIAL LAND USE REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

18.18.010 - Intent. 
    This chapter is intended to provide regulations for special land uses which may be compatible with permitted uses in a zoning district under specific locational and site criteria. This chapter provides standards for the planning commission to determine the appropriateness of a given special land use covering factors such as: compatibility with adjacent zoning, location, design, size, intensity of use, impact on traffic operations, potential impact on groundwater, demand on public facilities and services, equipment used and processes employed. Establishment or major expansion of any special land use requires a special land use permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.020 - Procedures. 
A.  Application. Upon submission of a special land use and site plan application meeting the requirements of Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the planning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 18.21.110. 
B.  Public Hearing. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall consider the public hearing input, reports from city staff, and consultants the criteria contained in Section 18.18.050, and the specific standards for the use found in the applicable zoning district. 
C.  Site Plan Revisions. If the planning commission determines that revisions are necessary to bring the proposed special land use and site plan application into compliance with applicable standards and regulations, the applicant shall submit a revised application and site plan. A second hearing is not required on a revised application that addresses concerns raised through the review process unless the planning commission determines that it is necessary. Following submission of revised application materials, the proposal shall be placed on the agenda of a scheduled meeting of the planning commission for review and possible action. 
D.  Impact Assessment. The planning commission may require the submittal of an impact assessment; the analysis shall be carried out by qualified individuals and shall include, but need not be limited to, the impact on: natural features, stormwater management, surrounding land uses, public facilities/services, public utilities and traffic. 
E.  Planning Commission Action. After the consideration of the general and specific criteria, the planning commission can either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the special land use application. 
1.  Approval. Upon determination by the planning commission that the application for a special land use is in compliance with the standards and requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws, approval shall be granted. 
2.  Approval with Conditions. With an approval of a special land use application, the planning commission may impose reasonable conditions. The applicant shall submit a revised site plan or other information that demonstrates compliance with the conditions for administrative approval by the city within sixty days of the date of conditional approval and prior to issuance of a building permit or the submission shall be considered null and void. 
3.  Denial. Upon determination that a special land use does not comply with standards and regulations set forth in this title, or requires excessive revisions in order to comply with the standards and regulations, the planning commission shall deny the application. Resubmittal of an application which was denied shall be considered a new application. 
F.  Conditions. In considering the special land use, the planning commission may impose conditions or limitations as permitted by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act that it deems necessary to fulfill the spirit and/or purpose of this title. The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged. Conditions imposed shall do all of the following: 
1.  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare as well as the social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole. 
2.  Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes that are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
3.  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance; be related to the standards established in this title for the land use or activity under consideration; and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.030 - Appeals and variances. 
    The zoning board of appeals may hear requests for variances to dimensional or site design requirements related to special land uses. However, the zoning board of appeals shall not have the authority to hear appeals of the planning commission's decision to approve or deny a special land use, nor to grant variances to any conditions that were attached to the special land use approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.040 - Restrictions on resubmittal of a special land use request. 
    No application for a special land use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions relating to all of the reasons noted for the denial found to be valid by the planning commission. A resubmitted application shall be considered a new application. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.050 - General standards. 
    Prior to approving a special land use application the planning commission shall require that the following general standards, in addition to the specific standards noted for individual uses in Chapters 18.03, Residential Districts, 18.05, Manufactured Home Park Districts, 18.06, Commercial Districts, 18.07, VCA District, 18.08, Office and Research Districts, 18.09, Industrial Districts and 18.10, Regulated Uses be satisfied. The proposed use or activity shall: 
A.  Be compatible and in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the city of Wixom master plan. 
B.  Promote the intent of the zoning district in which the use is proposed. 
C.  Be constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and so as not to change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed. 
D.  Be served adequately by public facilities and services, such as traffic operations along streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, water and sewage facilities and primary and secondary schools. 
E.  Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment or conditions of operation that, in comparison to permitted uses in the district, will be detrimental to the natural environment, public health, safety or welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odors or other such nuisance. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.060 - Specific standards. 
    Prior to approving a special land use application the planning commission shall require that the specific standards noted for individual uses in the applicable zoning district be satisfied. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.070 - Amendments, expansions and change in use. 
A.  Major Amendments. Any person or agency who has been granted a special land use permit shall notify the building official of any proposed amendment to the approved site plan of the special land use permit. A major amendment to a special land use permit shall require submittal of a new application for special land use and follow the review procedures contained in this chapter. The building official shall determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major amendment based on the following standards: 
1.  Changes increase the building(s) usable floor area by more than twenty-five percent. 
2.  Parking lots are expanded by more than twenty-five percent. 
3.  The occupancy, capacity or membership of the use is increased by more than twenty-five percent. 
4.  The use is expanded to occupy an additional twenty-five percent or more land area. 
5.  The expansion will result in a twenty-five percent or more increase in traffic generation based upon the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual. 
6.  The expansion will result in a twenty-five percent or more increase in the demand for public water or sewer. 
7.  Other similar types of changes deemed by the building official to be "major." 
B.  Minor Amendment. Minor amendment to an approved special land use does not require submittal of a new application for a special land use, but may require submittal of a site plan or sketch plan following the requirements of Chapter 18.17, Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures. 
C.  Change in Use. Change to another special land use shall require submittal of a new application for special land use and follow the review procedures contained in this chapter. 
D.  Separate Approval. A separate special land use permit shall be required for each use which requires special land use review on a lot. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.080 - Validity of permit. 
A.  Start of Construction. Special land use approval is valid for a period of one year from the date of planning commission approval. A building permit must be issued and physical construction must commence within the one year period. 
B.  Extensions. Upon written application filed prior to the termination of the one year period as provided above, the planning commission may authorize a single extension of the time limit for a further period of not more than one year. Such extension shall be granted only based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a reasonable likelihood of commencing construction within the one year extension. The planning commission may require compliance with any amendments to the zoning ordinance since the special land use was originally approved. 
C.  Expiration of Special Land Use Permit. Where actual construction of a substantial nature of structures authorized by a special land use permit has not commenced within one year of issuance, and a written application for extension of the approval has not been filed as provided above, the special land use permit shall become null and void and all rights thereunder shall terminate. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.18.090 - Revocation of an approved special land use. 
    The planning commission shall have the authority to revoke any special land use approval after the applicant has failed to comply with any of the applicable requirements of this chapter, other applicable sections of this title, or conditions of the special land use approval. Prior to any action, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing following the notification process for the original approval. The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to present information and to answer questions. The planning commission may revoke any previous approval if it finds that a violation exists and has not been remedied. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.20 - NONCONFORMING 
Sections: 

18.20.010 - Intent. 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to provide regulations governing lots, buildings, structures and the uses thereof, which were lawful prior to the enactment of this title, or amendment thereto, but which are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the provisions of this title. 
B.  It is the intent of this chapter to permit these buildings, structures and uses to continue, but not to encourage their prolonged existence. Because such nonconforming lots, buildings, structures and uses prevent the full realization of the goals and objectives of this title, the spirit of this title is to reduce and eliminate such nonconformance. The standards of this chapter are intended to accomplish the following: 
1.  Terminate and remove any use, building, structure or any combination thereof established after the effective date and in violation of this title. Such uses, buildings or structures are classified as a nuisance and shall not receive any of the rights, privileges or protection granted by this chapter for legal nonconformities. 
2.  Eliminate nonconforming uses which are considered to be incompatible with permitted uses, or encourage redevelopment into a more conforming use. 
3.  Permit legal nonconforming buildings, structures or uses to remain until they are discontinued or removed. 
4.  Encourage the upgrade of residential neighborhoods through bringing nonconforming residential structures more into compliance with this chapter. 
5.  Encourage a gradual upgrading to a more conforming status of site landscaping, parking, paving, signage, access, pedestrian circulation or other features of a site which were developed in compliance with the standards at the time of their construction, but which do not meet the site standards of this title and its amendments. 
6.  Encourage the combination of contiguous nonconforming lots of record to create lots which conform to current standards, are compatible with other lots in the zoning districts, to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to eliminate problems associated with the over crowding of land. 
C.  Nonconforming lots and structures are typically those established prior to the current zoning standards. The city intends to allow continued use of these lots and structures in certain cases. Accordingly, this chapter establishes regulations that govern the completion, restoration, reconstruction and expansion of nonconforming structures which do not increase the nonconforming situation. 
D.  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is defined to mean that the property owner has begun substantial construction under a lawfully issued building permit. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.20.020 - Nonconforming lots. 
A.  Use of Nonconforming Lots. Any lot of record existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that now fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district shall be considered a nonconforming lot. A principal building and customary accessory buildings for a permitted use may be erected on any nonconforming lot of record, provided all other standards of this title are met, such as setbacks, minimum floor area, maximum height and access requirements. 
B.  Variance to Area and Dimensional Requirements. If the use of a nonconforming lot requires a variation in minimum floor area or dimensional (minimum setback and maximum height) standards, then the use shall be permitted only if a variance is granted by the zoning board of appeals. 
C.  Nonconforming Contiguous Lots Under the Same Ownership. The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming contiguous lots under the same ownership. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that development of nonconforming lots will not overbuild the lots, result in a development pattern or structures that are out of character with the surrounding neighborhood, diminish access to open space, sunlight, and views for existing residences and will be in accordance with the residential density planned for in the city master plan. 
1.  If two or more lots or combination of lots with contiguous frontage are or have been under single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this title, and if all or part of the individual lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an individual parcel for the purposes of this chapter, except as provided in subsection (C)(4) of this section. The lots must be combined prior to receiving a building permit for any construction activity, including additions, renovations or new construction. 
2.  No portion of said parcel shall be used, occupied, or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division of a parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area less than the requirements stated in this title. 
3.  Any combination, in whole or in part, of nonconforming lots of record shall result in lots that conform to the requirements of this title to the maximum extent feasible. Any altering of lot lines or combination of lots shall result in lots that conform to the requirements of this title. Once any combination that creates a conforming lot occurs, the resulting lot shall not retain nonconforming lot of record status and will hereafter be required to comply with the lot requirements of this title. 
4.  Where an individual owns two or more contiguous nonconforming lots, the lots may be sold or developed as separate individual lots only where each individual lot has an area and width equal to or greater than the median area and width of all developed lots within seven hundred fifty feet. The seven-hundred-fifty-foot dimension shall be measured from the perimeter of the applicant's lots and shall include all lots or portions of lots within seven hundred fifty feet, but shall only include lots that are within the same zoning district. Where there are multiple lots developed with a single dwelling, these lots shall be considered a single combined lot for calculation of median area and width. Multiple contiguous vacant lots under the same ownership shall be considered a single combined lot for calculation of median area and width. The applicant shall provide a map and calculations to certify the median lot area and width. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.20.030 - Nonconforming uses. 
    A lawful use of a building, land or of a building and land in combination, that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or amendment thereto, that is made no longer permissible under the provisions of this title, as enacted or amended, shall be considered a nonconforming use. These nonconforming uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following limitations, unless otherwise approved by the zoning board of appeals: 
A.  Not Increased. Nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title. 
B.  Not Expanded. The existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. The addition of a second story on an existing nonconforming structure shall be considered an expansion, subject to Section 18.20.040(B). 
C.  Not Expanded Outside Original Structure. Any nonconforming use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the structure or outside the original foundation. 
D.  Not Moved. Nonconforming uses shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by the use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title. 
E.  Change in Use of a Structure. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the ZBA first finds that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the ZBA may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the purpose and intent of this title. 
F.  Change to a Permitted Use. Where there is a change in use to a structure or land resulting in a nonconforming use being superseded by a permitted use, the use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
G.  Not Reestablished if Abandoned. A nonconforming use that is abandoned for a period of six months or more shall not be reestablished. A nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if one or more of the following conditions exist, and which shall be deemed to constitute intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the nonconforming use: 
1.  Utility services, such as water, gas and electricity to the property, have been discontinued; 
2.  The property, buildings, or grounds have fallen into disrepair; 
3.  Signs or other indications of the existence of the nonconforming use have been removed; 
4.  Removal of equipment or fixtures which are necessary for the operation of the nonconforming use; 
5.  Other actions which, in the opinion of the building official, constitute an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon the nonconforming use; 
6.  Those alleged nonconforming uses which cannot be proven to have legally existed prior to the effective date of this section shall be declared illegal and shall be discontinued following the effective date of this section. 
H.  Removal of Structure. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.20.040 - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
A.  Nonconforming Buildings and Structures. A lawful building, or structure that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or amendment thereto, that is made no longer permissible under the provisions of this title, as enacted or amended, by reason of restrictions on setbacks, lot coverage, height, or other characteristics of the building, or structure or its location on the lot, shall be considered a nonconforming building or structure. These nonconforming buildings and structures may be maintained so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Nonconforming buildings and structures may not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity within the provisions of this chapter, except for residential buildings as provided for in subsection B of this section, unless otherwise approved by the zoning board of appeals. 
2.  Should a nonconforming building or structure be destroyed by any means to an extent greater than one-half of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this title. 
3.  Should a nonconforming building or structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved. 
4.  Should a nonconforming building or structure be altered or modified so as to eliminate, remove or lessen any or all of its nonconforming characteristics, then the nonconforming characteristics shall not be later reestablished or increased. 
B.  Expansion of Nonconforming Residential Buildings. A nonconforming residential building may be expanded, provided the expansion will meet required setbacks and other dimensional and building code requirements. (Example: a home with a nonconforming front yard setback may be expanded in the rear so long as the rear yard setback remains conforming and maximum lot coverage is not exceeded). The building official shall utilize the following standards: 
1.  The expansion does not extend closer to the lot line than any existing, nonconforming part of the structure. 
2.  The addition does not extend beyond the predominant existing building line along the same block. 
3.  The addition retains compliance with all other setback, lot coverage, and height requirements. An additional story may only be added to the portion of the building that is conforming. 
4.  The addition will meet all minimum building code requirements. 
5.  The resultant addition, in terms of dimensions and design, would be compatible with the established character of the neighborhood. 
6.  The design of the addition must be compatible with the existing structure and not detract from the appearance of the site. 
    The expansion of a residential building with a nonconforming yard, not meeting the requirements above, shall be prohibited unless a variance is granted by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.20.050 - Repairs and maintenance. 
A.  Restrictions on Damage Replacements Exceeding One-Half of Value. In the event that any nonconforming structure is damaged by any means or in any manner to the extent the cost of reconstruction or restoration exceeds one-half the value of the structure prior to the damaging occurrence as determined by the most recent assessment of the market value of the structure, exclusive of the market value of land, reconstruction or restoration shall only be permitted in conformity with the provisions of this title, except as otherwise provided herein. 
B.  Restrictions on Damage Replacements Less Than or Equal to One-Half of Value. In the event that any nonconforming structure is damaged by any means or in any manner to the extent the cost of reconstruction or restoration is equal to or less than one-half the value of the structure prior to the damaging occurrence, as determined by the most recent assessment of the market value of the structure, exclusive of the market value of land, reconstruction or restoration shall be permitted, provided a building permit for reconstruction or restoration is issued within one year of the occurrence of such damage. 
C.  Reconstruction of a Fire Damaged Residential Structure. In the event a nonconforming residential structure is damaged by fire or natural cause, a residential structure may be reconstructed on the same foundation, provided the first floor footprint and the total floor area does not exceed the size of the previous residence. 
D.  Repairs, Improvements and Modernization. Repairs, improvements, or modernization of nonconforming buildings or structures shall be permitted, provided such repairs or improvements do not exceed one-half of the value of the building or structure during any period of twelve consecutive months. This cost/value calculation shall not include any costs associated with modernization of electrical, plumbing, heating or cooling systems to meet building code requirements. 
E.  Safe Condition of Building. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.20.060 - Nonconforming sites. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this section is to permit improvements and minor modifications to a conforming use and building which does not meet all of the various site improvement related regulations of this chapter. The purpose is to allow gradual compliance with the site related requirements, for the entire site, for sites which predate the various zoning ordinance standards for landscaping, paving and other non-safety site related items. 
B.  Permitted. Such improvements or expansions may be permitted by the planning commission during site plan review without a complete upgrade of all site elements under the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant is proposing reasonable site improvements on the overall site in relation to the scale and construction cost of the building improvements or expansion. 
2.  The applicant has addressed safety related site issues on the overall site. 
3.  For landscaping, the applicant shall bring the site toward conformity at twice the rate of building or parking lot expansions (for example, a five percent building expansion will provide at least ten percent of the required landscaping). 
4.  The improvements or minor expansion will not increase noncompliance with site requirements. 
5.  All driveways that do not conform with the access standards of this chapter shall be eliminated, provided that the minimum reasonable access shall be maintained, as determined by the standards of Chapter 18.15, Off-Street Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.20.070 - Nonconforming resulting in right-of-way dedication. 
    Where a nonconforming front yard setback, parking lot setback or greenbelt is created as a result of additional road right-of-way width being acquired by a road agency, the building or parking lot may be improved or expanded without the need to obtain a variance from the zoning board of appeals, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  The building or parking lot complied with the front yard setback prior to the acquisition of the additional road right-of-way. 
B.  The building or parking lot expansion will not reduce the depth of the front yard setback. 
C.  All other ordinance requirements are met and necessary approvals obtained. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.20.080 - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
    There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of a nonconforming use, provided there is no change in character to the nonconformity and that all building and fire codes are met. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.21 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

18.21.010 - Planning commission. 
A.  The planning commission is created pursuant to the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008. In accordance with Section 83 of Public Act 33 of 2008, the planning commission shall have all the powers and duties provided for zoning commissions created pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006. Members of the planning commission shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the city council. The qualifications of members, the term of each member, filling of vacancies, compensation of members, and operation of the planning commission shall be in accordance with Public Act 33 of 2008. 
B.  The planning commission shall have the following responsibilities and authority pursuant to this title: 
1.  The planning commission shall be responsible for formulation of the zoning ordinance, review of amendments to the zoning ordinance, holding hearings on a proposed zoning ordinance or amendments, and reporting its findings and recommendations concerning the zoning ordinance or amendments to the city council. 
2.  The planning commission shall be responsible for review of all applications for site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 18.17, and special land use approval in accordance with Chapter 18.18 and making a determination to grant approval, approval subject to revisions, or denial of approval. 
3.  The planning commission shall be responsible for formulation and adoption of the city master plan as a guide for the development of the city, in accordance with Michigan Public Act 33 of 2008. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.020 - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this title shall be administered and enforced by the building official, or his or her designee, or by such deputies of his or her department as the building official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.030 - Duties of building official. 
A.  The building official shall have the authority to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits and to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this title. It is unlawful for the building official to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this title. 
B.  Under no circumstances is the building official permitted to make changes to this title nor to vary the terms of this title in carrying out his duties as building official. 
C.  The building official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this title are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements, which may occur upon the granting of the permit. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.040 - Plot plan. 
    The building official shall require that all applications for permits for uses not covered in Section 18.17.020 shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including plot plan information as required in this section: 
A.  The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. The applicant shall identify the front lot line. 
B.  The shape, size, location and setback of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
C.  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
D.  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this title are being observed. 
E.  In those instances where more than one use is proposed for a property or where lots or parcels are to be split or subdivided, the applicant shall submit copies of any private covenants, deed restrictions or agreements to the city in order to clarify the intended use of the property and its compliance with ordinance provisions. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.050 - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
A.  Permits Not to be Issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this title. 
B.  Permits for New Use of Land. Vacant land shall not be put to a new use and existing uses shall not be changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
C.  Permits for New Use of Buildings. Buildings and structures shall not be changed or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
D.  Permits Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit has been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the building code, housing law or this title, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
E.  Deposit of Guarantee. Any guarantee required under this title shall be deposited with the city treasurer prior to the issuance of permits in accordance with Section 18.21.100. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.060 - Certificates. 
    No land, building, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificates: 
A.  Certificate Issued. Certificates of occupancy shall only be issued for a building or structure, or for the use of any land, which is in accordance with all the provisions of this title. 
B.  Certificates Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for such building or structure. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any change in occupancy of any building, structure or land in all office-service, business and industrial districts. 
C.  Certificates Including Zoning. Certificates of occupancy, as required by the city building code, for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this title. 
D.  Record of Certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
E.  Application for Certificates. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building official on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within ten days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
    If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant shall be notified of such refusal and cause, within the ten-day period. 
F.  Temporary Certificates. 
1.  Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued only for site improvements which are included on an approved site plan, or which are otherwise required by this title or other ordinances of the city and shall be limited to a period not to exceed six months. Failure to finish and obtain approval of the improvement constitutes a violation of this title. 
2.  Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued in those instances where landscape planting cannot be completed due to winter weather conditions. Temporary certificates shall only be issued for a period to allow for time necessary to complete planting within the period specified in Section 18.14.020 and in no instance shall such temporary certificate exceed a six-month period. 
3.  Whenever an applicant seeks a temporary occupancy permit for a premises prior to completion of site work or landscaping, the applicant shall deposit cash, certified check or nondescriptive irrevocable bank letter of credit, all forfeitable to the city, in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the estimated cost of the remaining improvements pursuant to the site plan and the requirements of this title and other ordinances of the city. The estimate of the cost shall be solely in the discretion of the city. 
4.  The cash deposit, certified check, or nondescriptive irrevocable bank letter of credit shall run to the city and shall be forfeitable by its terms and conditions, automatically, thirty days after notice to the applicant that the requirements of the site plan or this title have not been met according to the terms of the temporary certificate or a time specified in the building permit. Any bank letter of credit shall automatically renew for a period of one year. The cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be considered posted with the condition that upon passage of the thirty days after such notice in writing by first class mail at the last known address of the applicant, such amount shall automatically be transferred to the city or otherwise enforceable by the city by any means available. Thereafter, the city shall be authorized to go onto the property and complete the construction in accordance with the site plan requirements with the funds available. The city may retain twenty-five percent of the cost of such completion as the city construction administrative expense and refund any balance to the applicant. No part of an irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be released until all of the work is completed. In the case of a deposit of cash or a certified check, portions of the amount may be rebated as work progresses at reasonable intervals, provided that at all times the amount on deposit equals one hundred fifty percent of the cost of the remaining work to be completed. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.070 - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure or part thereof, shall notify the building official immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.080 - Fees. 
A.  Fees for site plan review, inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this title may be collected by the building official in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the direct and indirect cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this title. 
B.  Publication costs for advertisement of public hearings and for mailing of notices as required under the provisions of this title shall be charged to the applicant in the amount of such actual cost. All other costs incurred by the city in administering an application under this title shall be charged to the applicant in the amount of such actual cost. 
C.  Fees for rezoning, special uses and such other fees as may be required for the administration of this title shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
D.  The applicant shall be required to pay all fees related to consultant or attorney reviews of an application. Expenses and costs incurred by the city that are directly associated with reviewing and processing a zoning application shall be paid from the funds in an escrow account established for the applicant. Applications shall not be processed prior to the required escrow fee having been deposited with the city. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow account after the application has been fully processed and the final city decision has been rendered regarding the project will be refunded to the applicant with no interest to be paid on those funds. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.090 - Security for completion of improvements. 
    Approval of a preliminary plat or site condominium plan shall be conditioned upon the execution of an agreement which secures the completion of improvements required on the plat or site condominium plan. The approval of a site plan shall be conditioned upon the execution of a development agreement meeting the requirements of Section 18.17.110(C). Unless designated as optional, all improvements shown on the site plan shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. However, where it would be impractical to delay occupancy prior to the completion of certain improvements, a temporary certificate of occupancy can be issued upon the approval of the building official if an adequate guarantee as required in Section 18.21.100 is presented to the city to secure the improvements. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.100 - Performance guarantees. 
A.  Guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check or nondescriptive irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be provided in a form acceptable to the city. The amount of such guarantee shall cover all improvements not normally covered in the building permit, (i.e., berms, walls, landscaping, lighting, surfacing of drives, parking, service drives, acceleration/deceleration lanes, bypass lanes and other traffic control devices, etc.). An additional twenty-five percent shall be added to cover the city's costs for administering the performance guarantee. The guarantee shall include a schedule of costs assigned to the different improvements. Monies may be released to the applicant in proportion to work completed on the different elements after inspection of work and approval of the building official. Any partial release of funds shall not reduce the amount of remaining guarantee to less than ten percent of the original amount, which shall be retained by the city until all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved by the building official. 
B.  If more than one guarantee is involved in construction of the improvements required in this section, each such assurance shall be treated as a separate agreement and the ten percent holdback may be released upon satisfactory completion of such phase of construction and approval of the building official. In instances where all improvements as required in this title are not completed, and a temporary certificate of occupancy is requested, the estimated cost of such improvement shall be verified by the building official, particularly with respect to any delay to another construction season. The building official in evaluating the adequacy of the financial guarantees may request any necessary input from the city engineer, planner and landscape architect. If the estimated cost has changed, then a revised guarantee, acceptable to the city, shall be filed with the treasurer covering such improvements. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.110 - Public hearings. 
    In instances where a public hearing is required under this title with the planning commission, the zoning board of appeals or the city council, written notice of the public hearing shall be as follows: 
A.  Notice Content. The notice shall do all of the following: 
1.  Describe the nature of the request; 
2.  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used; 
3.  State when and where the request will be considered; 
4.  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
B.  Notice Publication and Mailing. Notice shall be published and mailed no less than fifteen days prior to the public hearing as follows: 
1.  Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
2.  Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. 
3.  Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred feet of the subject property and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred feet of the subject property regardless of whether the property or structure is located in the zoning jurisdiction. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. If a single structure contains more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used for the intended recipient of the notice. 
4.  The notice under subsection (B)(3) of this section is considered to be given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United States Postal Service or other public or private delivery service. 
C.  Ordinance Amendments and Rezoning of More Than Ten Properties. Public hearings for an amendment to this title, or the zoning map, that affects more than ten properties shall only require notice in a newspaper, which shall not be required to indicate the property subject to the request under subsection (A)(2) of this section, and notice shall not be required to be mailed to individual properties under subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section. 
D.  Zoning Board of Appeals Interpretations and Appeals. Public hearings for ordinance interpretations and appeals of administrative decisions by the zoning board of appeals shall only require notice in a newspaper, as required in subsection (A)(2) of this section and if the interpretation or appeal of an administrative decision involves a specific property, notice shall also be given to the person bringing the appeal, as required in subsection (B)(2) of this section. Variances shall require full notification under subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.120 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, corporation, or firm who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter or any permit, license or exception granted hereunder, or any lawful order of the planning commission, building official, zoning board of appeals or city council issued in pursuance of this chapter is guilty of a municipal civil infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each such violation. The owner of record or tenant of any building, structure premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the violator from compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.130 - Each day a separate offense. 
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.140 - Nuisance declared. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted or any use of premises of land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this title and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.21.150 - Rights and remedies cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided in this title are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.22 - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
Sections: 

18.22.010 - Creation and membership. 
A.  There is established a zoning board of appeals (ZBA) which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, and in such a way that the objectives of this title shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
B.  The ZBA shall consist of nine members appointed by the city council. One of the regular members of the ZBA may be a member of the planning commission. Appointments shall be as follows: appointments for the first year shall be for a period of one, two and three years, respectively, so as nearly as may be to provide for the appointment of an equal number each year, thereafter each member to hold office for the full three-year term. Each member of the ZBA shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year prior to the date of appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such date and throughout his or her tenure in office. Appointed members may be removed for cause by the city council only after consideration of written charges and a public hearing. Vacancies on the ZBA shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The ZBA shall annually elect its own chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
C.  The city council may, if it desires, appoint two alternate members for three-year terms. One or both alternate members may be called by the chairman, or in the absence of the chairman by the vice chairman, or, in the absence of the vice chairman, by the secretary to sit as a regular member of the ZBA if a regular member is absent from or unable to attend two or more consecutive meetings of the ZBA or absent from or unable to attend the ZBA for a period of more than thirty consecutive days. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reason of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights a regular member. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.22.020 - Proceedings of the ZBA. 
    All meetings of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the ZBA may determine. All hearings conducted by the ZBA shall be open to the public. The city clerk, or a designated representative, shall keep minutes of these proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. Five members of the ZBA shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. The ZBA shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.22.030 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The ZBA shall hear only those matters which it is authorized to hear by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, and render its decision based upon the criteria contained in this chapter. The ZBA shall hear the following applications in accordance with the indicated standards. 
B.  Administrative Appeals. 
1.  The ZBA shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in fact, judgment, procedure, or interpretation in any order, requirement, permit, or decision made by the building official in enforcing the provisions of this title. The applicant appealing the order, requirement, permit or decision shall be required to file the request for appeal to the ZBA within thirty days of the decision. The ZBA shall not have the authority to hear an appeal of a decision by the planning commission or the city council. In order to be aggrieved by a decision of the city, the person or other entity making the appeal must have a property interest and sufficient standing as recognized under the law to challenge the decision. 
2.  Standards for Review of Appeals to Administrative Decisions. An appeal to an administrative decision may be reversed by the ZBA only if it finds that the action or decision appealed meets one or more of the following requirements: 
a.  Was arbitrary or capricious; 
b.  Was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact; 
c.  Constituted an abuse of discretion; 
d.  Was based on erroneous interpretation of the zoning ordinance or zoning law. 
C.  Interpretations. 
1.  The ZBA has the power to make an interpretation of the provisions of this title when it is alleged that certain provisions are not clear or that they could have more than one meaning. In deciding upon the request, the ZBA shall ensure that its interpretation is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and the chapter in which the language in question is contained. 
2.  The ZBA may make a determination of the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts in accordance with Chapter 18.02, Zoning Districts and Map and records, surveys, maps, and aerial photographs. 
3.  The ZBA may make a determination of which zoning district to allow a use not currently listed as a permitted or special land use in any zoning district. If the use is not addressed in the zoning ordinance, the ZBA shall select the use listed in the zoning ordinance that most closely resembles the proposed use. Once the use is determined, the proposed use shall comply with any use standards that apply to the similar use. The determination as to whether a proposed use is similar in nature and class to another permitted or special land use within a district should be considered as an expansion of the use regulations, not a variance applying to a particular situation. 
D.  Special Land Uses and Planned Unit Developments. 
1.  The ZBA may grant dimensional or other site plan related variances (e.g., lot dimensions, setbacks, building height, lot coverage, parking, etc.) for special land uses. The ZBA shall not have the power to reverse or modify the planning commission's decision to approve or deny a special land use permit nor grant variances to any conditions placed on special land use approval. 
2.  The ZBA shall not have the authority to grant variances to the PUD regulations of Chapter 18.11 or any requirements placed on PUD approval. However, the ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide appeal requests by individual lot owners for variances from other sections of the zoning ordinance following final approval of the PUD, provided such variances do not affect the terms or conditions of the original PUD approval or constitute a variance to the PUD regulations of Chapter 18.11. 
E.  Dimensional and Other Non-Use Variances. 
1.  The ZBA, after public hearing, shall have the power to grant requests for variances from the provisions of this title where it is proved by the applicant that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this title relating to the construction, equipment, or alteration of buildings or structures, or of stormwater management requirements so that the spirit of this title shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
2.  Non-Use Variance Standards for Review. A non-use variance may be allowed by the ZBA only in cases where the applicant has shown there is reasonable evidence of practical difficulty in the official record of the hearing and that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Extraordinary Circumstances. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
i.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
ii.  By reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure. 
iii.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question; whereby the literal enforcement of the requirements of this chapter would involve practical difficulties. 
iv.  Any other physical situation on the land, building or structure deemed by the ZBA to be extraordinary. 
b.  Practical Difficulty/Substantial Justice. Compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or other dimensional provisions would unreasonably prevent the use of the property. Granting of a requested variance or appeal would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district and such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity. Any variance granted shall be the minimum necessary to allow the preservation of these substantial property rights. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a variance. 
c.  Impact on Surrounding Neighborhood. The variance will not be significantly detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood or interfere with or discourage the appropriate development, continued use, or value of adjacent properties and the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  Public Safety and Welfare. The granting of the variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
e.  Not Self-Created. The immediate practical difficulty causing the need for the variance request was not self-created by the applicant. 
F.  Use Variances. 
1.  Application Requirements. In addition to the information required for other variance requests, an application for a use variance shall include a plan drawn to scale detailing the specific use and improvements proposed by the applicant, and a summary of the facts which support each of the following conclusions: 
a.  Applicant's property cannot be used for the purposes permitted in the zoning district; 
b.  Applicant's plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to his property and not to general neighborhood conditions; 
c.  Applicant's suggested use would not alter the essential character of the area; 
d.  Applicant's problem has not been self-created; 
e.  Unavailability of administrative relief which may afford reasonable use of applicant's property. 
    At the end of each statement subsections (F)(1)(a) through (F)(1)(e) of this section, identify all persons who will testify at the hearing with respect to each of the facts and, separately, identify all persons who will testify at the hearing relative to the respective conclusion (and if any person is to be offered as an expert witness, include with the application a resume which shows the education and experience of such person within the particular area of expertise). 
2.  Use Variance-Pre-Hearing Conference. 
a.  Prior to the scheduling of a hearing, the applicant shall contact the building official for the purpose of scheduling a pre-hearing conference. 
b.  The purposes of the pre-hearing conference shall be to: 
i.  Review the procedure for the hearing and identify all persons who will testify (directly or through affidavit) and the evidence to be offered on behalf of the applicant; 
ii.  Attempt to secure a statement of agreed-upon facts to be used to narrow the matters of dispute and shorten the hearing; 
iii.  Explore a means of providing relief to the applicant by way of non-use variance from the ZBA, or other relief which may require action by persons or bodies other than the ZBA which will afford an adequate remedy for the applicant; 
iv.  Discuss the need, desirability, and the terms of providing a verbatim record of the hearing. 
c.  The building official shall determine who should be present at the pre-hearing conference based upon the application submitted, and taking into consideration the discussion with the applicant or the applicant's representative. 
d.  The pre-hearing conference shall be scheduled and conducted on an expeditious basis so as to avoid unreasonable delay to the applicant. Sufficient time shall be taken, however, to achieve the purposes of the pre-hearing conference stated above. 
3.  Use Variance-Hearing Procedure. 
a.  The applicant will have the burden of proof. In order to be entitled to relief, the applicant must demonstrate each of the five factors in subsection (F)(5) of this section. 
b.  Manner of Presentation. 
i.  Community representatives shall present an overview of the zoning regulations involved. This may include an indication of the objectives sought to be achieved in the zoning district, and any planning, engineering, financial, environmental or other considerations which are generally relevant within the zoning district and/or in the general area of the property at issue. 
ii.  The applicant may present witnesses, including the applicant, or may submit affidavits, for the purpose of attempting to prove facts or conclusions. The applicant shall be provided with the opportunity to present all testimony and evidence proposed to be presented at the pre-hearing conference, either through witnesses or affidavits; however, the chairperson of the ZBA may restrict testimony and evidence which would result in unreasonable duplication. In addition, by motion made on its own or at the request of a person at the hearing, the ZBA may require the presence of any witness who has offered either testimony by affidavit on a material question of fact or testimony of an expert nature, with the view of permitting members of the ZBA to ask questions of such witnesses. 
iii.  At the conclusion of the applicant's presentation, interested persons attending the hearing shall be provided with the opportunity to present testimony and evidence in the same manner and subject to requiring the presence and questioning of witnesses, as provided above for the applicant. 
iv.  When interested persons have completed their presentations, at the same meeting and/or at an adjourned meeting date, testimony and evidence may be presented on behalf of the community in the same manner, and subject to requiring the presence and questioning of witnesses, as provided above for the applicant. The purpose of such presentation shall be to ensure that a full picture, including all relevant information, is before the ZBA for consideration as it relates to the specific application presented. 
v.  If testimony or evidence has been offered by or on behalf of interested persons and/or the community, the applicant shall have the opportunity to make a responsive presentation, restricted to answering the points raised by interested persons and community representatives. The manner of presenting witnesses, and requirement of their presence and questioning, shall be the same as provided above for the applicant's principal case. 
vi.  At the hearing, the ZBA may determine to establish other rules of procedure, such as meeting hours on any given day, procedure for presentations by interested persons and/or on behalf of the community, or other rules found to be necessary or appropriate by the board. When questions of procedure arise during the hearing, the chairperson of the ZBA may solicit the recommendation of the representatives of both the applicant and the community. 
vii.  If a hearing is not completed at a given meeting within the time period allowed by the ZBA, the board shall adjourn the hearing to a date certain for continuation. 
4.  Use Variance-Decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
a.  The ZBA may deem it appropriate in any given case to provide an opportunity for anyone presenting testimony or evidence to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions. 
b.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the ZBA may make its decision at that meeting, or it may adjourn the hearing to a new date for the purpose of reviewing the testimony and evidence, and reviewing proposed findings and conclusions submitted by hearing participants, in preparation for making its decision. 
c.  If the ZBA determines to grant variance relief, it shall be the minimum relief required to allow reasonable use of the property, while maintaining the essential character of the area. Such relief may be in the form of one or more non-use variances and/or in the form of a use variance. The motion may include conditions that are authorized by law. 
d.  If the ZBA adopts a motion to grant variance relief, such motion may be made as a tentative grant of relief, subject to review by the planning commission, planning director/consultant, engineer or other person or official with expertise, with a view of obtaining recommendations on any conditions that may be relevant and authorized by law, and for the further purpose of ensuring that the grant of relief would not violate applicable law. If such a tentative grant of relief is approved, the ZBA shall request the completion of all reviews by other boards or persons by a specific date, so that relief may be expeditiously finalized. 
5.  Use Variance Standards for Review. A use variance may be allowed by the ZBA only in cases where there is reasonable evidence of unnecessary hardship in the official record of the hearing, and that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Hardship. The applicant has demonstrated that the site cannot reasonably be used for any of the uses allowed within the current zoning district designation. The ZBA may require submission of documentation from professionals or certified experts to substantiate this finding. 
b.  Unique Circumstances. That the condition or situation of the specific parcel of property or the intended use of such property for which the variance is sought is unique to that property and not commonly present in the general vicinity or in the zone district. The applicant must prove that there are certain features or conditions of the land that are not generally applicable throughout the zone and that these features make it impossible to earn a reasonable return without some adjustment. Such unique conditions or situations include: 
i.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
ii.  Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure. 
iii.  The use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
iv.  Any other physical situation on the land, building or structure deemed by the ZBA to be extraordinary. 
c.  Character of Neighborhood. The use variance will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or the intent of the comprehensive development plan, or be a detriment to adjacent properties. 
d.  Capacity of Roads, Infrastructure and Public Services. The capacity and operations of public roads, utilities, other facilities and services will not be significantly compromised. 
e.  Not Self-Created. The immediate practical difficulty causing the need for the variance request was not self-created by the applicant. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.22.040 - Decisions of the ZBA. 
A.  Area or Dimensional Variance Votes. A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the ZBA shall be required to grant a variance to the requirements of this title. 
B.  Use Variance Votes. A concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the ZBA shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land if permitted by this title. Nothing contained in this title shall be construed to give or grant to the ZBA the power or authority to alter or change this title or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the city council in the manner provided by law. 
C.  Appeal. In exercising the above powers, the ZBA may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building official from whom the appeal is taken. A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the ZBA shall be required to reverse an order, decisions, or determination of an administrative official. 
D.  Decision Effective. The decision of the ZBA shall be final upon the earlier of: 
1.  Issuance of a written decision signed by the authorized representative of the ZBA. 
2.  Approval of the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made. 
E.  Conditions. In granting a variance the ZBA may attach conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this title. Performance guarantees shall be required to ensure that conditions attached to a variance are complied with in accordance with Section 18.21.100. 
F.  Validity of Variance. The order of the ZBA authorizing the erection or alteration of a building shall expire in one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
G.  Validity of Use Variance. The order of the ZBA authorizing a use of a building or premises shall expire in one year, unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
H.  One Year to Rehear Denied Variance. When any application made under the provisions of this title has been denied by the ZBA, not less than one year must intervene before a new application of the same tenor, and relating to the same property or proposed use, may be accepted or acted upon by the building official or by any other city employee or authority, unless a positive finding is made by the building official that the facts of the case have substantially changed since its previous consideration. 
I.  Reconsideration. The ZBA shall have the authority to rehear a prior decision on its own motion in instances where new information is presented that could change the findings of fact used to reach the original decision. Where the ZBA passes a motion to reconsider a variance decision based upon the new information provided, it shall set a new public hearing, noticed in the same manner as required for the original hearing. 
J.  Appeals of Planning Commission Decisions. A member of the ZBA who is also a member of the planning commission shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of the planning commission. However, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.22.050 - Appeals to the circuit court. 
    The decision of the ZBA shall be final. Appeals from decisions of the ZBA shall be to the circuit court, as provided by law. An appeal from a decision of a ZBA shall be filed within thirty days after the ZBA issues its decision in writing signed by the chairperson, or within twenty-one days after the ZBA approves the minutes of its decision. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.22.060 - Temporary use permits. 
    The ZBA may grant temporary use permits to uses that do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature under the following conditions: 
A.  The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
B.  The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of the temporary permit. Temporary uses may be approved for a period of up to twelve months, with the granting of twelve-month extensions being permissible. 
C.  All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city shall be made at the discretion of the ZBA. 
D.  In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the ZBA shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of land; recreation developments such as, but not limited to, golf driving ranges and outdoor archery courts or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections. 
E.  The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district. 
F.  No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.22.070 - Fees. 
    The city council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the ZBA. At the time the notice for appeal is filed, the fee shall be paid to the secretary of the ZBA, which the secretary shall forthwith pay over to the city treasurer to the credit of the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.23 - AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE 
Sections: 

18.23.010 - Initiation of rezoning and zoning ordinance text amendments. 
    The city council may, from time to time, amend, modify, supplement or revise the zoning district boundaries shown on the zoning map (rezoning) or the provisions of this title. An amendment to the zoning district boundaries contained on the zoning map (rezoning) may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by the owner or owners of property which is the subject of the proposed amendment. Amendments to the provisions of this title may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by petition of one or more residents or property owners of the city. All proposed amendments to the zoning map or the provisions of this title shall be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation to the city council, prior to consideration thereof by the city council. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.23.020 - Application procedure. 
A.  An amendment to the zoning map or this title, except those initiated by the city council or planning commission, shall be initiated by submission of a completed application on a form supplied by the city, including an application fee, which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
B.  In the case of an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning), the following information shall accompany the application form: 
1.  Legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a map identifying the subject property in relation to surrounding properties. 
2.  Name, signature and address of the owner of the subject property, a statement of the applicant's interest in the subject property if not the owner in fee simple title, and proof of consent from the property owner. 
3.  Existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject property. 
4.  Site analysis site plan illustrating existing conditions on the site and adjacent properties, such as woodlands, wetlands, soil conditions, steep slopes, drainage patterns, views, existing buildings, any sight distance limitations and relationship to other developed sites and access points in the vicinity. 
5.  Conceptual plan demonstrating that the site could be developed with representative uses permitted in the requested zoning district meeting requirements for setbacks, wetland buffers access spacing, any requested service drives and other site design factors. 
6.  Written environmental assessment describing site features and anticipated impacts created by the host of uses permitted in the requested zoning districts. A traffic impact analysis shall be provided if any use permitted in the requested zoning district could generate one hundred or more peak hour directional trips, or one thousand or more vehicle trips per day. The traffic study should contrast the daily and peak hour trip generation rates for representative uses in the current and requested zoning district. The determination of representative uses shall be made by the planning commission with input from city staff and consultants. 
7.  Written description of how the requested rezoning meets Section 18.23.040. 
C.  In the case of an amendment to the zoning map, the site must be staked to clearly indicate the location of the requested amendment. Flagged stakes shall be placed at each parcel corner. A sign shall be posted on the property by the applicant indicating that the property is proposed to be rezoned. Such sign shall also indicate the date, time and location of the planning commission public hearing where the proposal will be reviewed, as noted in Section 18.23.030. 
D.  In the case of an amendment to this title, other than an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning), a general description of the proposed amendment shall accompany the application form. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.23.030 - Rezoning and zoning ordinance text amendment procedure. 
A.  Upon initiation of a rezoning or an ordinance amendment, a public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be held in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 18.21.110. 
B.  Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and shall report its findings and recommendation to the city council. In the case of an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning), the planning commission shall consider the criteria contained in Section 18.23.040 in making its finding and recommendation. 
C.  Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall consider the proposed amendment to be adopted following two readings. In the case of an amendment to the text of this title, the city council may modify or revise the proposed amendment, as recommended by the planning commission, prior to enactment. In the case of an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning), the city council shall approve or deny the amendment, based on its consideration of the criteria contained in Section 18.23.040. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.23.040 - Criteria for amendment of the zoning map (rezoning). 
    In considering any petition for an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning) and zoning ordinance text, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following criteria in making its findings, recommendations and decision: 
A.  Consistency with the goals, policies and future land use map in the city of Wixom master plan, including any subarea or corridor studies. If conditions have changed since the master plan was adopted, the consistency with recent development trends in the area. 
B.  Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological and other environmental features with the host of uses permitted in the proposed zoning district. 
C.  Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return on investment through developing the property with any of the uses permitted under the current zoning. 
D.  Compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values. 
E.  Capacity of city infrastructure and services sufficient to accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising the "health, safety and welfare" of the city. 
F.  Apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in the requested zoning district in the city in relation to the amount of land in the city currently zoned to accommodate the demand. 
G.  Where a rezoning is reasonable given the above criteria, a determination that the requested zoning district is more appropriate than another district or amending the list of permitted or special land uses within a district. 
H.  The request has not previously been submitted within the past one year, unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.23.050 - Conditional zoning agreement. 
A.  Intent. It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning classification, that certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a request for rezoning. This is especially true since the city must consider all potential uses which may be made of property when considering a traditional rezoning request, some of which may be inappropriate for a particular piece of property considering items such as, but not limited to, the surrounding land uses, the city master plan, available infrastructure, and natural features. It is the intent of this section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCL 125.3405) by which an owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request. It is not the intent of this section to provide for rezonings that are inconsistent with the city's master plan or surrounding land uses, nor is it the intent to provide a mechanism for circumventing any requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
B.  Application and Offer of Conditions. An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a conditional rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for conditional rezoning is filed, or additional conditions may be offered at a later time during the conditional rezoning process as set forth below. 
1.  General Procedure. A request for a conditional rezoning shall be commenced by filing a petition with the city building official, on the required forms, accompanied by the specified fees. The petition shall explicitly describe the proposed conditional rezoning and shall be signed by the owner of the property. Petitions for conditional rezoning of a specific site shall be accompanied by a plot plan or survey containing the following information: 
a.  Applicant's name, address, and telephone number; 
b.  Scale, northpoint, and dates of submission and revisions; 
c.  Zoning classification of applicant's property and all abutting parcels; 
d.  Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, driveways, and other improvements on the property and within one hundred feet of the property; 
e.  Proposed lot lines and lot dimensions, and general layout of proposed structures, parking area, driveways, and other improvements proposed for the property; 
f.  Dimensions, centerlines, and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys; 
g.  Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and streams, wetlands, and woodlands; 
h.  All existing and proposed easements; 
i.  Location of sanitary sewer or septic systems, existing and proposed; 
j.  Location and size of water mains, well sites and building service, existing and proposed; 
k.  The applicant shall also present a conceptual plan showing the specific proposed use of the property, and containing all the information outlined in Section 18.17.060. 
2.  Pre-Application Conference. Prior to filing a formal request for a conditional rezoning, and prior to a public hearing, the applicant must informally meet with the city building official, and other representatives as deemed necessary by the city, to discuss the proposed development. The pre-application conference is intended to be informative and advisory in nature, and affords the applicant the opportunity to discuss the land use and planning policies of the city of Wixom. 
    The applicant must present a conceptual plan for the contemplated conditional rezoning at or before the pre-application conference. Any and all statements made by the city of Wixom employees, attorneys, agents or representatives at the pre-application conference have no legal force and are not legally binding promises, commitments or contracts. 
C.  Review Procedures. The owner's offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. 
1.  Standards for Rezoning. The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which the conditional rezoning is requested. Further, the planning commission and city council shall, at a minimum, consider all the following standards in rendering a decision on a request for conditional rezoning: 
a.  Will the proposed amendment be in accordance with the basic intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance? 
b.  Is the proposed amendment consistent with the master plan of the city? 
c.  Have the conditions changed since the current zoning was adopted, or was there a mistake in the zoning ordinance that justifies an amendment? 
d.  Will the amendment correct an inequitable situation created by the zoning ordinance rather than merely grant special privileges? 
e.  Will the amendment set an inappropriate precedent? 
f.  Is the requested zoning consistent with the existing or planned surrounding land uses? 
g.  If the rezoning is granted, could all requirements in the proposed zoning classification be complied with on the subject property? 
h.  Would the proposed rezoning be consistent with the trends in land development in the general vicinity of the subject property? 
i.  Would the proposed rezoning have a negative impact on public services, utilities, or roads? 
j.  Would the proposed rezoning negatively impact natural features on the site, such as woodlands or wetlands? 
2.  Other Required Approvals. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a special land use permit under the terms of this title may only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a variance under the terms of this title may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms of this title may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the terms of this title. 
3.  Amendment of Conditions. The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of conditional rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner, and confirmed in writing. An owner may withdraw in writing all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the city council provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the planning commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred back to the planning commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
D.  Planning Commission Review. The planning commission, after public hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in subsection C of this section, may recommend approval, approval with recommended changes, or denial of the rezoning; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner in writing. In the event that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are not subsequently offered by the owner in writing, the recommendation of the planning commission shall be considered by the city council to be a recommendation of denial of the proposed conditional rezoning. 
E.  City Council Review. After receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city council shall, consistent with subsection C of this section, review the planning commission's recommendation and deliberate upon the requested conditional rezoning, and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request. If the applicant initiates additional or different conditions not considered by the planning commission subsequent to the recommendation of the planning commission, then the city council shall refer such proposed additional or different conditions to the planning commission for report thereon within a time specified by the city council, and the city council shall thereafter proceed to deny or approve the conditional rezoning. 
F.  Approval. If the city council finds the conditional rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offer of conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written statement of conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this section. The statement of conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance codified in this title adopted by the city council to accomplish the requested conditional rezoning. The statement of conditions shall: 
1.  Be prepared in a form recordable with the Oakland County Register of Deeds; 
2.  Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains; 
3.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions runs with the land, and is binding upon successor owners of the land; 
4.  Incorporate by attachment the conceptual plan which formed the basis of the conditional rezoning; 
5.  Contain the notarized signatures of all the owners of the property proceeded by a statement attesting to the fact that they are the only parties having an interest in the property, and that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the statement of conditions; 
6.  The statement of conditions may be reviewed and approved by the city attorney, with the applicant to pay all costs associated with such review and approval; 
7.  The approved statement of conditions shall be filed by the owner with the Oakland County Register of Deeds within thirty days after approval of the conditional rezoning. The owner shall provide the city with a recorded copy of the statement of conditions within thirty days of receipt; and 
8.  Upon the conditional rezoning taking effect, and after the required recording of the statement of conditions, use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all the requirements regulating use and development within the new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in the statement of conditions. 
G.  Compliance with Conditions. Any person who establishes development or commences a use upon land that has been conditionally rezoned shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in full compliance with all the conditions set forth in the statement of conditions. Any failure to comply fully with the conditions contained within the statement of conditions shall constitute a violation of this title and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 
H.  Time Period for Establishing Development or Use. The approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within eighteen months after the effective date by publication of the conditional rezoning, and must thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may, upon written request, be extended an additional eighteen months by the city council if: (1) it is demonstrated to the city council's sole satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion, and (2) the city council finds that there has not been a change in circumstances that would render the conditional rezoning with statement of conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning policy. 
I.  Reversion of Zoning. If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land do not occur within the time frame specified under subsection H of this section, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in MCL 125.3405(2). 
J.  Subsequent Rezoning of Land. When land that is conditionally rezoned with the statement of conditions is thereafter rezoned to a different zoning classification, or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no statement of conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to subsection I of this section, or upon application of the landowner, or otherwise, the statement of conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner's written request, the city clerk shall record with the Oakland County Register of Deeds a notice that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect. 
K.  Amendment of Conditions. 
1.  During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use specified pursuant to subsection H of this section, or during any extension thereof granted by the city council, the city shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement of conditions. 
2.  The statement of conditions may be amended thereafter in the same manner as was prescribed for the original conditional rezoning and statement of conditions. 
L.  City Right to Rezone. Nothing in the statement of conditions or in the provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a statement of conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this title and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
M.  Failure to Offer Conditions. The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner's rights under this title. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.24 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

18.24.010 - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this title: 
A.  The particular shall control the general; 
B.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control; 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive, with the decision made by the building official, planning commission, city council or zoning board of appeals; as indicated; 
D.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary; 
E.  The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "build" includes the words "erect" and "construct." A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof; 
F.  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for"; 
G.  The term "including" means "including, but not limited to" and the term "such as" means "such as, but not limited to" unless otherwise noted; 
H.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity recognizable as a "person" under the laws of Michigan; 
I.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply, 
2.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination (i.e., "or" also means "and/or"), 
3.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination; 
J.  The terms "abutting" or "adjacent to" include property along the lot lines of the subject site including those in another community, but do not include lands separated by a public street right-of-way; 
K.  The word "days" shall mean calendar days and include all weekend days and holidays; 
L.  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.020 - Definitions A-B. 
    "Accessory building" means a detached building on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, a principal structure, and occupied or devoted exclusively to an accessory use. Examples may include detached garages, sheds and storage buildings. 
    "Accessory structure" means a detached building or other type of structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, a principal structure, and occupied or devoted exclusively to an accessory use. Examples include accessory buildings, fences, decks and swimming pools. 
    "Accessory use" means a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same zoning lot, unless otherwise specified, as the principal use to which it is related. When accessory is used in this text, it has the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers; 
2.  Outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests; 
3.  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure; 
4.  A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays; 
5.  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations; 
6.  Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations; 
7.  Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located; 
8.  Uses clearly incidental to a main use, such as but not limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex; 
9.  Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located; 
10.  Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located; 
11.  Common household gardening in a residential district when located only in the rear yard and/or nonrequired side yard areas. For purposes of this title, common household gardening shall include the growing of fruits and vegetables for consumption, solely by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit located on the same zoning lot; 
12.  Solar panels, wind generators, television reception antennae and air conditioning units. 
    "Adult care facility" means a governmental or nongovernmental establishment that provides foster care of adults, over eighteen years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state under Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, and rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing homes (which are defined separately), homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, or a residential center for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility. Such organizations shall be defined as follows: 
1.  "Adult foster care small group home" means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive twelve or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
2.  "Adult foster care large group home" means an adult foster care facility with approved capacity to receive at least thirteen but not more than twenty adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
3.  "Adult foster care family home" means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
4.  "Adult foster care congregate facility" means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than twenty adults to be provided with foster care. 
    "Adult day care" means a facility that provides care for elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a period of less than twenty-four hours. 
    "Alley" means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    "Alterations" means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to in this title as altered or reconstructed. 
    "Amusement arcade" means any place, premises, or establishment, or any room or floor space set aside in a commercial establishment, in or at which four or more mechanical amusement devices as defined in this chapter are located. 
    "Animal, Domesticated (Pet)" means an animal that is commonly considered capable of being trained or is capable of adapting to living in a human environment and being of use to human beings, and which is not likely to bite without provocation nor cause death, maiming or illness to human beings, including by way of example: bird (caged), fish, rodent (bred, such as a gerbil, rabbit, hamster or guinea pig), cat (domesticated), lizard (non-poisonous), and dog. Wild, vicious, or exotic animals shall not be considered domesticated. Animals bred, raised or boarded for commercial purposes are not considered pets. A premises where more than three pets are kept shall be considered a kennel. 
    "Animal, non-domesticated, vicious or exotic (wild)" means any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human beings or domesticated animals without adequate provocation, or which because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or injure human beings or domesticated animals. Or, an animal from a species which is not commonly domesticated or kept as livestock, or which is not native to the state of Michigan, or a species which, irrespective of geographic origin, is of wild or predatory character, or which because of size, aggressive or vicious characteristics would constitute an unreasonable danger to human life or property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner, including any hybrid animal that is part exotic animal. 
    "Apartment, efficiency" means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    "Apartments" means an attached dwelling unit with party or common walls, contained in a building with other dwelling units or sharing the occupancy of a building with other than a residential use. Apartments are commonly accessed by a common stair landing or walkway. Apartments are typically rented by the occupants, but may be condominiums. Apartment buildings often may have a central heating system and other central utility connections. The grounds of the apartment complex are common and each apartment unit typically does not have its own separate yard space. Apartments are also commonly known as garden apartments or flats. 
    "Architectural features" means steps, windowsills, belt courses, brick and/or wrought iron wing walls, chimneys, architraves, pediments. 
    Arterial Streets. See "Streets, Arterial." 
    "Assembly hall" means a building or portion of a building used as a meeting place at which the public or membership groups are assembled regularly or occasionally in which facilities are provided for civic, educational, political, religious, or social purposes. 
    "Automobile car wash" means any building or structure or portion thereof containing facilities for washing motor vehicles using production line methods with a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical washing devices; and shall also include coin and attendant operated drive-through, automatic self-serve, track mounted units and similar high volume washing establishments, but shall not include hand washing operations in a "gasoline service station." 
    Automobile Repair, Major. "Major automobile repair" means the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting; and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Automobile Repair, Minor. "Minor automobile repair" means repairs other than major repair, including oil change, engine tune-up, muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops and tire stores. 
    "Basement" means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    "Bed and breakfast" means a use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a one-family dwelling unit, and a use in which transient guests are provided room and board in return for payment. 
    "Berm" means an earthen mound of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring device in carrying out the requirements of this title. 
    "Block" means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating); or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the municipality. 
    "Boat" means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. This title distinguishes nonmotorized watercraft less than eighteen feet in length such as canoes and kayaks from other boats in terms of regulating the number of boats moored on a lot. 
    "Building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    "Building height" means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deckline of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Any extension of a mansard, gambrel, hip or gable roof below a wall shall require building height measurement to take place at the average height between the top of the building wall and the ridgeline and the established grade of the building. 
    "Building line" means a line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this title, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
    "Building official" means the building official for the city of Wixom. 
    Building, Main or Principal. "Main or principal building" means a building in which the lot's principal use is conducted. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.030 - Definitions C-D. 
    "City building code" means Title 15, Buildings and Construction of the Wixom Municipal Code. 
    "Child care facilities" means facilities for the care of children under eighteen years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state under Michigan Public Act 116 of 1973 and the associated rules promulgated by the State Department of Human Services. Such organizations shall be further defined as follows: 
1.  "Child care or day care center" means a facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school-age children for care for periods less than twenty-four hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. Child care center or day care center includes a facility that provides care for not more than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, before or after-school program, or drop-in center. Child care center or day care center does not include a Sunday school, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are attending for not more than four hours per day for an indefinite period or for not more than eight hours per day for a period not to exceed four weeks during a twelve-month period; a facility operated by a religious organization where child care is provided for not more than three hours while persons responsible for the children are attending religious services; a program that is primarily supervised, school-age-child-focused training in a specific subject, including, but not limited to, dancing, drama, music, or religion, only during the time the child is involved in supervised, school-age-child-focused training; a program that is primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities for school-age children, sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby group, including, but not limited to, youth groups, scouting, and school-age recreational or supplementary education programs, open only during the time the child is engaged in the group athletics or social activities, and if the school-age child can come and go at will. 
2.  "Child care institution" means a child care facility that is organized for the purpose of receiving minor children for care, maintenance, and supervision, usually on a twenty-four-hour basis, in a building maintained for that purpose, and operating throughout the year. An educational program may be provided, but the educational program shall not be the primary purpose of the facility. Child care institution includes a maternity home for the care of unmarried mothers who are minors and an agency group home, that is described as a small child caring institution owned, leased, or rented by a licensed agency providing care for more than four but less than thirteen minor children. Child care institution also includes institutions for mentally retarded or emotionally disturbed minor children. Child care institution does not include a hospital, nursing home, or home for the aged licensed under Article 17 of the Public Health Code, a boarding school licensed under Section 1335 of the Revised School Code, a hospital or facility operated by the state or licensed under the Mental Health Code, or an adult foster care family home or an adult foster care small group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Licensing Act in which a child has been placed under that Act. 
3.  "Foster family home" means a private home in which at least one but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan Adoption Code, are given care and supervision for twenty-four hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
4.  "Foster family group home" means a private home in which more than four but less than seven children, including children related to the caregiver by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan Adoption Code, are provided care for twenty-four hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
5.  "Family day care home" means a private home in which up to six minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four hours a day, including children related to the caregiver by blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
6.  "Group day care home" means a private home in which more than six but not more than twelve children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, including children related to the caregiver. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    "Church" means a site used for or intended for the regular assembly of persons for the conducting of religious services and accessory uses therewith. Such accessory uses may include rectories, living quarters for church ministry and other members of the religious order who carry out their duties primarily on the site, religious education classes, day care, outdoor recreation facilities (unlighted), religious office space, youth centers and other similar activities. Rescue missions, tent revivals and other temporary assemblies are not included in this definition. 
    Church, Large-Scale. "Large-scale church" means a religious institution with a seating capacity of one thousand five hundred people or more in its sanctuary or main area of assembly or more than five hundred parking spaces. A large-scale church may also be characterized by any one or more of the following features: region-serving accessory facilities such as high schools, colleges, and seminaries; one or more buildings one hundred thousand square feet in floor area or greater; retreat and conference centers or other features. Large-scale churches have negative impacts on one-family residential areas because of scale of buildings, large off-street parking lots, large size of assemblies and resultant traffic surges and frequency of use, which are different from smaller churches which have traditionally been compatible with single-family areas. Because of these impacts, large-scale churches are more compatible with nonresidential districts, subject to conditions, which minimize the impacts. 
    "Civic building" means a building, either publicly or privately owned, which is located on any lot that is open to the public, including meeting halls, libraries, clubhouses, museums, cultural societies, visual and performance arts buildings, municipal buildings, and community buildings that are administered by nonprofit cultural, educational or religious organizations. 
    "Civic square" means an outdoor public tract of land or open space where the area is defined by streets or adjacent buildings. 
    "Clinic" means an establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by physicians, dentists or similar professions. 
    Club, Social. "Social club" means a club, group or organization created for recreational, artistic, athletic, academic, political, charitable, or other social purpose, and whose activities are not conducted primarily for profit or material gain and do not involve merchandising, vending, or other commercial activities, except as required incidentally for the membership and purpose of the social club. 
    Cocktail Lounge/Night Club. See "Restaurant, Cocktail Lounge/Bar/Nightclub/Tavern." 
    "Commercial recreation" means recreational uses operated for profit, open to the general public through a fee or membership purchase such as health clubs, gyms, martial arts schools, gymnasiums, bowling alleys, archery ranges, tennis courts, soccer arenas, skating rinks, batting cages and miniature golf courses. 
    "Commercial use" means an occupation, employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee for more than seven days during a calendar year. 
    "Commercial vehicle" means: 
1.  A motor vehicle designed to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the driver; 
2.  A motor vehicle, having a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand one or more pounds; 
3.  A motor vehicle with a gross combination weight rating of twenty-six thousand one pounds or more including a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand pounds; 
4.  A motor vehicle carrying hazardous material and on which is required to be posted a placard as defined and required under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 199; or 
5.  A commercial vehicle does not include a vehicle used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for nonbusiness purposes. 
    "Composting" means the process of biologically decomposing organic matter. 
    Condominium. The following definitions are related to condominiums: 
1.  "Condominium Act" means Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
2.  "Condominium documents" means the master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
3.  "Condominium subdivision (site condominium)" means a method of subdivision where land ownership of sites is regulated by the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended MCL 559.101), as opposed to the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (MCL 560.101). Condominium subdivision shall be equivalent to the term subdivision as used in this title and the city subdivision regulations ordinance (Ordinance 16). 
4.  "Condominium subdivision plan" means the drawings and information prepared in accordance with Section 66 of the Condominium Act. Such drawings and information typically include the site, survey and utility plans, floor plans and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the location thereof on the land. 
5.  "Condominium unit" means the portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a time-share unit, or any other type of use. 
6.  "Consolidating master deed" means the final amended master deed for a contractible or expandable condominium project, or a condominium project containing convertible land or convertible space, which final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed. 
7.  "Contractible condominium" means a condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn in accordance with this title and the Condominium Act. 
8.  "Conversion condominium" means a condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under Section 71 of the Condominium Act. 
9.  "Expandable condominium" means a condominium project to which additional land may be added in accordance with this title and the Condominium Act. 
10.  "Master deed" means the condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by Section 8 of the Condominium Act. 
11.  "Notice of proposed action" means the notice required by Section 71 of the Condominium Act, to be filed with the city and other agencies. 
12.  "Site condominium" means a developmental concept for a condominium development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial or other structure for uses permitted in the zoning district in which located; in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights in a condominium unit as described in the master deed. 
13.  "Condominium unit" means that portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, and is a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. Lot shall mean the same as home site and condominium unit in site condominium developments. 
    "Consignment shop" means a second-hand or resale store that offers used goods; typically where the dealer holds the merchandise from another individual and pays the person a percentage upon the sale of the goods. 
    "Contractor yard" means any land or buildings used primarily for the storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery, building materials, paints, pipe, or electrical components used by the owner or occupant of the premises in the conduct of any building trades or building craft. 
    Convalescent Home. See "Nursing and Convalescent Home." 
    "Convenience store" means a retail store offering for sale a limited line of groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood that may also sell gasoline; but does not include automotive service stations or vehicle repair shops. 
    "Convention center" means a multi-purpose facility whose primary purpose is to accommodate meetings, seminars, social and civic events, and conferences. Such a facility offers a total meeting environment which typically consists of meeting rooms, conference rooms, and catering uses that comprise continuous space. A conference center may include lodging facilities. A hotel/motel with at least ten thousand square feet of conference room facilities shall also be considered a conference center. Accessory uses may include dining areas, recreational facilities and specialty shops that cater to conference center guests. 
    Day Care Center. See "Child Care Facilities." 
    Day Care Home for Elderly Adults. See "Adult Day Care." 
    "Deck" means an accessory platform structure that is open, unenclosed by a roof or walls, either freestanding or attached to the principal structure, that is supported by pillars or posts. 
    "Deck line" means the intersection of two roof surfaces of a mansard or gambrel roof forming the highest horizontal line of the steeper roof slope. 
    "Density" means the number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed per net acre of land. The following calculation shall be utilized in determining maximum density. 
1.  The acreage exclusive of subsections 2 and 3 of this definition shall be calculated at one hundred percent toward the total site acreage. 
2.  The acreage comprised of land within the one hundred-year floodplain elevation, or wetlands protected by the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, PA 203 of 1979, shall be calculated at twenty-five percent toward the total site acreage. 
3.  All submerged land below the ordinary high-water mark of a lake, creek, or stream and public rights-of-way shall be excluded from the net area calculation. 
    "Detention basin" means a structure or facility, natural or artificial, which stores stormwater on a temporary basis and releases it at a controlled rate. A detention basin may drain completely after a storm event, or it may be a body of water with a fixed minimum and maximum water elevation between runoff events. 
    "Development" means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    "District" means a portion of the incorporated area of the municipality within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title. 
    Drive-In. See "Restaurant, Drive-In." 
    Drive-Through. See "Restaurant, Drive-Through." 
    "Dumpster" means a container that has a hooking mechanism that permits it to be raised and dumped into a sanitation truck. This definition excludes roll-off containers, which are commonly called dumpsters, that are hauled away from a site rather than being emptied on site. 
    "Dwelling unit" means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one-family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    Dwelling, Live/Work. "Live/work dwelling" means a multi-story dwelling unit wherein the first floor is designed as a storefront for retail, service, office or artisan studio and a dwelling unit on the upper floors. The live/work unit shall be designed as an integral unit with interior stairway connections between floors, providing the option for the first floor storefront to be owned and operated by the occupant of the upper floor dwelling. The type of use allowed in the first floor shall be subject to uses permitted in the district, which may be limited to the list of permitted home occupations in residential districts or allowable commercial used in mixed-use districts such as the VCA district. Live/work dwellings may be attached to a similar single dwelling unit with party or common walls, each with a separate entryway with direct access to the outdoors at ground level. 
    Dwelling, Multiple-Family. "Multiple-family dwelling" means a building, or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. Multiple-family dwelling units may also be known as apartments, which have common entrances. 
    Dwelling, One-Family. "One-family dwelling" means a building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one-family. 
    Dwelling, Townhouse. "Townhouse dwelling" means a self-contained single dwelling unit attached to a similar single dwelling unit with party or common walls, designed as part of a series of three or more dwelling units, each with: a separate entryway with direct access to the outdoors at ground level, a separate basement, a separate garage, separate utility connections and defined front yards. Townhouses may also be known as attached one-family dwelling units, row houses, clustered one-family dwellings or stack ranches. Any three or more attached dwellings not meeting the above criteria shall be considered an apartment or multiple-family dwelling. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family. "Two-family dwelling" means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other, commonly referred to as "duplexes." 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.040 - Definitions E-F. 
    Elderly Housing. See "Senior Housing." 
    "Erected" means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    "Essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, communication, collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection herewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. Wireless communication towers, devices and facilities are not defined as an essential service. 
    "Excavation" means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    "Facade" means that exterior side of a building which faces, and is most nearly parallel to, a public or private street. The facade shall include the entire building walls, including wall faces, parapets, fascia, windows, doors, canopies, and visible roof structures of one complete elevation. 
    "Family" means either of the following: 
1.  A domestic family, that is, one or more persons living together and related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage or adoption, together with servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
2.  The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic family must be cooking and otherwise housekeeping as a single, nonprofit unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie organization or group where the common living arrangement and/or the basis for the establishment of the functional equivalency of the domestic family is likely or contemplated to exist for a limited or temporary duration. For the purposes of enforcement, the building official shall presume that a functional equivalent of a domestic family is limited to six or fewer persons. A property owner may rebut this presumption to allow more than six persons by submitting an application for special land use approval, subject to the standards set forth in this title. 
    "Farm" means all of the contiguous neighboring or associated land operated as a single unit on which bona fide farming is carried on directly by the owner-operator, manager or tenant farmer, by his own labor or with the assistance of members of his household or hired employees, provided, however, that land to be considered a farm under this chapter shall include a continuous parcel of more than ten acres in area; provided further, farms may be considered as including establishments operated as bona fide greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, poultry farms and apiaries; but establishments keeping or operating fur-bearing animals, public riding, or boarding stables or commercial dog kennels, shall not be considered a farm under this chapter unless combined with bona fide farm operations on the same continuous tract of land; and provided further, buildings, structures, or yard areas used for the keeping of animals shall be located not less than one hundred feet from a property line. No farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal, or rendering plants, or for the slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised on the premises or have been maintained on the premises prior thereto and for the use and consumption of persons residing on the premises. None of the provisions of this chapter is intended to conflict with those rights protected under the Michigan Right to Farm Act, MCL 286.471, et seq. 
    "Feeder road" means a street or road intersecting with a limited access freeway and having traffic interchange facilities with such limited access freeway. 
    "Fence" means a manmade structure constructed for the purpose of or to have the effect of enclosing the area it is constructed upon. 
    Fence, Ornamental. "Ornamental fence" means a man-made structure, the surface area of which is more than fifty percent open, such as wood picket fences or wrought iron fences. Ornamental fences do not include chain-link fences or fences of wire construction. 
    Fence, Privacy. "Privacy fence" means a manmade structure; the surface area of which is less than fifty percent open. 
    "Filling" means the depositing or dumping of gravel, earth, or other materials of any composition whatsoever on land, whether submerged or not, placed to alter land contours; displace water or fill a waterbody, water course or wetland; or place shoreline protection measures. 
    "Flood hazard" means a hazard to land or improvements due to overflow water having sufficient depth or velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of watercourses. 
    "Floodplain" means that area which would be inundated by storm runoff or flood water equivalent to that which would occur with a rainfall or flood of one hundred year recurrence frequency after total development of the watershed. 
    Floor Area, Residential. "Residential floor area" means for the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor Area, Usable. "Usable floor area" means for the purposes of computing parking, that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior wall. Where the layout of the interior floor plan has not been finalized, usable floor area shall be no less than eighty-five percent of the gross building floor area for the purpose of determining parking requirements. 
    "Frontage" means the linear dimension of a lot measured along the public road right-of-way line, private road access easement, or shared driveway. 
    "Funeral home or mortuary establishment" means an establishment where the dead are prepared for burial or cremation and where wakes or funerals may be held. A funeral home or mortuary establishment shall not include crematoria. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.050 - Definitions G-H. 
    "Garage sale" means a temporary, short-term sale of personal effects, jewelry, or household items, furnishings and equipment belonging to the owner or occupant of a residential dwelling by the owner or occupant. 
    "Garage service" means any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Garage, Private. "Private garage" means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles, recreational equipment, home and lawn maintenance equipment and other household storage, all of which is owned and used by the occupant of the building to which it is accessory. 
    "Gasoline service station" means a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major automobile repair. 
    "Grade" means the ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    "Greenbelt" means a planting of trees and shrubs to serve as a screening device between abutting land uses. 
    "Guarantee" means a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit. 
    "Hardship" means situations created by circumstances unique to an individual property that do not generally occur to land or buildings in the neighborhood or zoning district of the property in question and which circumstances make the use of such property in question not feasible under conditions imposed by this title. Hardship shall not include personal or financial hardship or economic disadvantage nor shall it constitute circumstances that are self-created. 
    "Hazardous use" means any use which involves the storage, sale, manufacture, or processing of materials which are dangerous, combustible and/or produce either poisonous fumes or explosions in the event of fire. These uses include all high hazard uses listed in the State Building Code. 
    "Home occupation" means an occupation or profession customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, as further regulated herein. 
    "Hospice" means a principal use as a lodging place for the terminally ill where persons are housed and furnished meals and attendant care. 
    "Hotel" means a building or part of a building with a common entrance or entrances in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk services, and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.060 - Definitions I-J. 
    "Impervious surface" means man-made material which covers the surface of land and substantially reduces the infiltration of stormwater to a rate of five percent or less. Impervious surface shall include pavement, buildings, and structures. 
    "Improvements" means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the municipality to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas, landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. 
    "Industrial" means of, relating to, concerning, or arising from the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, or processing of goods, or mineral extraction. 
    "Junk yard" means an area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junk yard includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any open area of more than two hundred square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.070 - Definitions K-L. 
    "Kennel" means any lot or premises on which more than three dogs, cats or other domestic animals, or any combination of more than three dogs, cats, or other domesticated animals are either permanently or temporarily boarded or bred and raised. 
    Large-Scale Church. See "Church, Large-Scale." 
    "Livestock" means domesticated animals and fowl, which includes, but is not limited to (without regard to the animal's gender or age) horses, sheep, cattle, mules, burros, goats, swine, poultry and fur-bearing animals being raised in captivity. 
    "Loading space" means an off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    "Lot" means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this title. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. Lot means the same as homesite and condominium in site condominium developments. 
    "Lot area" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    "Lot coverage" means the part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings, including accessory buildings. 
    "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    "Lot lines" means the lines bounding a lot as defined as follows: 
1.  Front Lot Line. In the case of an interior lot, it is that line separating the lot from the street. In the case of through lot or corner lot, it is that line separating the lot from each street. 
2.  Rear Lot Line. The lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
3.  Side Lot Line. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    "Lot of record" means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record, ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    "Lot width" means the horizontal straight-line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than one hundred thirty-five degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this title if the arc is of less radius than one hundred fifty feet and the tangents to the curve at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees. 
    Lot, Flag. "Flag lot" means a lot that has access to a public right-of-way or private road access easement by means of a narrow strip of land. 
    Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, Through. "Through lot" means any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of such lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
    Lot, Zoning. "Zoning lot" means a single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this title with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.080 - Definitions M-N. 
    "Main building" means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    "Main use" means the principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purposes for which the premises exist. 
    "Major thoroughfare" means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan as designated on the city master plan for future land use. 
    "Manufactured housing" means any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be sold as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. Manufactured housing does not include recreational vehicles or equipment. 
    "Marginal service road" means a roadway parallel to a major or collector thoroughfare as designated on the city of Wixom master plan which provides access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic. 
    "Marihuana" or "medical marihuana" means that term as defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106, as amended. 
    "Master plan" means the city of Wixom's comprehensive community plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. Such plan shall be adopted by the planning commission in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (PA 33 of 2008). 
    "Mechanical amusement device" means any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or other form of payment, operates or may be operated as a game of contest of skill or amusement when the element of skill in such operation predominates over chance or luck. It includes mechanical, electrical, or electronic video games, mechanical grabbing devices, pinball games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic baseball, football, basketball, hockey or similar sports-type games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic card games, shooting games, target games, card games or any other machine, device or apparatus which may be used as a game of skill and wherein the player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by such machine. 
    "Medical marihuana activities" means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer or transportation of medical marihuana by a qualifying patient or primary caregiver as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law. 
    "Mezzanine" means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    "Mini storage units" means storage buildings for lease to the general public for storage of personal and household effects and for dry storage of office or business effects not including the warehousing of products or supplies. 
    Mobile Home. See "Manufactured Housing." 
    "Motel" means a series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    "Municipality" means the city of Wixom, Michigan. 
    "Nonconforming lot" means a lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
    "Nonconforming structure" means a structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of this title in the district in which it is located. 
    "Nonconforming use" means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    "Nuisance factor" means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes, vibration, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable effluent, noise of congregation of people, particularly at night, passenger traffic, invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic, a burned-out structure, or a condemned structure. 
    "Nursery school" means a daytime facility which has as its main objective a development program for preschool children and whose staff meets the educational requirements established by the state. 
    Nursery, Plant Materials. "Plant materials nursery" means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this title does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    "Nursing or convalescent home" means a structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 1-28-2014 ) 
18.24.090 - Definitions O-P. 
    "Off-premise advertising sign" means a sign which contains a message related to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or activity not sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. 
    "Off-street parking lot" means a facility providing off-street vehicular parking spaces and drives or aisles for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    "Open air business" means business and commercial uses conducted solely outside of any building unless otherwise specified herein. Examples of open air businesses include: 
1.  Retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises, and lawn furniture; 
2.  Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products, including fruits, vegetables and Christmas trees; 
3.  Various outdoor recreation uses, including but not limited to: tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving ranges, and amusement parks; 
4.  Outdoor display and sale of automobiles, recreational vehicles, garages, swimming pools, playground equipment, and similar goods. 
    "Open front store" means a business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term open front store shall not include automobile repair or gasoline service stations. 
    "Open space" means that part of a lot, which is open and unobstructed by any built features from its lowest level to the sky, and is accessible to all residents upon the site. This area is intended to provide light and air or is designed for environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to: lawns, decorative plantings, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, living plant materials, wetlands and water courses. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular travel. 
    "Open/outdoor storage" means the storage of any materials or objects outside the confines of a building for a continuous period longer than twenty-four hours or more. 
    "Outdoor display" means the placement of objects that are for retail sale outside the confines of a building. 
    "Parking lot" means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with driveways, aisles and other paved areas for vehicular maneuvering. For the purpose of determining setbacks, parking lots shall not include driveways providing access to a roadway or dedicated service drives providing cross-access to adjacent lots. 
    "Parking space" means an area of definite length and width; such area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    "Pawnshop" means an establishment where a pawnbroker lends money on the security of personal property pledged and kept by the pawnbroker until the loan is repaid. A pawnshop can also include establishments where individuals sell personal items to the pawnbroker for cash instead of a loan. A pawnshop may also include the resale of items that were formerly pawned objects. A pawnshop that deals in precious metals and gems shall also be subject to the requirements for precious metal and gem dealers. 
    "Performance standards" means criterion developed to control nuisance factors. 
    "Planning commission" means the city of Wixom planning commission as established by the city of Wixom city council under provisions of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as amended. 
    "Play structures" means a structure in which is 
    "Precious metal and gem dealer" means any place where a person engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public, including jewelry, precious gems, or items containing gold, silver, or platinum and subject to the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended. Any establishment that operates as a precious metal and gem dealer, either as a principal use or as an activity that is accessory to any other use of the property shall be considered a precious metal and gem dealer and subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
    "Primary caregiver" means a person who is at least twenty-one years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs, as further defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law. 
    "Principal building" means a building or structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot or parcel on which it is situated. 
    "Principal use" means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    "Private home" means a private residence in which the licensee or registrant permanently resides as a member of the household, which residency is not contingent upon caring for children or employment by a licensed or approved child-placing agency. Private home includes a full-time foster family home, a full-time foster family group home, a group day care home, or a family day care home. 
    "Public utility" means a person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing, under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. Wireless communication towers, devices and facilities are not defined as a public utility. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 1-28-2014 ) 
18.24.100 - Definitions Q-R. 
    "Qualifying patient" means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law. 
    "Reception antenna" means an exterior apparatus capable of receiving communications for radio or television purposes including satellite dishes and other satellite reception antennae but excluding facilities considered to be essential public services or those preempted from city regulation by applicable state, Federal Communication Commission (FCC), or federal laws or regulations. 
    "Recreational equipment" means travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, snowmobiles, horse trailers, dune buggies, and other similar equipment. 
    "Recreational facility" means publicly owned or operated site or building, used or occupied predominantly for recreational purposes, such as: parks, play areas, indoor or outdoor swimming pools, bathing beaches, boating and fishing areas, winter recreation areas, nature study areas, community halls, and fairgrounds. 
    "Registry identification card" means a document issued by the State of Michigan that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or a registered primary caregiver. 
    "Restaurant" means an establishment serving foods and/or beverages to a customer in a ready-to-consume state. The method of operation may be characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, standard restaurant, or lounge/tavern, or combination thereof, as defined below. 
1.  "Restaurant with outdoor seating" means a use that involves the sale or delivery of any prepared food or beverage for consumption in a defined area on premises but outside of the building in which it is prepared. Examples of defined areas include an external deck, patio, mall, garden, balcony or sidewalk. 
2.  "Carry-out restaurant" means a restaurant, with no more than six tables offered for sit down dining, that involves the sale of food, beverages, and/or desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption mainly off the premises. A carry-out restaurant differs from a drive-in or drive-through restaurant in that a customer must park and walk up to the restaurant or an employee must exit the restaurant and deliver the food to a customer in a parked car. 
3.  "Drive-in restaurant" means an establishment where food, desserts or beverages are sold to the customers in a ready-to-consume state and where an employee exits the restaurant and delivers the food to a customer in a parked automobile, for consumption in the automobile, while parked upon the premises or at other facilities provided for customers which are located on the premises. 
4.  "Drive-through restaurant" means an establishment so developed that some portion of its retail or service character is dependent upon providing a driveway approach and staging area specifically designed for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons through a window while in their motor vehicles, rather than parking their vehicle, for carry-out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed from the premises. 
5.  "Standard restaurant" means a standard restaurant is a use that involves either of the following: 
a.  The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building. 
b.  The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is subsequently consumed by the customers within a completely enclosed building. 
6.  "Cocktail lounge/bar/nightclub" means a type of restaurant that is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages. The preparation and sale of food or snacks to customers may be permitted. 
    "Retail establishment" means establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale. 
    "Ridge line" means the intersection of two roof surfaces forming the highest horizontal line of the roof. 
    "Ringlemann chart" means measurements of smoke in accordance with the United States Bureau of Mines standards. 
    "Roof" means the outside top covering of a building. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 1-28-2014 ) 
18.24.110 - Definitions S-T. 
    "Satellite earth station" means a structure designed, intended or used to receive communications or other signals from geostationary, communications satellites or other extraterrestrial sources. 
    Senior Housing, Dependent. "Dependent senior housing" means a facility consisting of dependent and semi-independent dwelling units, each occupied by not more than two residents per dwelling unit, at least one of whom is fifty-five years of age or older. These facilities will typically have available central dining facilities, recreational facilities, supervised and unsupervised activities, housekeeping assistance, and full-time medical personnel to provide medical services, including but not limited to dietary and nutritional assistance and nursing care. See "Nursing and Convalescent Home." 
    Senior Housing, Independent. "Independent senior housing" means typically one- and two-bedroom apartments or condominiums designed to meet the needs of persons sixty-two years of age and older or, if more than one hundred fifty units, persons fifty-five years of age and older, and restricted to occupancy by them. These dwelling units are intended for those of qualifying age that do not need regular care and can generally maintain their own households on a daily basis. 
    "Setback" means the distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this title. Setbacks from a public street shall be measured from the existing or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Sexually Oriented Businesses. The following definitions shall apply to sexually oriented businesses: 
1.  "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein cash-operated, credit-operated, coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, internet or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
2.  "Adult bookstore or adult video store" means a commercial establishment which offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration, as one of its principal business purposes, any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video matter or photographs, cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representation which depict or describe "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
b.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "sexually explicit activities"; or 
c.  Items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia depicting, displaying, advertising or packaged as "sexually explicit activities" or depict or describe "specified anatomical areas"; 
d.  For purposes of this chapter, "principal business purpose" means: 
i.  The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or interior floor space, meaning at least thirty percent of the floor area, or 
ii.  The receipt of fifty percent of more of its revenues from the sale of the items listed above, or 
iii.  The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of the sale, rental or viewing of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, film, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual representations, items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia which are characterized by the depiction, description, display, advertising or packaging of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
e.  An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas," and still be characterized as an adult book store, adult novelty or retail store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store, so long as the establishment falls within the definition of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store as set forth above. 
3.  "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcohol is served, which regularly features: 
a.  Persons who appear in a state of restricted nudity; or 
b.  Live performance which are characterized by the partial exposure of "specified anatomical areas"; or 
c.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
4.  "Adult massage parlor" means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other manipulation of the human body which occurs as part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical areas. The definition of sexually oriented business shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program nor a therapeutic massage practitioner. An adult massage parlor is considered a sexually oriented business for purposes of these regulations. 
5.  "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
a.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are regularly characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and which advertises the availability of this adult type of material by means of a sign, visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, internet or television; or 
b.  Permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for electric transmission over the World Wide Web; or 
c.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
d.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
6.  "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
7.  "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the performance of "sexually explicit activities." This definition does not include a theater which features occasional live nude performances with serious literacy, artistic or political value and which has no adverse secondary effects. 
8.  "Adult use business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty or retail store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude modeling studio and/or a sexual encounter establishment or any business determined by the building official, city manager, and/or the director of public safety, to be an adult use because of the similarities in the characteristics and activities of the business with regulated adult business uses, such as nudity, semi-nudity, exposure of "sexually explicit activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas." The definition of "adult use business" shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
9.  "Alcoholic commercial establishment" means any hotel, motel, tavern, restaurant, park, nightclub, cocktail lounge, burlesque house, bar, cabaret, taproom, club or other similar establishment licensed by the state of Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or where alcoholic beverages, including beer, are dispensed and/or consumed. This definition shall exclude a theater or auditorium. 
10.  "Entertainer" means a person who performs some type of activity or pose with the intent of allowing others to witness that activity or pose. 
11.  "Escort" means a person who, for consideration in any form, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately perform as an entertainer, including, but not limited to, the modeling of lingerie, the removal of clothing and the performance of a dance or skit. Under this definition, "privately" shall mean a performance for an individual or that individual's guests. 
12.  "Escort agency" means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
13.  "Establishment" means any of the following: 
a.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
b.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
c.  The location or relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
14.  "Licensee" means the individual listed as an applicant on the application of a sexually oriented business license, or a person whose name appears on a license to operate an adult use business. 
15.  "Licensing officer" means the clerk of the city of Wixom or his/her designee. 
16.  "Manager" means an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees, or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the sexually oriented business. 
17.  "Massage" means the treating of external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided shall pay any consideration whatsoever therefore. For purposes of this chapter, the term "bodywork" shall mean massage. 
18.  "Nude model studio" means any place where a person appears in a state of nudity or displays "specific anatomical areas," and is provided money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. This includes modeling studios that provide for nude modeling on an occasional basis, but it does not include a modeling studio whose primary function is to provide art classes as part of a college, university or educational institution and which is certified by the state of Michigan. 
19.  "Nudity or a state of nudity" means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts. 
20.  "Operator" means the owner, licensee, manager or person in charge of any premises. 
21.  "Peep booth" means an adult motion picture theater with a viewing room or cubical of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space. 
22.  "Premises or licensed premises" means any premises that requires a sexually oriented business license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business. 
23.  "Principal owner" means any person owning, directly or beneficially: (a) ten percent or more of a corporation's equity securities; (b) ten percent or more of the membership interests in a limited liability company; or (c) in the case of any other legal entity, ten percent or more of the ownership interests in the entity. 
24.  "Private room" means a room in a hotel/motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed and a bath in the room or adjacent room, and is used primarily for lodging. 
25.  "Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
26.  "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of "sexually explicit activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" for any form of consideration, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the same or opposite sex; or 
b.  Activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or 
c.  Permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for recording or transmission over the World Wide Web or any other media. 
27.  "Sexually explicit activities" means any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
d.  Any activity intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desires; or 
e.  The display of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
f.  The display of excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the activity set forth in subsections (27)(a) through (27)(e) of this definition. 
28.  "Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult novelty or retail store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center or similar establishment or any place that permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for electronic transmission over the World Wide Web. "Sexually oriented" when used to describe film, motion picture, videocassette, slides, or other photographic reproductions shall mean film, movies, motion picture videocassette, slides or other photographic reproductions that regularly depict material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas" offered for observation by the patron(s) on the premises of a sexually oriented business. The definition of "sexually oriented business" shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
29.  "Specified anatomical areas" means any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, or female breast or breasts of any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or 
b.  Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, even if opaquely and completely covered. 
30.  "Specified criminal acts" means sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, criminal sexual conduct, rape, crimes classified as sexual crimes by the state of Michigan or any other state, or crimes connected with another adult use business, including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity, prostitution and/or pandering. 
31.  "Significant or substantial portion" means thirty percent or more of the term modified by such phrase. 
    "Shopping center" means a grouping of two or more business establishments developed in accordance with an overall plan and designed and built as an interrelated project. Buildings constructed on outlots shall not be considered part of the shopping center unless access and parking easements are provided. 
    Signs. The following definitions are related to signs: 
1.  "Sign" means any announcement, declaration, display, billboard, illustration and insignia when designed and placed so as to attract general public attention. Such shall be deemed to be a single sign whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggest a single unit, notwithstanding any physical separation between parts. Sign includes any banner, bulbs or other lighting devices, streamer, pennant, balloon, propeller, flag (other than the official flag of any nation, state or municipality) and any similar device of any type or kind, whether bearing lettering or not. 
2.  "Accessory sign" means a sign which pertains to the principal use of the premises. 
3.  "Billboard" means a sign other than an off-premises directional sign or political sign, which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises and which is regulated in accordance with the Highway Advertising Act, Public Act 106 of 1972, as amended, and this title. 
4.  "Changeable message sign" means a sign that provides a display created by electronic means such as lights, television, liquid crystal display or a reader board attached to a sign or the exterior of a wall where copy is changed manually. 
5.  "Community special event sign" means signs and banners, including decorations and displays celebrating a traditionally accepted patriotic or religious holiday, or special municipal or school activities. 
6.  "Construction sign" means a sign which identifies the owners, financiers, contractors, architects, and engineers of a project under construction. 
7.  "Decorative display" means a decorative, temporary display designed for the entertainment or cultural enrichment of the public and having no direct or indirect sales or advertising content. 
8.  "Freestanding sign" means a sign other than a ground sign or portable sign which is not attached to a building and is capable of being moved from one location to another on the site on which it is located. 
9.  "Gasoline price sign" means a sign which is used to advertise the price of gasoline. In the event that the brand identification sign is attached to or is a part of the sign advertising price, that portion of the sign used for advertising price shall be considered the gasoline price sign. 
10.  "Ground sign" means a display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces or mounted directly upon the ground surface and having a height not in excess of six feet. 
11.  "Development ground sign" means an entrance sign identifying a development and/or the occupants of a development in which more than one tenant or use occupies a site or sites in the development. 
12.  "Marquee sign" means a display sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy or other covered structure projecting from and supported by the building and extending beyond the building wall, building line or street lot line. 
13.  "Nonaccessory sign" means a sign which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises. 
14.  "Nonaccessory temporary development sign" means a sign advertising a real estate development consisting of five or more lots or parcels in one ownership. 
15.  "Off-premises directional sign" means a sign which provides direction to a location in the city. 
16.  "Pole sign" means a display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in the ground surface and having a height in excess of six feet. 
17.  "Political sign" means a temporary sign relating to matters to be voted on in a local, state, or national election or referendum. 
18.  "Portable sign" means a sign and sign structure which is designed to facilitate the movement of the sign from one zoning lot to another. The sign may or may not have wheels, changeable lettering and/or hitches for towing. A sign shall be considered portable only if such sign is manifestly designed to be portable to facilitate its movement from one zoning lot to another. Signs utilized to be movable, other than from one zoning lot to another, shall be considered freestanding signs under this title. 
19.  "Poster panel sign" means a type of temporary sign that is used to draw attention to matters that are temporary in nature, such as price changes or sales. "A" frame or sandwich signs are types of poster panel signs. 
20.  "Projecting sign" means a sign which is affixed to any building or structure, other than a marquee, and any part of which extends beyond the building wall more than twelve inches. 
21.  "Real estate development sign" means a temporary sign that is designed to promote a new real estate development (such as a subdivision or shopping center) that is under construction on the parcel on which the sign is located. The sign may also identify the designer, contractors and subcontractor, and material suppliers participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located. 
22.  "Real estate sign" means an on premises temporary sign that makes it known that real estate upon which the sign is located is for sale, lease, or rent. 
23.  "Roof sign" means a display sign which is erected, constructed and maintained above the roof of the building. 
24.  "Temporary sign" means a display sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame, or any other sign intended for a limited period of display, but not including decorative displays for holidays or public demonstration. 
25.  "Wall sign" means a display sign which is painted on or attached directly to the building wall. 
26.  "Window sign" means a sign affixed to a window or within three feet of the window so as to be observable from the outside of the window. 
27.  "Vehicle sign" means a sign attached to a vehicle or placed within or upon such vehicle which advertises products for sale other than the identification of the vehicle owner or operator. 
28.  Sign Area. See Section 18.16.060. 
29.  "Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or paint. 
30.  "Noncombustible material" means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
31.  "Sign face" means the area of display surface used for the sign message. 
    "Single housekeeping unit" means all of the associated rooms in a dwelling unit available to and occupied by all of the occupants with a single set of cooking facilities also available to and utilized by all of the occupants of the dwelling unit. 
    Site Condominium. See "Condominium." 
    "Storage" means something kept for future use. Any material, equipment or vehicles kept on a lot for more than forty-eight hours shall be considered storage. 
    "Story" means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined in this chapter, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling of the floor. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Story, Half. "Half story" means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least two hundred square feet with a clear height of no more than seven feet, six inches. For the purposes of this title, the usable floor area is only that area having at least five feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    "Street" means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
1.  State Trunkline. These streets function as important shipping and travel corridors, and generally provide means for long distance trips, through-travel movements that serve to connect communities, and provide important links to the interstate system. The only trunkline is I-96, which traverses through the south end of the city. 
2.  County Primary (Arterial). County primary streets generally carry long distance, through-travel movements and provide access to important traffic generators, such as major employment centers, major residential areas, and shopping. County primary streets include Grand River Avenue, Pontiac Trail, and Wixom Rd. 
3.  Major Streets (Collector). These streets carry high traffic volumes and function as the link between streets of other classification, such as between trunklines and local streets. Major Streets include Loon Lake Rd. (from Wixom Road to City limits), Potter Rd. (from Wixom to Beck), Maple Rd. (from Hampton to Beck), West Rd. (from Wixom to Beck), Beck Rd. (Twelve Mile to Potter), Napier Rd. (from Grand River to Twelve Mile) and Charms Rd. (Wixom to Devonshire). 
4.  Local Streets. Local streets provide access primarily to individual properties and homes. All streets that are not classified as trunkline, arterial or collector streets are considered local streets. 
5.  Major Thoroughfare. Any state trunkline, county primary, arterial or major collector street as defined above. 
    "Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    "Subdivide or Subdivision" means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, that results in one or more parcels of land, of less than forty acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of Public Act 288 of 1967 as amended. Subdivide or subdivision does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, or the requirements of the chapter. 
    "Submerged land" means land area located below the ordinary high-water mark of a stream, river, lake or pond. Submerged land shall not include land under a pond with an area of less than five acres or a manmade stormwater retention pond. 
    "Swimming pool" means any artificially constructed portable or non-portable pool; capable of being used for swimming or bathing, having a depth of two feet or more at any point and having a surface area of two hundred fifty square feet or more. 
    "Temporary use or building" means a use or building permitted by the zoning board of appeals to exist during a specified period of time. 
    "Traditional neighborhood design" means the integration of mixed uses (residences of all types, businesses, offices and public facilities) into a pedestrian-oriented neighborhood characterized by architecture reflecting the period from the colonial days to the 1940's. 
    "Traffic calming" means measures used, such as traffic circles and shortened street lengths, which encourage lower density vehicular traffic. 
    "Transition" for the purposes of this chapter, one or more of the following. 
1.  A zoning district which may serve as a district of transition, i.e., a buffer zone between various land use districts or land use types; 
2.  A residential rear or side yard lot or land parcel arrangement abutting a land use of more intense development character; 
3.  A device such as an earth berm, wall, screening fence, heavy shrub and tree planting or a combination of such devices providing a buffer between land use types. 
    "Tree" means a self-supporting woody, deciduous, or evergreen plant which at maturity is fifteen (15) feet or more in height with an erect perennial trunk and having a definite crown of foliage. 
1.  "Canopy tree (deciduous)" means a deciduous tree which has a height of twenty-five feet or more, with branch structures that provide foliage primarily on the upper half of the tree and provide shade beneath the tree. 
2.  "Deciduous tree" means a tree that sheds its foliage at the end of the growing season. 
3.  "Evergreen tree" means a tree that has foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year. 
4.  "Ornamental tree (deciduous)" means a deciduous tree that is typically grown because of its shape, flowering characteristics or other attractive features and typically grows to a mature height of twenty-five (25) feet or less. Such tree is sometimes known as an understory tree. 
5.  "Height of tree" - where a minimum height is specified for a deciduous or evergreen tree, the height shall be measured from the top of the tree to the surrounding ground elevation or top of the ball (location where fabric containing root system meets the exposed trunk). 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 6-28-2016 ) 
18.24.120 - Definitions U-V. 
    "Use" means the principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.24.130 - Definitions W-Z. 
    Wall, Obscuring. "Obscuring wall" means a structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this title. 
    "Watercourses" means any waterway or other body of water having reasonably well-defined banks, including rivers, streams, creeks, drains and brooks, whether continually or intermittently flowing, and lakes and ponds, as shown on the zoning district map of the city and as further defined as streams and intermittent streams in the city report, dated September 1961 and entitled soil resources of Wixom. 
    "Wetlands" means lands generally or intermittently covered with water which, by nature of their surface and/or subsurface soil characteristics either contribute to the replenishment of subsurface water supply, or are self-contained water resources, including marshes, swamps and bogs, as shown on the zoning district map of the city and as further defined as soil resources group 7 in the city report, dated September 1961 and entitled Soil Resources of Wixom. 
    "Wholesale establishment" means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies. 
    Wireless Communication Towers. The following definitions are related to wireless communication towers: 
1.  "Alternative tower structure" means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
2.  "Antenna" means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
3.  "Backhaul network" means the lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
4.  "Height" means when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
5.  "Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas" means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
6.  "Tower" means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term also includes the structure and any support thereto. 
    "Yards" means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this title and as defined in this section. 
1.  Exterior Side Yard. A side yard abutting a street, parking area or courtyard. 
2.  Interior Side Yard. A side yard other than an exterior side yard. 
3.  Front Yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
4.  Rear Yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. A waterfront yard shall be considered a rear yard for purposes of setback and yard requirements. 
5.  Side Yard. An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
6.  Waterfront Yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the shoreline of a lake and the nearest point of the main building. Waterfront lots shall be considered to have a waterfront yard along the lake and a street front yard along the street frontage. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
Chapter 18.25 - ENACTMENT PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

18.25.010 - Repeal of ordinances. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. The zoning ordinance adopted by the city council of the city of Wixom on the 27th day of January, 1998, and all amendments thereto, are repealed insofar as they conflict with this title. The repeal of the above ordinance and their amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. Such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be separately punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of such ordinance at the time the violation was committed. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.25.020 - Severability clause. 
    This title and the various components, chapters, sections, subsections, sentences, and phrases thereof are declared to be severable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this title to be unconstitutional or invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this title not specifically included in said ruling. Further, if any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare unconstitutional or invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular parcel, lot, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
18.25.030 - Enactment and effective date. 
    Public hearings having been held hereon by the planning commission and city council, the provisions of this title are effective, pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). This title shall become effective fifteen days from the date of publication of notice of adoption. 
(Ord. 08-05 § 1 (part), 2008) 
TITLE 19 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES[1] 
  
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2017 , amended the code by adding a new Title 19. In order to conform to the numbering format used in this code the editor has renumbered the provisions added by said ordinance to conform to the numbering system described on page v of this code. 

Chapter 19.01 - REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
Article I. - In General 

19.01.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the authority and procedures for requiring, accepting, and enforcing performance guarantees, to assure that development projects are completed and maintained in accordance with city standards, requirements, and approval conditions. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.020 - Administrative provisions. 
    This chapter sets forth provisions general to the administration of performance guarantees, including applicability, default, conditions, forms and amounts, reductions, release of guarantees, and scheduling of performance, maintenance, and defect inspections. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.030 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to permits and approvals granted pursuant to the various provisions of this Code, including (without limitation) buildings and construction regulations (Title 15); public services (Title 13); streets, sidewalks and other public places (Title 12); subdivision of land (Title 16); utilities (Title 16); environment (Title 17); and the zoning ordinance (Title 18). 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.040 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    "Applicant" means the person or entity that has a legal or equitable right (with written permission from the owner) to affect the development or improvement of the subject real property. Only the applicant may post a performance guarantee. If the subject real property is transferred, conveyed, or sold (other than as an individual, single-family lot or unit), the successor (with legal proof of ownership) shall replace any outstanding performance guarantees at the time of purchase. Cash guarantees may be assigned upon proof of transfer, conveyance, or sale. If the successor does not replace all performance guarantees, then the applicant shall continue to be responsible under such guarantees for completing the project in accordance with their terms. This provision shall not prohibit joint performance guarantees, if the applicant is one (1) of the joint guarantors and if deemed acceptable by the building official. 
    "Bonds" or "maintenance bonds" means a surety bond in the amount of twenty-five percent for a period of two years that is due as part of final acceptance of the site construction, with the two-year timeline commencing on the date of final acceptance of the project by the city. 
    "Building official" means the city building official or his/her designee. 
    "City engineer means the city engineer or his/her designee. 
    "Code" means the Wixom Municipal Code. 
    "Default" means the failure to: 
(1)  Comply with performance guarantee requirements and conditions; 
(2)  Complete, in the specified time, any required improvements in accordance with this code and with an approved site plan or plat and any conditions thereto; 
(3)  Maintain, for the specified period, any required improvements in accordance with this code and with an approved site plan or plat and any conditions thereto; or 
(4)  Pay current fee balances due. 
    "Department" means the city building department, unless a different department or individual is specified in or by reference to a particular provision or section hereof or by the code. 
    "Forfeiture." Performance guarantees cannot be terminated, canceled, reduced, rebated, or released without authorization from the building official, after consultation with the planning consultant and city engineer to ensure work has been completed. All guarantees shall remain in full force and effect until the building official has authorized otherwise. On determination of the building official, after consultation with the planning consultant and city engineer, that any conditions of the performance guarantee have not been complied with, the building official shall have recourse to the rights created under the guarantee and as set forth in this chapter. 
    "Guarantor" means the applicant (or assignee) and, if applicable, or a financial institution incorporated and located within the United States and insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 
    "Improvements" means any physical construction, alteration, undertaking, or activity for which a permit is required under this code, including (without limitation) buildings and construction regulations (Title 15); public services (Title 13); streets, sidewalks and other public places (Title 12); subdivision of land (Title 16); environment (Title 17); and the zoning ordinance (Title 18) for which the posting of a performance guarantee is required or authorized. 
    "Initial permit" means a permit for mass grading, building foundations, or utilities, whichever occurs first. 
    "Issuance of an initial permit" means delivery by the city of the permit to the applicant and acceptance of such permit by the applicant as required under the code (e.g., signature or acknowledgment of same). 
    "Performance guarantee" means a form of financial security posted in the amount of one hundred fifty percent) of the total cost of the improvements as verified by the city engineer to ensure timely, proper, and workmanlike completion of all the required site improvements, or in another amount subject to under Section 19.01.05(A) below. Performance guarantees may be in the form of cash, certified check, or an automatically renewing irrevocable bank letter of credit. 
    "Property" means the real property described in and made subject to an approved site plan or plat. For development projects that are approved with separate and discrete phases, the requirements of this chapter shall be applied separately to each phase (i.e., on a phase-by-phase basis). 
    "Site improvements" or "improvements" shall be a specific reference to all the following unless otherwise noted in this chapter or in any approved site plan or plat or any conditions thereon: Infrastructure improvements include streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, mass grading, retention basins; maintenance of retention basins on private property; and utilities. Site improvements include parking lots, drives, sidewalks, safety paths, bicycle paths and public walkways; street signs; street island improvements; woodland replacements; landscaping and screen planting of non-access greenbelt easements and; street trees, including an estimate for the removal of any dead trees within street rights-of-way for a period of two (2) full growing seasons after the date of acceptance of streets and utilities; and the placement or replacement, after construction of improvements, of all lot stakes and monuments. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.050 - Authorization. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, and as set forth in the various provisions of this code, the department is authorized to require all applicants constructing infrastructure improvements (sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, storm water facilities) under any permits and approvals granted pursuant to this code to post a performance guarantee with the building official to guarantee completion of all required improvements in accordance with this chapter. The applicant shall post a percentage of the amount of the cost of infrastructure improvements, as verified by the city engineer, in the amounts set forth in the chart below, with the express acknowledgement that no building permits shall be issued for construction of any structure until the infrastructure improvements have been completed, inspected, approved by the city engineer: 
Cost of Improvements $0 to $100,000 10% $100,001 to $500,000 8% $500,001 to $1,000,000 6% $1,000,001 to $3,000,000 5% $3,000,001 and above 3%  
  
    If the applicant begins construction of other site improvements (e.g., buildings, walkways, etc.), the applicant shall post a performance guarantee in the amount of one hundred fifty percent of the cost of all infrastructure and site improvements, as verified by the city engineer, prior to issuance of any building permit. In the event there is simultaneous construction of infrastructure and site improvements, no building permit shall issue until all the infrastructure improvements have been completed, inspected, and approved by the city engineer. 
B.  Notwithstanding any provision of any other chapter of this code with regard to issuance of permits for specific improvements, performance guarantees shall require actual construction and installation of all required improvements within two years after the issuance of the initial permit, together with the posting of necessary performance guarantees therefor, for any improvements listed in subsection (A) above, or within six months after a temporary occupancy permit has been issued for any structure on the property, whichever is shorter or occurs first. The time limit may be extended for six months at the building official's discretion, upon determination that work is proceeding toward completion and that the delay is not dilatory or unreasonable under all the circumstances. In reaching this determination, the building official may take into consideration any appropriate factors established by the applicant, including but not limited to weather conditions, delays in securing required approvals/permits from other regulatory agencies, and unforeseen economic events or conditions. The request for extension shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of all remaining work. At the time an extension is requested, a site inspection will be conducted, with the cost of such inspection being the direct responsibility of the applicant, to confirm work remaining on the site. 
    If an extension is requested for longer than six months, approval of the city council shall be required. In determining whether to grant the extension, the city council shall determine that the delay is not dilatory or unreasonable under all the circumstances may take into consideration any appropriate factors established by the applicant. If an extension is granted, a revised performance guarantee shall be posted in an amount no less than two hundred percent of the cost of the work to be completed, unless reduced by city council. In all events, however, the work must be completed at the time ninety percent of the building permits have been issued. 
C.  An applicant who has posted the performance guarantees required under this chapter who suspends work on a project or development may request a waiver of the requirements in this subsection to continue the performance guarantees in place upon a showing of the following: 
(1)  Few or limited physical improvements have occurred on site, such as minimal clearing and grading, no infrastructure improvements such as roads or utilities have been installed or constructed, and no footing or foundations for any buildings have been commenced, or alternatively that any such improvements will be removed and the site restored as required by the city, including the stabilization of soils pursuant to state and local soil erosion and stabilization regulations; 
(2)  No lot, unit, or parcel within the development or project has been created by the recording of an approved subdivision plat or condominium subdivision plan or transferred to a third party. 
    Upon a showing of the same cause for extension described herein, the city council may grant the requested waiver as to any improvements not actually commenced, upon entry by the applicant into a completion agreement that shall include the posting of required performance guarantees for any work commenced, including clearing and grading, and for required soil erosion controlled measures, in an amount to be determined by city council. The waiver shall expire after two (2) years or upon expiration of the approved final site plan, and as a condition of the waiver the applicant shall agree that, if the required performance guarantees are not posted and the project recommenced at the expiration of the agreement, the site plan and all project permit approvals shall be expired and/or null and void. 
D.  If the applicant does not meet the criteria for waiver set forth in subsection (C) above, the applicant may seek relief pursuant to Section 19.01.120. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.060 - Conditions. 
A.  Every performance guarantee shall obligate the applicant to comply with all the provisions of this Code and to complete all conditions required by the permit or approved site plan, plat or development agreement within the time limit specified. 
B.  The city may collect or execute against and/or use a performance guarantee when work is not completed in a timely manner in accordance with terms and provisions of this chapter and of a permit or approved site plan, plat or development agreement, including any conditions thereto. The building official shall notify the applicant in writing of any such determination. 
C.  All performance guarantees, maintenance bonds or letters of credit shall contain language, acceptable to the city, that is substantially similar to the following: If at any time the city determines that the funds remaining in the performance guarantee are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the required percentage of the remaining unpaid cost of all improvements and unpaid fees [or that the funds remaining in the performance bonds, maintenance bonds or letters of credit are not, or may not be sufficient to pay all unpaid costs of correcting any defects and deficiencies in the improvements], then, within ten days after demand by the city, the applicant shall increase the amount of the performance guarantee to be sufficient to pay the unpaid costs and fees. Failure to so increase the amount of the performance guarantee, maintenance bond or letter of credit shall be grounds for the city to retain any remaining balance of any escrow deposit and to draw down the entire remaining balance of the performance guarantee, maintenance bond or letter of credit. All unpaid fees will be deducted from this balance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.070 - Form and amount. 
    At the time of issuance of the initial permit for improvement under subsection 19.01.050(A) above, and before conducting any preconstruction meetings, the building official shall require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee in the amount required under Section 19.01.050(A). The performance guarantee shall be a single guarantee posted by and in the name of the applicant encompassing all required improvements and shall be in the form of cash, certified check, or an automatically renewing irrevocable bank letter of credit for all amounts up to five hundred thousand dollars. To the extent that amounts required to be deposited are more than five hundred thousand dollars, such excess amounts may be posted by and in the name of the applicant as a separate guarantee, in any form allowed under the definition of "performance guarantee" in Section 19.01.040, relating to all required improvements. In unusual or unique circumstances affecting the applicant's ability to post the performance guarantee, the building official may accept a joint guarantee with a person or entity other than the applicant who has a contractual obligation to the applicant to post such performance guarantee. Maintenance bonds posted pursuant to section 19.01.100 (including those described in sections 19.01.230, 19.01.240, 19.01.270, 19.01.290, 19.01.300, and 19.01.310) may be posted by a third-party who performed the work guaranteed. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.080 - Release or rebate of performance guarantees. 
    The building official shall not release a performance guarantee until: 
A.  All fees (e.g., escrow, permit fees) that are due have been paid; 
B.  A maintenance guarantee has been posted, if applicable; 
C.  Inspection of the development site has been performed; 
D.  All require easements have been conveyed to the city; and 
E.  The building official, after consultation with the planning consultant and city engineer, determines that the conditions and requirements of the permit/approval otherwise specified in the performance guarantee have been met and final approval of same has been granted. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, § 1, 2-6-2018) 
19.01.090 - Scheduling of performance, maintenance, and defect inspections. 
    All improvements must be inspected by the city after the completion of construction of the improvements, as well as during the construction process as set forth in this chapter. The applicant must submit a written request for such inspection, if the improvements substantially comply with the requirements of the approved plans and all city standards, and city inspections will occur as soon as reasonably practicable thereafter. Periodic inspections may also be made at the discretion of the building official. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.100 - Maintenance bonds authorized. 
A.  The department shall require all applicants to post a maintenance bond warranting the successful operation and maintenance of certain improvements including but not limited to stormwater facilities, roads and utility construction of public utilities (the "required public facilities"), and guaranteeing the workmanship, materials, and design used in construction of these improvements required by the conditions of any permits or approvals issued pursuant to this code, as defined above. The maintenance bond shall be in the amount of twenty-five percent of the cost of the required public facilities. 
B.  Unless otherwise specifically indicated in this code, all maintenance bonds shall guarantee successful operation, workmanship, materials, and design of required public facilities for a period of two years following final inspection and final acceptance by the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in article II of this chapter. If any defect or deficiency occurs or becomes evident during the two-year period, then the owner shall after ten days' written notice from the city, correct it or cause it to be corrected. In the event any improvement is repaired or replaced pursuant to the demand of the city, the building official may require the maintenance bond with respect to such repair or replacement, as defined and determined by the department, to be extended for two full years from the date of the repair or replacement. 
C.  The applicant shall notify the city and schedule inspections of the required public facilities, as defined above, at least sixty days before the end of the two-year maintenance and/or defect period, and the city shall conduct such inspection as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.110 - Default. 
A.  If the applicant fails to timely complete all improvements and/or timely take the required action for which the performance guarantee was required, the applicant shall be deemed to be in default. Unless a shorter period has been specified in a permit or approval issued, or elsewhere in this code, "timely" completion of improvements shall mean no longer than two years from the date of issuance of the initial permit for improvements and the necessary performance guarantees therefor, unless such time is extended by the building official as permitted in subsection 19.01.05(c), or unless otherwise stated in an approved development agreement. 
B.  In the event of a default, the city shall, following notice to the applicant and opportunity for the applicant to cure such default, as specified in the notice, have the right (but not the obligation) to use the performance guarantee deposited to complete the improvements or take the appropriate actions to achieve completion, and the application for site plan or plat approval, building permit, temporary certificate of occupancy, improvements under a development agreement, or similar approvals shall be deemed to have authorized the right of the city to enter upon the property to bring about such completion. A notice to the applicant given under this section may be provided by one or more of the following methods: regular first class mail to the address on the application for permit; delivery of the notice to the applicant at such address; hand-delivery to the applicant; or posting the property. 
C.  In the event the performance guarantee posted is insufficient in amount to allow the city to complete the improvements and/or actions, the applicant shall be required to pay to the city such additional costs as are needed for the completion of such improvements and/or actions. Should the city use the performance guarantee, or a portion thereof, to achieve such completion, any amounts remaining shall first be applied to the city's administrative costs, which shall be equal to twenty-five percent of the cost of such completion, and to payment of actual attorney's fees, consultant fees, and like fees expended in connection with securing the guarantee and completing the improvements and/or actions; the balance remaining thereafter (if any) shall be refunded to the applicant. 
D.  In the event of default, the city may contract with a third party to complete work required pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Subject to Section 19.01.080, the applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that the required performance guarantees remain in place until all site improvements are complete and the guarantees have been released by the building official. Irrevocable letters of credit shall not be permitted to lapse or expire without renewal or replacement. The building official may call or collect upon any such guarantee prior to its expiration if it reasonably appears to the building official that the guarantee will be permitted to lapse or expire. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.120 - Exceptions. 
    The city council may authorize exceptions to the requirements and conditions set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited to, the form, timing, waiver, or reduction of performance guarantee amounts. The city council shall consider such factors as the size and nature of the development project and the existence of matters beyond the control of the applicant (such as weather conditions, delay in securing permits/approvals from other regulatory agencies, or unforeseen economic events or conditions). 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.130 - Violations. 
    A violation of any provision or requirement of this chapter shall be a civil infraction, subject to enforcement and the fines and penalties for civil infraction violations as set forth in this code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.140-19.01.200 - Reserved. 
Article II. - Specific Requirements 

19.01.210 - Generally. 
    The following provisions set forth special performance guarantee requirements for certain specific improvements. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.220 - Site improvements-Generally. 
A.  All unfinished site improvements that are included on an approved site plan, plat, or under an approved development agreement, or that are otherwise required by this code, shall be constructed, installed, or placed on the property, and be approved by the city engineer, building official and/or the planner, as applicable, upon substantial completion of all phases of the development process. Upon substantial completion, the city engineer, building official and/or planner may issue a master punchlist letter listing all items to be completed by the applicant within the time period as stated within the punchlist letter. 
B.  All site work shall be in accordance with all other applicable statutes and ordinances. 
C.  Before the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, a performance guarantee in the form and amount required under Sections 19.01.050 and 19.01.070 shall be posted for all incomplete site improvements. No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all site improvements have been completed and approved by the building department. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.230 - Requirements for completion of improvements in developments with public streets and utilities. 
    The following requirements shall apply where the streets and utilities within a development are contemplated or required to be dedicated to the public and accepted by the city. 
A.  Completion of utilities and acceptance for maintenance. 
(1)  No building permit shall be issued unless authorized by an approved site plan, permit application, plat, or approved development agreement. No building permit shall be issued until the city has been notified of the recording of any required subdivision or plat or site condominium master deed, following appropriate approval by the city attorney. 
(2)  Approval of permits for any single-family residential building sites, including platted subdivisions and site condominiums, shall be the responsibility of the building official. No certificate of occupancy shall be approved until completion of all utility construction and testing as well as road base course construction in accordance with city-approved design standards and in accordance with the approved site plan. In addition, no permit shall be approved until the city has been notified of the recording of the subdivision plat or site condominium master deed, following appropriate approval by the city attorney. 
a.  After completion of utility construction and testing, as well as road construction, including asphalt base or concrete section, the applicant's engineer shall request an inspection from the city engineer. 
b.  The site inspection required above will be performed by the city engineer (or designee) and the applicant's engineer and contractor. If it is determined by the city engineer that the development is not ready for inspection, the inspection shall not occur until a determination is made that the inspection is proper. The city will conduct any required inspection as soon as reasonably practicable. 
c.  If after site inspection it is determined that the public utilities were not completed in accordance with design standards and the approved site plan or plat, the city engineer will prepare a "utility and grading punchlist." A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until these punchlist items have been addressed to the satisfaction of the city. 
d.  The applicant will have ten working days to complete all items on the "utility and grading punchlist," unless extended in writing by the city engineer. If these items still have not been adequately addressed, additional fees shall be assessed for any reinspections. 
e.  No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any single-family residential building until the following occur: 
1.  The city attorney has provided a letter to the building official confirming that the documents required under subsection (A)(4) below are in a legally acceptable form and have been properly executed by all parties in interest determined by the city attorney as necessary to convey sufficient title to the utilities and corresponding easements to the city; and 
2.  The city engineer has inspected and approved the improvements, and the applicant has conveyed all necessary easements for the improvements to the city. 
(3)  No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any non-single family residential or nonresidential developments until the plan for development has been reviewed and approved by the building official, zoning and planning office, the city engineer, the department of public works, and the department of public safety (fire and police). Approvals will not be issued until all of the requirements of subsections (A)(2)a.-d. immediately above have been satisfied, including completion of any "utility and grading punchlist" items and until all fees have been collected and all performance guarantees are in place and the following occur: 
a.  The city attorney has provided a letter to the building official confirming that the documents required under subsection (A)(4) below are in a legally acceptable form and have been properly executed by all parties in interest determined by the city attorney as necessary to convey sufficient title to the utilities and corresponding easements to the city; and 
b.  The city engineer has inspected and approved the improvements, and the applicant has conveyed all necessary easements for the improvements to the city. 
(4)  The following acceptance documents (executed by or on behalf of the applicant unless otherwise specified herein) must be submitted to the building department for review and approval prior to the issuance of any final certificate of occupancy: 
a.  Detention basin maintenance agreement as outlined in the city's Engineering Design Standards. 
b.  Private ingress/egress easement (if applicable). 
c.  Private drainage easement(s) (if applicable). 
d.  Easements for storm sewer and stormwater drainage in proposed rights-of-way, where surface drainage or storm sewer drainage crosses property boundaries, including an easement surrounding the sedimentation basin and the detention basin (one-hundred-year storm elevation) and a maintenance access easement for the sedimentation basin, if applicable. 
e.  Water main easement providing a minimum easement for water mains to be made public, in accordance with the city's engineering standards. 
f.  Sanitary sewer easement providing a minimum easement for the sanitary sewers to be made public, in accordance with the city's engineering standards. 
g.  Detention basin maintenance agreement for both public and private stormwater facilities for two years after the date of completion of construction and final inspection of the stormwater facilities. 
h.  Contractor's sworn statements are provided to the building official listing those parties and stating that all labor and material expenses incurred in connection with the subject construction improvements have been paid. 
i.  Maintenance bonds equal to twenty-five percent of the cost of the construction of the required public utilities to be accepted. These maintenance bonds must be in effect for a period of two years from the date of the final acceptance by the city engineer indicating the city has accepted the utilities and corresponding easements. 
j.  As-built drawings of the construction plans (exclusive of landscape and utility detail sheets). 
k.  Except with the prior express consent of the city, and as further set forth in section 19.02.04 below, no construction traffic shall be permitted to use any street dedicated to the city after installation of the final surface course of that street. If the applicant uses the street for construction traffic, the applicant shall post a performance guarantee to guarantee the physical integrity of the roads to be accepted considering continuing construction activity. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be established by the city engineer in an amount to be determined based on the number of buildings remaining to be constructed, an estimate of time for completion and expected acceptance of the remaining site improvements, and other factors specific to the development at issue. The applicant keep the street free and clear of mud, debris, obstructions, and hazards and shall after the use is no longer necessary, restore and repair that street to city standards. 
l.  Upon issuance by the city of any permit authorizing the construction of any public road improvements within a platted subdivision or a site condominium, public trust title to such public roads shall be deemed to pass to the city, unless otherwise specifically indicated in the permit, and the dedication of such right-of-way by the applicant may not thereafter be withdrawn except with the consent of the city. However, no public road improvements within such underlying right-of-way (i.e., physical improvements such as utilities, curb and gutter, asphalt, or concrete) shall be deemed to have been accepted by the city and the city shall have no obligation or liability in respect of maintenance or repair of the street, until the street has been constructed, approved, and accepted by city council and the utilities have been accepted by the city pursuant to the "acknowledgement" issued by the city engineer in accordance with subsections (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section. The city shall not be obligated to keep any street cleared, plowed, or otherwise maintained before the street has been completed, approved, and accepted by city council. The city may (but is not obligated to) undertake emergency maintenance, including without limitation snow plowing, flood prevention/repair, and the like as set forth in the city's emergency operations plan, and may upon exercise of such authority recover the cost of such action from the applicant pursuant to the terms of the appropriate performance guarantee(s). The exercise of such authority shall not be construed in any way to constitute an "acceptance" of the street or utility improvements before all requirements of this chapter are met. 
(5)  With respect to all projects requiring a detention basin maintenance agreement as indicated in subsection (A) (4)a. and g. above, no final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the detention basin maintenance agreement has been approved by city council after approval by the city engineer and city attorney in accordance with subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.240 - Site restoration performance guarantee. 
A.  The performance guarantee required under sections 19.01.050 and 19.01.070 shall include a performance guarantee for site maintenance and restoration, in an amount to be specified by resolution of the city council, guaranteeing that the applicant shall: 
(1)  Establish or reestablish ditches and culverts and properly drain the building area and reopen and reestablish any drainage ways that may have been interrupted by the building operation; 
(2)  Repair, replace, and rebuild public road surfaces damaged during construction so that the same shall be in comparable status as prior to commencement of construction; 
(3)  Repair, replace, and rebuild any sidewalk damaged during construction; 
(4)  Repair all public utility structures if damaged during construction and restore and adjust all manholes, catch basins, gate wells, hydrants, and shut-off boxes to the condition that they were prior to construction; 
(5)  Maintain streets, highways, pathways, and alleys free of mud, dirt, debris, and other material from the construction site, as required by this Code; and 
(6)  Maintain construction sites, as required by this code. 
B.  If the applicant fails to perform under the provisions of subsections 19.01.240(A)(1)-(5), above, either during the life of the building permit or any extension thereof, or within thirty days after written notice is given to the applicant to correct or fulfill unperformed provisions, the performance guarantee shall be forfeited and deposited in the general fund of the city. If the applicant fails to perform the provision of subsection 19.01.240(A)(6) above, the performance guarantee may be used for the payment of site cleanup performed by the city. The cost of cleanup shall be used and collected in the same manner provided in this code. In addition, the performance bond may be utilized for payment of the costs of street clean-up performed by the city. Whenever funds are expended for such purposes the permit holder shall be required to replace such amount to bring the performance guarantee to that amount set by resolution of city council. 
C.  The performance guarantee amount shall be returned to the applicant or assignee after final inspection and determination by the building official, in consultation with the city engineer, that the provisions of subsection 19.01.240(A) have been performed. 
D.  In addition to any other performance guarantees permitted in this section or elsewhere in this code, as a condition of issuance of any building permit for construction on property abutting a public street or road, the city DPW shall require a right-of-way permit in an amount established by the city. In the event there is damage or other prohibited condition to the public street or road, or other public improvement, directly adjacent to the property for which the performance guarantee has been posted, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the damage or condition has been caused by or in connection with the activity occurring under the building permit, and the city may use the performance guarantee for the purposes stated in subsections (a)(1)-(5) of this section. The building permit holder may rebut the presumption by establishing that the damage or condition was caused by another or by other activity. If the amount of the performance guarantee is insufficient to repair or remedy the damage or condition, the city may require the posting of an additional guarantee. The permit holder shall always remain responsible for repair of any damage or condition actually caused by the permit holder. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.250 - Private streets. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any residential dwelling unit permitted to front on a private street unless private roads have been constructed in accordance with city standards for such road, and confirmation is received from the city's engineer indicating satisfactory completion of all private streets within the development, in accordance with such standards and the approved site or plot plan or plat. 
B.  The city will not maintain pavement, streets, signs, or drainage improvements on private streets. A private maintenance covenant approved by the city attorney shall be required for any private street. The covenant shall set out the terms and conditions of responsibility for maintenance, maintenance methods, standards, distribution of expenses, remedies for noncompliance with the terms of the agreement, right of use easements, and other considerations. 
C.  A statement is required on the face of any plan, plat, or master deed containing a private street with the following language: 
    "City of Wixom has no responsibility to improve or maintain the private streets contained within or private streets providing access to the property described in this [plan/plat]". 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.260 - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
    The performance guarantee required under Sections 19.01.050 and 19.01.070 of this chapter shall include guarantee amounts in accordance with the Title 17 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.270 - Woodlands and fence maintenance guarantees. 
A.  The performance guarantee required under sections 19.01.050 and 19.01.070 of this chapter shall include guarantee amounts to secure the planting of required woodland trees, per the schedule established from time to time by resolution of the city council, and a fence maintenance guarantee in an amount as determined by the building official or his or her designee. 
B.  Where tree relocation or replacement is not feasible within the woodland area, or on the property where the activity is to be conducted, or on other property within the city approved by the parks/forestry operations manager the permit grantee shall pay into the city tree fund monies for tree replacement in a per tree amount representing the current market value for the tree replacement that would otherwise be required to be determined by the parks/forestry operations manager. The city tree account shall be used for all forestry related items including but not limited to the planting of trees within the city. 
C.  The applicant shall guarantee trees for two growing seasons after the applicant's installation and the city's acceptance. A two-year maintenance bond in the amount of twenty-five percent of the value of the trees, but in no case, less than one thousand dollars, shall be required to insure the continued health of the trees following acceptance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.280 - Wetlands. 
    Any applicant conducting any activities within a watercourse or wetland location must obtain a use permit and file with city administration a performance guarantee to guarantee continued compliance with the use permit granted. These performance guarantees shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.290 - Landscaping. 
    The performance guarantee required under Sections 19.01.050 and 19.01.070 of this chapter shall include guarantee amounts to secure the completion and improvement of required landscaping in accordance with approved site plan. There will be no issuance of any temporary or final certificate of occupancy in the development until this guarantee is paid. A final certificate of occupancy will not be granted until all required landscape material has been inspected and accepted by the city and any required guarantees are in place. The applicant shall guarantee planting materials for two growing seasons after applicant installation and acceptance by the city. A two-year maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the value of the landscaping, but in no case less than one thousand dollars, shall be required to insure the continued health of the landscaping following acceptance. The applicant shall replace all unhealthy and dead plant material without delay and within three months following notice, or the next appropriate planting period, whichever comes first. The applicant shall guarantee all replacement material for an additional two years after, if required by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.300 - Street trees. 
    The performance guarantee required under sections 19.01.050 and 19.01.070 of this chapter shall include guarantee amounts to secure the planting of required street trees, per the schedule established from time to time by resolution of the city council. There will be no issuance of any temporary certificate of occupancy in the development until this guarantee is in place. A final certificate of occupancy will not be granted until the applicant has planted all required street trees and they have been inspected and accepted by the city and any required guarantees are in place. The applicant shall guarantee trees for two growing seasons after applicant installation and acceptance by the city. A two-year maintenance bond in the amount of twenty-five percent of the value of the street trees, but in no case, less than one thousand dollars, shall be required to insure the continued health of the street trees following acceptance. The applicant shall replace all unhealthy and dead plant material within three months following notice or the next appropriate planting period, whichever comes first. The applicant shall guarantee all replacement trees for an additional two years after, if required by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
19.01.310 - Right-of-way. 
    For any work proposed within the right-of-way of the arterial system of the city, a performance guarantee shall be posted in accordance with Title 12 of this code. 
19.01.320 - Application of chapter to existing developments. 
    Unless the building official determines otherwise for good cause and because of peculiar practical difficulties establishing an applicant's inability to comply with the requirements hereof, this chapter shall apply to all property and development within the city after the effective date hereof, including any phase of any property or development for which an initial permit has not been issued, except: 
(1)  A property or development for which an initial permit has been issued; or 
(2)  A property or development for which a building permit has been issued pursuant to an approved plot plan. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-26-2017 ) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR MICHIGAN CITIES, TOWNSHIPS AND VILLAGES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Michigan cities, townships and villages. They are up to date through PA 171 of 2017. 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Fourth Class Cities 
Fourth Class Cities 
  Chapters 81 to 113 
Incorporation 
  MCLA 81.1 et seq. 
General powers of city 
  MCLA 91.1 et seq. 
Ordinances 
  MCLA 89.1 et seq. 
Enforcement of ordinances 
  MCLA 89.2, 89.2a and 90.1 et seq. 
Imprisonment 
  MCLA 90.8, 93.1 et seq. 
Elections 
  MCLA 86.1 et seq. 
Home Rule Cities 
Home Rule Cities 
  Chapter 117 
Annexation/incorporation 
  MCLA 117.6 et seq. 
City charters 
  MCLA 117.3 et seq. 
Code of ordinances 
  MCLA 117.5b 
Enforcement of ordinances 
  MCLA 117.4i; 117.4l; 117.29 
Wards 
  MCLA 117.27a 
Elections 
  MCLA 117.15 et seq., 117.26 
Townships 
Charter townships 
  MCLA ch. 42 
Ordinances 
  MCLA 41.181 et seq. 
Ordinance violations 
  MCLA 41.183 and 41.183a 
Elections 
  MCLA 41.102 et seq. 
Villages 
Villages 
  Chapters 61 to 75 
Incorporation 
  MCLA ch. 61 
Ordinances 
  MCLA ch. 66 
Ordinance violations 
  MCLA 66.6 et seq. 
Imprisonment 
  MCLA 66.8, 66.11 
Elections 
  MCLA ch. 63 
ADMINISTRATION 
Planning commissions 
  MCLA 125.3811 et seq. 
Michigan Campaign Finance Act 
  MCLA 169.201 et seq. 
Fourth Class Cities 
City council 
  MCLA. 88.1 et seq. 
Mayor 
  MCLA 87.1 et seq. 
City clerk 
  MCLA 87.6 et seq. 
City treasurer 
  MCLA 87.11 et seq. 
City marshal 
  MCLA 87.16 et seq. 
City attorney 
  MCLA 87.20 
Police department 
  MCLA 92.1 et seq. 
Fire department 
  MCLA 109.1 et seq. 
Board of public works 
  MCLA 108.1 et seq. 
Home Rule Cities 
Administrative powers generally 
  MCLA 117.4j 
Local officers compensation commission 
  MCLA 117.5c 
Police 
  MCLA 117.34 
Charter commission 
  MCLA 117.20 et seq. 
Townships 
Township board 
  MCLA 41.70 et seq. 
Township clerk 
  MCLA 41.65 et seq. 
Township supervisor 
  MCLA 41.61 et seq. 
Township treasurer 
  MCLA 41.76 et seq. 
Township officer compensation 
  MCLA 41.95 et seq. 
Police and fire protection 
  MCLA 41.801 et seq. 
Villages 
Village council 
  MCLA 65.1 et seq., 67.1 et seq. 
Village president 
  MCLA 64.1 et seq. 
Village clerk 
  MCLA 64.5 et seq. 
Village treasurer 
  MCLA 64.9 et seq. 
Village officers generally 
  MCLA 62.1 et seq. 
Vacancies in office 
  MCLA 62.10 et seq. 
REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Limitation on taxation by cities or villages 
  MCLA 211.201 et seq. 
Limitation on taxation by home rule cities 
  MCLA 117.5 
General Property Tax Act 
  MCLA 211.1 et seq. 
City income tax 
  MCLA 141.501 et seq. 
Use tax 
  
  MCLA 205.91 et seq. 
Sales tax 
  MCLA 205.51 et seq. 
Unclaimed, lost or abandoned property 
  MCLA 434.151 et seq. 
Delinquent collection, credit, return by cities and villages 
  MCLA 211.107 et seq. 
Fourth Class Cities 
Assessment and collection of taxes 
  MCLA 111.1 et seq. 
Delinquent taxes 
  MCLA 111.16 et seq. 
Finance and taxation 
  MCLA 110.1 et seq. 
Home Rule Cities 
Financial recovery bonds 
  MCLA 117.36a 
Townships 
Special assessments and improvements 
  MCLA 41.721 et seq. 
Villages 
Finance and taxation 
  MCLA 69.1 et seq. 
BUSINESS LICENSES 
Licensing power (4th class cities) 
  MCLA 91.2 
Licensing power (home rule cities) 
  MCLA 117.4i 
Auctioneers (4th class cities) 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(j) 
Places of entertainment (4th class cities) 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(e) 
Charitable Organizations and Solicitations Act 
  MCLA 400.271 et seq. 
Hawkers and peddlers (4th class cities) 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(k) 
Secondhand and junk dealers 
  MCLA 445.401 et seq. 
Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 
  MCLA 436.1101 et seq. 
Lotteries and games 
  MCLA 432.1 et seq. 
Taxicabs (4th class cities) 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(o) 
Transient merchants (4th class cities) 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(mm) 
ANIMALS 
Animals running at large 
  MCLA 102.14 and 67.23 
Dog Law of 1919 
  MCLA 287.261 et seq. 
Rabies, dogs 
  MCLA 287.266, 287.270, 287.290 
Animal control ordinances and dog licensing ordinances 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(ff) and 287.290 
Distraint and impoundment of animals 
  MCLA 433.101 et seq. 
HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Food inspection (4th class cities) 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(q) 
Garbage 
  MCLA 123.361 et seq. and 324.4301 et seq. 
Littering 
  MCLA 324.8901 et seq. 
Public nuisances 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(c) and 600.3801 et seq. 
Wells, cisterns 
  MCLA 750.493b et seq. 
Fireworks 
  MCLA 28.451 et seq. 
Explosives and bombs 
  MCLA 750.200 et seq. 
Weed control 
  MCLA 247.61 et seq. 
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Offenses by or against public officials and government 
  MCLA 750.117 et seq., 750.183 et seq., 750.215 et seq., 750.240 et seq. 
Assaults 
  MCLA 750.81 et seq. 
Offenses against public decency 
  MCLA 750.49 et seq., 750.102 et seq., 750.301 et seq., 750.330 et seq., 750.335 et seq., 750.448 et seq. 
Offenses against public peace 
  MCLA 750.167 et seq., 750.169 et seq. 
Offenses against property 
  MCLA 750.71 et seq., 750.110 et seq., 750.174 et seq., 750.356 et seq., 750.377a et seq., 750.535 et seq., 750.552 et seq. 
Offenses by or against minors 
  MCLA 750.135 et seq., 436.1701 et seq. 
Firearms 
  MCLA 28.421 et seq. 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Motor vehicles generally 
  MCLA 257.1 et seq., 750.412 et seq. 
Uniform traffic code in cities, townships and villages 
  MCLA 257.951 et seq. 
STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Recreation and playgrounds 
  MCLA 123.51 et seq. 
Fourth Class Cities 
Sidewalks generally 
  MCLA 103.1 et seq. 
Street regulations 
  MCLA 102.11 et seq. 
Streets and alleys, paving and improvements 
  MCLA 102.8 et seq. 
Streets and alleys, general provisions 
  MCLA 102.1 et seq. 
Lighting 
  MCLA 107.1 et seq. 
Public parks 
  MCLA 100.3 
City bodies of water 
  MCLA 91.1(1)(v) 
City cemeteries 
  MCLA 95.8 
Home Rule Cities 
Streets and alleys, permissible charter provisions 
  MCLA 117.4h 
Recreational trailways 
  MCLA 117.4m 
Townships 
Sidewalks and pavements 
  MCLA 41.271 et seq. 
Public parks 
  MCLA 41.421 et seq. 
Recreational trailways 
  MCLA 41.183a 
Villages 
Streets and sidewalks generally 
  MCLA 67.7 et seq. 
Streets and sidewalks, paving and improvements 
  MCLA 67.17 et seq. 
Obstructions and encroachments 
  MCLA 67.20 et seq. 
Excavations 
  MCLA 67.22 
Street grades 
  MCLA 67.15 et seq. 
Public parks 
  MCLA 67.4 
Recreational trailways 
  MCLA 66.2a 
PUBLIC SERVICES 
Municipal water supply systems 
  MCLA 124.251 et seq. 
Municipal sewage and water supply systems 
  MCLA 124.281 et seq. 
Sewer, waterworks, solid waste, refuse and garbage, city, township and village powers 
  MCLA 324.4301 et seq. 
Metropolitan districts 
  MCLA 119.1 et seq. 
Fourth Class Cities 
Sewers, drains and watercourses 
  MCLA 101.1 et seq. 
Waterworks 
  MCLA 106.1 et seq. 
Home Rule Cities 
Sewer system 
  MCLA 117.4b; 117.4f 
Waterworks 
  MCLA 117.4f 
Electricity 
  MCLA 117.4b 
Townships 
Water supply and sewage disposal system 
  MCLA 41.331 et seq. 
Villages 
Sewers, drains and watercourses 
  MCLA 67.24 et seq. 
Waterworks 
  MCLA 71.1 et seq. 
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
State construction code 
  MCLA 125.1501 et seq. 
Technical code adoption, fourth class cities 
  MCLA 89.6 
Technical code adoption, home rule cities 
  MCLA 117.3 
Technical code adoption, charter townships 
  MCLA 42.17 
Adoption by reference, villages 
  MCLA 66.4 
Signs 
  MCLA 102.14, 42.16, 67.11, 67.23 
Mobile Home Commission Act 
  MCLA 125.2301 et seq. 
SUBDIVISIONS 
Land Division Act 
  MCLA 560.101 et seq. 
ZONING 
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act 
  MCLA 125.3101 et seq. 
Regulation by local authorities 
  MCLA 125.3201, 125.3202 
Zoning board of appeals and appeals generally 
  MCLA 125.3601 et seq. 
Special zoning provisions 
  MCLA 125.3501 et seq. 
Judicial review 
  MCLA 125.3606, 125.3607 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 11, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
 Number   28 Planning commission (2.16) 30 Building and zoning codes (Not codified) 31 Trailer coach parks (Repealed by 155) 31-A1 Adds § 1.01(d)(7) and repeals and replaces §§ 1.01(d)(1) and (2) and 1.01(e) and (e)(3), trailer coach parks (Repealed by 155) 31-A2 Repeals § 2.01 of Ord. 31, trailer coach parks (Repealed by 155) 32 Littering (Repealed by 156) 33 (Repealed by 102) 33-A-1 (Repealed by 102) 33-A-2 (Repealed by 102) 34 Repeals and replaces previous Ord. 34, zoning (Title 18) 34-A-124 Rezone (Special) 34-A-126 Rezone (Special) 34-A-127 Rezone (Special) 34-A-128 Rezone (Special) 34-A-129 Adds §§ 1903, 2011 and 2208(2)(a) and (2)(b), to Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-130 Adds § 2108(4) to Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-132 Rezone (Special) 34-A-133 Rezone (Special) 34-A-134 Rezone (Special) 34-A-135 Rezone (Special) 34-A-136 Rezone (Special) 34-A-137 Adds § 2204(8); amends §§ 1403(1), 1403(5), 2104(9), 2104(10), 2106(3) and 2117; repeals § 402(10) of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-139 Rezone (Special) 34-A-140 Amends §§ 201, 1900(P) and (Q) of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-141 Rezone (Special) 34-A-142 Rezone (Special) 34-A-143 Rezone (Special) 34-A-144 Adds § 2123 to Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-145 Repeals and replaces § 2103(7) of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-146 Repeals and replaces § 1402(4) of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-147 Repeals and replaces §§ 2103(9) and 2300(5) of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98)  
  
Ordinance 
 Number   34-A-148 Repeals and replaces § 2108(1)(c) and (d) of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-149 Repeals and replaces § 1301 of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-150 Rezone (Special) 34-A-151 Rezone (Special) 34-A-152 Amends § 1900 of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-153 Amends map of master plan, zoning (Not codified) 34-A-155 Adds §§ 1450-1453 to Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-158 Adds language to master plan; amends future land use map, zoning (Not codified) 34-A-161 Adds language to § 201; amends § 2109 of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-162 Adds language to Art. IV; amends Art. XIX of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-164 Amends zoning map (Not codified) 34-A-165 Amends §§ 2103 and 2304 of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-166 Amends § 2109 of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-167 Adds § 401(7)(B)(12); amends § 201; repeals and adds §§ 402(5), 602(4), 802(4), 901 and 1451(8), zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-168 Repeals and adds § 2104(3), off-street parking requirements (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-171 Adds §§ 1900 (footnote(r)) and 2115-A; amends §§ 201, 402, 502, 602 and 704 of Ord. 34, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 34-A-173 Rezone (Special) 34-A-174 Rezone (Special) 34-A-177 Rezone (Special) 34-A-178 Rezone (Special) 34-A-179 Rezone (Special) 34-A-180 Rezone (Special) 34-A-181 Rezone (Special) 34-A-182 Rezone (Special) 34-A-183 2/11/97: Rezone (Special) 34-A-184 8/12/97: Rezone (Special) 34-A-185 9/23/97: Rezone (Special) 34-A-191 (Rezone) 34-A-192 (Rezone) 35-A1 Dogs (Repealed by 05-04) 36 Passing school buses (Repealed by 102) 36-A Adds § 7 to Ord. 36, school buses (Repealed by 102) 37 Fire prevention (Repealed by 114) 37-A1 Adds Art. 1 §§ 2-A and 2-B; amends Art. 1 § 2 of Ord. 37, fire prevention (Repealed by 114) 37-A2 Amends Art. II § 1 of Ord. 37, fire prevention (Repealed by 114) 38 Subdivisions (Repealed by 155) 39 Adopts BOCA Basic Building Code, 1958 Edition (Repealed by 155) 39-A Adds § 118.8; amends §§ 118.3, 118.4 of Ord. 39, building code (Not codified) 39-A2 Repeals and replaces § 3 of Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A4 Amends § 107.5 of Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A5 Adopts BOCA Basic Building Code; amends BOCA Code § 122.3; repeals Ord. 39 (Repealed by 155) 39-A6 Amends § 3 of Ord. 39-A3, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A6(1) Adds building permit fee schedule to Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A6(2) Adds fee schedule to Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A6(3) Adds fee schedule to Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A6(4) Adds fee schedule to Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A7 Amends § 3 of Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A7(1) Adds §§ 5-7 to Ord. 39-A7, building code (Repealed by 155) 39-A8 Changes title, repeals and replaces §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. 39, building code (Repealed by 07-04) 39-A9 Fire limits and fire limits district (15.28) 39-A10 Screening from view of mechanical equipment (15.20) 39-A11 Temporary construction offices (15.24) 39-A12 Amends § 4 of Ord. 39-A9, fire limits (15.28) 39-A13 Amends § 2 of Ord. 39-A9, fire limits (15.28) 39-A14 4/26/94: Adds § 15.04.050, State Construction Code (15.04) 40 Offenses, nuisances and other unlawful acts (Repealed by 154) 40-A1 Amends § 8 of Ord. 40, offenses (Repealed by 154) 40-A2 Adds § III(4)(k) to Ord. 40, offenses (Repealed by 154) 40-A3 Adds Part 1 § 6(1)(B-1)-(B-4) to and repeals Part 1 § 6(B) of Ord. 40, offenses (Repealed by 154) 40-A3-1 Adds § 6(1)(B-1)-(B-5) to and repeals § 6(B) of Ord. 40-A3, offenses (Repealed by 154) 40-A4 Repeals and replaces § 8 and repeals § 4(1) of Ord. 40, offenses (Repealed by 154) 40-A5 Adds § 6(1)(D) to Ord. 40, offenses (Repealed by 154) 40-A6 Adds § 6(3) to Ord. 40, offenses (Repealed by 154) 41 Minors and alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 154) 42 Justice of the peace compensation (Repealed by 154) 43 Locomotive bells and other warnings at railroad crossings (10.24) 44 Curfew for minors (Repealed by 154) 44-A Amends §§ 3 and 4 of Ord. 44, curfew for minors (Not codified) 45 Taxicabs (Repealed by 45-A) 45-A Taxicabs, repeals Ord. 45 (5.20) 46 Participation in county child and youth protection committee (Repealed by 154) 47 (Repealed by 102) 48 Parks and recreation department (Repealed by 34-A-181) 48-A1 Amends §§ 3 and 8 of Ord. 48, parks and recreation (Repealed by 34-A-181) 48-A2 Amends §§ 3 and 9 of Ord. 48, parks and recreation (Repealed by 34-A-181) 50 Watercraft in city navigable waters (Repealed by 155) 52 Garbage and rubbish dumping (Repealed by 154) 53 (Repealed by 78) 54 Traffic violations bureau (Repealed by 155) 55 Building and housing standards (Repealed by 155) 57 Combines offices of clerk and treasurer (Repealed by 116) 58 Firearms and trapping (9.40) 58-A1 Amends § 1 of Ord. 58, firearms (9.40) 58-A2 Changes title and repeals and replaces § 1 of Ord. 58, firearms (9.40) 59 Adopts Fire Prevention Code, Abbreviated Edition, 1965 edition, with amendments (Repealed by 114) 60 Subdivision regulations (Repealed by 67) 61 Subdivision design standards (Repealed by 61-A) 61-A 3/22/94: Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.16, subdivision design standards (13.16) 62 Law enforcement officer employment standards (2.32) 63 Permit procedures for utilities in rights-of-way (Repealed by 63A-2) 63A-1 Repeals and replaces §§ 5e and f of Ord. 63, utilities in rights-of-way (Repealed by 63A-2) 63A-2 3/22/94: Repeals Ch. 13.12 (Repealer) 64 Sewage disposal system (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 65 Sanitary sewers and building sewers (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 65-A1 Amends fees set out in §§ 12.05 and 13.04 of Ord. 65, sewer construction (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 65-A2 Adds § 10.01 to Ord. 65, sewer construction (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 65-A3 Repeals and replaces § 12.05 of Ord. 65, sewer construction (Repealed by 65-A4) 65-A4 Repeals and replaces § 12.05 of Ord. 65, sewer construction (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 65-A5 Adds § 12.05(D) to Ord. 65, sewer construction (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 65-A6 Adds § 12.05(E) to Ord. 65, sewer construction (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 66 Glue sniffing (9.36) 67 Subdivision regulations, repeals Ord. 60 (Repealed by 155) 68 Adopts plumbing code dated 8/21/56 (Repealed by 122) 69 Electrician licensing and regulation (Repealed by 155) 69-A Adopts National Electrical Code, 1978 Edition (Repealed by 155) 69-B Adopts National Electrical Code, 1978 Edition, with amendments (Repealed by 155) 69-C Electrician licensing and regulation (Repealed by 155) 69-D Adopts National Electrical Code, 1981 Edition, with amendments (Repealed by 155) 69-D1 Amendments to the 1981 National Electrical Code (Repealed by 155) 69-E City enforcement of the Michigan Electrical Code (15.04) 69-E1 Transfers authority to issue electrical licenses to the state (15.04) 70 Central business area renewal project (Special) 71 Central business area renewal project (2.28) 72 Pavement openings and excavations (Repealed by 123) 73 Adopts Reciprocal Heating Code, 1966 Edition, with amendments (Repealed by 155) 74 (Repealed by 86) 75 Special assessment procedures (3.08) 76 Water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A1 Amends § 10.01(a) of Ord. 76, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A2 Amends § 12.01 of Ord. 76, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A3 Amends § 10.01(a) and § 12.01 of Ord. 76, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A3-1 Amends § 1 of Ord. 76-A3, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A3-2 Amends § 10.01(a) of Ord. 76, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A3-3 Amends § 10.01(a) of Ord. 76, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A4 Amends § 12.01 of Ord. 76, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 76-A5 Repeals and replaces § 14.01 of Ord. 76, water wells (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 77 Civil defense department (Repealed by 77-A1) 77-A1 Repeals Ord. 77 (Repealer) 77-A2 Emergency management and disaster control (Not codified) 78 Swimming pools, repeals Ord. 53 (15.16) 78-A1 Repeals and replaces §§ 2.4, 3.1(a) and 3.2(a) of Ord. 78, swimming pools (15.16) 79 Assistant to the mayor office created (Repealed by 154) 80 Subdivisions, repeals subdivision ordinance dated 6/3/68 (16.04, 16.08, 16.12) 80-1A Amends § 800 of Ord. 80, subdivisions (Repealed by 80-4I) 80-2B Amends §§ 401(3)(a) and 500(6) of Ord. 80, subdivisions (Repealed by 80-4G) 80-3C Repeals and replaces Art. 5 § 7 of Ord. 80, subdivisions (Repealed by 80-4H) 80-4D Adds § 302(D)(10) to Ord. 80, subdivisions (16.12) 80-4E Adds Art. V § 3(D) and 10 to Art. V of Ord. 80, subdivisions (Repealed by 80-4H) 80-4F Adds § 350 to Art. 3 and amends § 200 of Art. 2 of Ord. 80, subdivisions (16.08, 16.12) 80-4G 3/22/94: Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.16, design standards (16.16) 80-4H 3/22/94: Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.20, improvements (16.20) 80-4I 3/22/94: Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.24, review fees (16.24) 81 Franchise grant to consumers Power Company, gas service (Special) 82 Outdoor assemblies (8.24) 83 Parking violations bureau (10.08) 84 Trespassing (9.16) 85 Landfills (8.16) 86 Snowmobiles and ATVs repeals Ord. 74 (10.16) 86-A1 Amends § 8(d) of Ord. 86, snowmobiles and ATVs (10.16) 87 Refrigeration systems (Repealed by 124) 88 Criminal code (9.04-9.28, 9.36, 9.40) 88A Amends § 5 of Ord. 88, criminal code (9.12) 88B 12/21/93: Adds § 9.24.140, retail fraud (9.24) 89 Voting precincts (1.08) 89-A2 Amends § 1 of Ord. 89, voting precincts (1.08) 89-A3 2/22/94: Amends §§ 1.08.030 and 1.08.040, voting precincts (1.08) 90 Sanitary sewer system (Repealed by Ord. 13.08 dated 7-12-94) 91 Rejects addition of fluoride to water system (Special) 92 Cross-connection with water system (Repealed by Ord. 13.04 dated 7-12-94) 93 Motorcycles, minibikes and other toy vehicles (10.12) 93-A-1 Amends Ord. 93, motorcycles etc. (10.12) 94 Dangerous building abatement (15.12) 94-A1 Amends §§ 4(5), 5 and 6 of Ord. 94, dangerous buildings (15.12) 95 Loon Lake boating hours (12.16) 96 Soil erosion and sedimentation control (Repealed by Ord. dated 10-24-95) 96-A1 Repeals and replaces Art. 3 § D of Ord. 96, soil erosion control (Repealed by Ord. dated 10-24-95) 96-A2 Repeals and replaces Art. 11 of Ord. 96, soil erosion control (Repealed by Ord. dated 10-24-95) 97 Business licenses (Repealed by 100) 98 Building code enforcement officer (Repealed by 119) 98-A1 (Repealed by 120) 99 Adds Art. 8 and §§ 1350-1354, WW watercourses and wetlands zoning districts, and amends § 201, zoning (Not codified) 100 Repeals Ord. 97 (Repealer) 101 Open alcohol containers in motor vehicles (Repealed by 102) 102 Adopts Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, with amendments, and repeals Ords. 33, 33-A-1, 33-A-2, 36, 36-A, 47 and 101 (Repealed by 102-3A) 102-1A Amends traffic code as adopted (Repealed by 102-3A) 102-2A Amends traffic code as adopted (Repealed by 102-3A) 102-3A Adopts 1979 Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, repeals Ords. 102, 102-1A, 102-2A (10.04) 102-4A Amends traffic code as adopted (10.04) 103 Garage, attic and lawn sales (5.12) 104 Building official as authorized enforcement agency for Michigan Plumbing Code (Repealed by 121) 105 Building official as authorized enforcement agency for National Electrical Code (Repealed by 155) 102-5A Repeals and replaces §§ 5.15 and 5.15a-5.15h of Ord. 102, uniform traffic code (10.04) 106 Housing commission (2.20) 107 Discrimination in real estate transactions (9.44) 108 Eliminates tax exemption for certain housing (Special) 109 Drinking age restrictions (9.28) 110 Snow removal provisions (12.08) 112 Trains obstructing grade crossings (10.24) 113 Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal (Repealed by 113-A-1) 113-A-1 Repeals Ord. 113 (Repealer) 114 Adopts BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, 1978 Edition, and repeals Ords. 37 and 59 (Repealed by 114-C) 114-A Repeals and replaces § 3 and repeals § 2(c) of Ord. 114, fire code (Repealed by 114-C) 114-B Repeals and replaces § 3 and repeals § 2(c) of Ord. 114, fire code (Repealed by 114-C) 114-C Adopts BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, 1990 Edition, and repeals and replaces Ords. 114, 114-A and 114-B (8.04) 114-D 4/26/94: Amends § 8.04.010, fire code (Repealed by Ord. Ch. 8.04 dated 8-10-99) 115 Pinball arcades (Repealed by 117) 116 Repeals Ord. 57 (Repealer) 117 Pinball arcades and machines, repeals Ord. 115 (5.16) 118 Franchise grant to the Detroit Edison Company, electrical power (Special) 119 Repeals Ord. 98 (Repealer) 120 Repeals Ord. 98-A1 (Repealer) 121 Repeals Ord. 104 (Repealer) 122 Repeals Ord. 68 (Repealer) 123 Repeals Ord. 72 (Repealer) 124 Repeals Ord. 87 (Repealer) 125 Adopts BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code, 1981 Edition (Repealed by 125-A-1) 125-A-1 Repeals and replaces Ord. 125, BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code (Repealed by 07-27) 126 Sidewalk construction and maintenance (Repealed by Ord. Chs. 12.04 and 12.05) 126-A 3/22/94: Amends § 12.05.050, streets, sidewalks and public places (12.05) 127 Park and recreation area use regulations (12.12) 127-A-1 Amends § 16 of Ord. 127, park and recreation area use regulations (12.12) 128 Downtown development authority (2.24) 128-A1 Amends boundaries of downtown development district (2.24) 128-A-2 (Same as Ord. 03-10) 129 Weed control and abatement (Repealed by 129-A-1) 129-A-1 Repeals Ord. 129 (Repealer) 129-A-2 Noxious weeds (8.32) 130 Cable communications services (Repealed) 130-A 4/26/94: Adds Art. XI to Ch. 5.08, customer service and miscellaneous (Repealed) 131 Franchise grant to Greater Media Cablevision, Incorporated, cable television (Special) 132 Downtown development plan (3.04) 132-A-2 (Same as Ord. 03-13) 133 Business licenses and fees (Repealed by 154) 133-A1 Amends §§ A.2, A.4 and B.1 of Ord. 133, business licenses (Repealed by 154) 133-A-2 Business licenses and fees (5.04) 133-A-3 Repeals and replaces § 6 of Ord. 133-A2, business licenses (5.04) 134 Cemeteries (Repealed by 03-12) 134-A-1 Amends Ord. 134 § IV(I)[§ 13.20.040I], cemeteries (Repealed by 03-12) 135 City tax exemption ordinance (3.20) 135-A-1 Adds § 6(A) to and amends §§ 5 and 6 of Ord. 135, housing development taxes (3.20) 135-A-2 Amends § 1 of Ord. 135-A1, housing development tax exemptions (3.20) 135-A-3 Amends § 5 of Ord. 135, housing development tax exemptions (3.20) 135-A-4 3/28/06: Amends § 3.20.040, city tax exemption ordinance (3.20) 136 Wastewater disposal standards (13.08) 137 Wetlands and watercourses (Repealed by 137-A-2) 137-A-1 Adds §§ 22.01 and 23.01 to Ord. 137, wetlands and watercourses (Repealed by 137-A-2) 137-A-2 Wetlands and watercourses ordinance, repeals Ords. 137 and 137-A-1 (Repealed by 137-A-3) 137-A-3 10/12/93: Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.08, wetlands and watercourses (17.08) 138 Woodlands protection (Repealed by Ord. Ch. 17.12 dated 5-25-99) 138-A-1 Adds § 20.01 and repeals and replaces § 10.01(4), woodlands protection (Repealed by Ord. Ch. 17.12 dated 5-25-99) 138-A-2 Adds §§ 2.01(s), 3.01(23), 4.01(s), and 12.01(3); repeals and replaces § 9.01, woodlands protection (Repealed by Ord. Ch. 17.12 dated 5-25-99) 139 Council members' salaries (2.04) 140 Mayor's salary (2.04) 141 Speed limits for trains (10.24) 142 Alarm systems and false alarms (Repealed by 08-02) 143 Vehicle weight restrictions and motor carrier safety (10.20) 144 Drug paraphernalia (9.32) 145 Marijuana (9.32) 146 Hazardous chemicals regulations (8.12) 147 (Not adopted) 148 Building official and code official ordinance enforcement authority (2.08) 149 Refuse container regulations (8.08) 150 Burning leaves and yard waste (8.20) 152 Tax payment schedule (3.12) 153 Procedure for disposition of real estate (Repealed by 163) 154 Repeals §§ 17, 30, 40, 41, 42, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84 of Ord. 88; repeals Ords. 40, 40-A-1, 40-A-2, 40-A-3, 40-A-3-1, 40-A-4, 40-A-5, 40-A-6, 41, 42, 44, 44-A-1, 46, 52, 79, 133, 133-A-1 (Repealer) 155 Repeals § 4(A) of Ord. 64 and § 3.01 of Ord. 65; repeals Ords. 31, 31-A1, 31-A2, 38, 39, 39-A1, 39-A2, 39-A3, 39-A4, 39-A5, 39-A6, 39-A6(1), 39-A6(2), 39-A6(3), 39-A6(4), 39-A7, 39-A7(1), 50, 54, 55, 67, 69, 69-A, 69-B, 69-C, 69-D, 69-D1, 73 and 105 (Repealer) 156 Repeals Ord. 32 (Repealer) 157 Repeals Ord. 50 (Repealer) 158 Adopts general penalty (1.12) 159 Adopts general provisions (1.04) 160 Establishes emergency management program (2.36) 161 Regulates disposal of solid waste (13.24) 161-A-1 Adds § 9(c) to Ord. 161, solid waste (13.24) 162 Alcoholic liquor licenses (5.30) 163 Classification and disposition of real estate, repeals Ord. 153 (3.16)  
New Ordinance Number Series Ch. 18.92.160 10/13/92 Adds § 18.92.160, waterfront property (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Ch. 16.20.020, Ch. 18.84.040 11/24/92 Adds §§ 16.20.020(H)(4) and (5) and 18.40.040(E), trees (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Water rate resolution Amends § 13.04.110, water rates (13.04) Ch. 18.96.040 12/15/92 Amends § 18.96.040, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Ch. 18 6/8/93 Amends §§ 18.108.010 and 18.108.050(B), zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Ch. 1.08 6/22/93 Amends § 1.08.020, voting precincts (1.08) Ch. 12.05 6/22/93 Adds Ch. 12.05, removal or opening of sidewalks, streets, curbs and gutters (Repealed by Ord. Chs. 12.04 and 12.05) Ch. 13.08 6/22/93 Amends Art. IV of Ch. 13.08, sewer service system (13.08)  
Ordinance Number 164 Adoption of Wixom Municipal Code (1.01) 165 4/12/94: Acquisition of waste water treatment plant and sewage disposal system; bond issuance (Special) 165-1A 6/14/94: Amends Ord. 165, acquisition of waste water treatment plant (Special) 165-2A 6/28/94: Amends Ord. 165, acquisition of waste water treatment plant (Repealed by 08-03) Section 9.12.011 1/11/94: Adds § 9.12.011, offenses against public peace and decency (9.12) 13.04 7/12/94: Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.04, water service system (Repealed by Ord. Ch. 13.04 dated 7-13-99) 13.08 7/12/94: Repeals and replaces Arts. I, II and III of Ch. 13.08, sewer service system (13.08) Chapter 5.24 9/27/94: Adds Ch. 5.24, massage (5.24) Chapter 18 11/15/94: Adds subsection (I) to § 18.100.020 and subsections (G) and (H) to § 18.100.030, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Chapter 17 2/28/95: Repeals and replaces § 17.12.120(D), review standards (17.12) Chapter 18 2/28/95: Repeals and replaces § 18.92.150, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Chapter 18 3/28/95: Amends §§ 18.76.010(d), 18.76.030(E)(1), 18.76.030(E)(6), and 18.76.040(C)(1), zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 134-176 3/28/95: Rezone (Special) Chapter 18 8/8/95: Amends §§ 18.64.030, 18.68.020, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) -- 11/9/95: Amends § 9.2 of Charter (Charter) Chapters 12.04 and 12.05 10/24/95: Repeals Chs. 12.04 and 12.05 (Repealer) Chapter 12 10/24/95: Adds Chs. 12.00-12.06, streets, sidewalks and public places (12.00, 12.02, 12.03, 12.04, 12.05, 12.06) Chapter 17.04 10/24/95: Repeals Ch. 17.04 (Repealer) Chapter 17.04 10/24/95: Adds Ch. 17.04, soil preservation (17.04) Chapter 1.08 11/28/95: Adds § 1.08.050; amends §§ 1.08.020-1.08.040, voting precincts (1.08) Chapter 2.12 8/13/96: Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.12, parks and recreation commission (2.12) Chapter 18 1/14/97: Adds §§ 18.08.066, 18.08.066(a)[A], 18.08.461, 18.32.020(F), 18.44.020(B)(9) and 18.48.030(J); amends §§ 18.16.030(A), 18.32.020(G) and (I) and 18.48.020(H); repeals § 18.08.070, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Chapter 13.08 4/8/97: Repeals and replaces § 13.08.930, sewer service (13.08) Section 18.80.080 5/13/97: Amends § 18.80.080, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Chapter 13.08 4/8/97: Amends § 13.08.930, sewer service system (13.08) Section 18.84.030 8/12/97: Adds §§ 18.08.521, 18.84.030(D); amends §§ 18.08.155, 18.08.435, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) 18.84.105 10/28/97: Repeals and replaces § 18.84.105, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Chapter 12.04 10/28/97: Adds §§ 12.04.091 and 12.04.092; amends title of Ch. 12.04, sidewalks and bike paths (12.04) Chapter 16.08 11/12/97: Amends Ch. 16.08, subdivisions (16.08) Chapter 16.12 11/12/97: Repeals §§ 16.12.020, 16.12.030, 16.12.060, 16.12.070; renumbers § 16.12.040 to be 16.12.020; amends and renumbers § 16.12.050 to be 16.12.030; adds new § 16.12.040, subdivisions (16.12) Section 16.20.040 10/28/97: Amends § 16.20.040, subdivisions (16.20) Chapter 16.28 11/12/97: Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.28, land divisions (16.28) Section 18.84.105 10/28/97: Amends § 18.84.105, zoning (Repealed by Ord. Title 18 dated 1-27-98) Chapter 17.04 11/25/97: Amends §§ 17.04.210 and 17.04.220, environment (Repealed by 07-03) Title 18 1/27/98: Repeals and replaces Title 18, zoning (18.04, 18.08, 18.12, 18.16, 18.24, 18.28, 18.32, 18.36, 18.40, 18.44, 18.48, 18.52, 18.56, 18.60, 18.64, 18.68, 18.72, 18.74, 18.76, 18.80, 18.84, 18.88, 18.92, 18.96, 18.100, 18.104, 18.106, 18.108, 18.112, 18.116) Chapter 16.12 11/12/97: added §§ 16.12.020 and 16.12.030; repeals existing §§ 16.12.020-16.12.070, subdivisions procedure (16.12) Section 16.20.050 6/9/98: Amends § 16.20.050(C), trees (16.20) Chapter 5.16 6/23/98: Amends §§ 5.16.040-5.16.060, 5.16.080 and 5.16.100, pinball arcades and machines (5.16) Chapter 13.04 10/13/98: Amends §§ 13.04.080 and 13.04.810, water service system (13.04) Chapter 16.12 10/13/98: Adds § 16.12.040 and amends § 16.12.030, subdivisions procedure (16.12) Chapter 10.04 5/11/99: Amends §§ 10.04.090, 10.04.100-10.04.180, vehicles and traffic (10.04) Chapter 17.12 5/25/99: Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.12, woodlands (17.12) Chapter 9.24 6/8/99: Adds § 9.24.150; amends §§ 9.24.080, 9.24.120 and 9.24.140, fraud and related offenses (9.24) Chapter 9.16 6/8/99: Adds §§ 9.16.085 and 9.16.170; amends §§ 9.16.070, 9.16.080, 9.16.110, 9.16.120, offenses pertaining to property (9.16) Chapter 13.04 7/13/99: Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.04, water service system (13.04) Chapter 13.08 7/13/99: Adds § 13.08.031, sewer service system; repeals and replaces § 13.08.040; repeals §§ 13.08.050, 13.08.060, 13.08.205, 13.08.210, 13.08.215 and 13.08.220 (13.08) Chapters 16.08 and 16.20 7/13/99: Amends § 16.08.010, subdivisions definitions; repeals and replaces § 16.20.030, improvements (16.08, 16.20) Chapter 5.06 8/10/99: Adds § 5.06.180, nude entertainment prohibited (5.06) Chapter 8.04 8/10/99: Repeals and replaces § 8.04.010, fire code (8.04) Chapter 9.12 8/10/99: Amends § 9.12.210, offenses against public peace and decency (9.12) Chapter 9.20 8/10/99: Adds §§ 9.20.080, 9.20.090 and 9.20.100, offenses by or against minors (9.20) Chapter 9.28 8/10/99: Adds Ch. 9.28, alcoholic beverage control regulations (9.28) 99-23 10/26/99: Amends § 9.12.011, offenses against public peace (9.12) 99-24 10/26/99: Amends §§ 9.16.070, 9.16.080, 9.16.085, 9.16.110, 9.16.120 and 9.16.170, offenses pertaining to property (9.16) 99-25 10/26/99: Amends § 9.24.140 and 9.24.150, fraud and related offenses (9.24) 99-26 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.090, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-27 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.100, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-28 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.110, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-29 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.120, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-30 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.130, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-31 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.140, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-32 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.150, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-33 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.160, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-34 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.180, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-35 10/26/99: Amends § 10.04.190, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-36 10/26/99: Adds § 10.04.200, Uniform Traffic Code adopted (10.04) 99-37 11/23/99: Amends §§ 1.08.040 and 1.08.060, voting precincts (1.08) 00-01 7/11/00: Franchise grant to DTE Energy Marketing, Inc, for use of local public ways to transact local electrical business (Repealed by 03-07) 00-02 12/12/00: Adds Ch. 18.75, zoning (18.75) 00-03 12/12/00: Adds [amends] Figure 18.08(H) and §§ 18.48.030(L), 18.56.030(D) and 18.100.020(J); amends §§ 18.08.455(A)(2) and 18.100.100(H), billboards (18.08, 18.48, 18.56, 18.100) 01-01 1/9/01: Amends § 2.08.020, building official's duties (2.08) 01-02 1/9/01: Adds § 13.24.140, disposal of solid waste (13.24) 34-A-192 3/23/99: Rezone (Special) 34-A-193 6/22/99: Rezone (Special) 34-A-194 11/23/99: Rezone (Special) 34-A-195 6/27/00: Rezone (Special) 34-A-196 7/11/00: Rezone (Special) 34-A-197 7/11/00: Rezone (Special) 34-A-198 12/12/00: Rezone (Special) 34-A-199 12/12/00: Rezone (Special) 34-A-200 12/12/00: Rezone (Special) 34-A-201 12/12/00: Rezone (Special) 34-A-202 7/24/01: Rezone (Special) 34-A-203 7/24/01: Rezone (Special) 34-A-204 8/14/01: Rezone (Special) 01-03 6/26/01: Amends §§ 3.16.030 and 3.16.040, disposition of property (3.16) 01-04 9/18/01: Repeals and replaces Chapter 5.08, cable communications franchises (5.08) 01-05 9/18/01: Grants non-exclusive franchise to Comcast Cablevision of the South, Inc. (Special) 34-A-205 1/08/02: Rezone (Special) 02-01 5/28/02: Amends §§ 18.64.020 and 18.64.030, M-1 light industrial districts (18.64) 02-02 Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.04, the Michigan Vehicle Code (10.04) 34-A-207 5/28/02: Rezone (Special) 34-A-208 12/10/02: Rezone (Special) 03-01 Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.08, Cable Communications Franchises (5.08) 03-02 (Special) 03-03 Adds § 13.08.535 and amends §§ 13.08.450, 13.08.460 and 13.08.490, Wastewater Disposal Standards (13.08) 03-04 3/11/03: Rezone (Special) 03-05 3/25/03: Adopts telecommunications provisions (5.09) 03-06 3/25/03: Amends § 13.08.490, sewer service local limits (13.08) 03-07 5/13/03: Repeals Ord. 00-01, franchise grant to DTE Energy Marketing, Inc. (Repealer) 03-08 5/13/03: Rezone (Special) 03-09 5/27/03: Adds Ch. 5.10, peddlers, solicitors and canvassers (5.10) 03-10 6/10/03: Amends Ord. 128-A-1, boundaries of downtown development authority (2.24) 03-11 6/24/03: Amends § 16.20.050, tree subdivision design standards (16.20) 03-12 7/8/03: Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.20, city cemeteries (13.20) 03-13 8/12/03: Amends Ord. 132-A-1, downtown development plan and tax increment financing plan (3.04) 03-14 8/26/03: Amends § 13.08.490, sewer service local limits (13.08) 03-15 12/9/03: Amends § 1.08.040; repeals § 1.08.060, voting precincts (1.08) 04-01 1/13/04: Rezone (Special) 04-02 6/8/04: Repeals and replaces § 3.12.020, tax payment schedule (3.12) 04-03 7/13/04: Rezone (Special) 04-04 10/12/04: Amends §§ 18.64.010-18.64.040 and 18.96.060, zoning (18.64, 18.96) 04-05 11/9/04: Rezone (Special) 04-06 12/14/04: Rezone (Special) 05-01 1/25/05: Adds Ch. 12.17, village center area improvement and underground relocation of overhead lines (12.17) 05-02 Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.04, Michigan Vehicle Code (10.04) 05-03 9/27/05: Amends § 18.08.255, zoning (18.08) 05-04 9/27/05: Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.04, animal control (6.04) 05-05 10/11/05: Amends § 18.75.070, zoning (18.75) 05-06 11/9/05: Rezone (Special) 06-01 3/14/06: Amends § 18.80.080, zoning (18.80) 06-02 9/26/06: Amends Ch. 5.06, alcoholic liquor (5.06) 07-01 6/12/07: Rezone (Special) 07-02 6/12/07: Rezone (Special) 07-03 6/12/07: Adds § 17.04.160, soil preservation; repeals Arts. I, III and IV of Ch. 17.04 (17.04) 07-04 9/11/07: Repeals and replaces Art. I of Ch. 15.04, state construction code enforcement (15.04) 07-05 10/23/07: Amends §§ 13.04.110 and 13.04.810; repeals §§ 13.04.640 and 13.04.660, water service system (13.04) 08-01 2/12/08: Adds [amends] Ch. 5.20, taxicabs and taxicab drivers (5.20) 08-02 2/12/08: Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.28, municipal cost recovery (8.28) 08-03 6/24/08: Amends Ords. 165 and 165-1A; repeals Ord. 165-2A, acquisition of waste water treatment plant and sewage disposal system; bond issuance (Special) 08-04 8/26/08: Rezone (Special) 08-05 8/26/08: Amends T. 18, zoning (18.01, 18.02, 18.03, 18.05, 18.06, 18.07, 18.08, 18.09, 18.10, 18.11, 18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.15, 18.16, 18.17, 18.18, 18.20, 18.21, 18.22, 18.23, 18.24, 18.25)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 11, the Ordinance List and Disposition Table will be replaced with the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
  
RESOLUTION LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
 Resolution Number    Resolution dated 7/31/01 Adopts Property Maintenance and Construction Codes (15.04) Resolution dated 3/25/03 Implements the telecommunications ordinance (5.09) 03-31 12/31/03: Adopts Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code and Rehabilitation Code for existing buildings (Repealed by 07-04) 05-28 7/26/05: Amends § 12.1 of Charter (Charter) 07-27 11/27/07: Adds § 15.04.015; repeals Ch. 15.08, state construction code enforcement (15.04) 07-28 11/27/07: Amends § 15.04.015, state construction code enforcement (15.04) 08-63 8/12/08: Amends § 15.04.015, state construction code enforcement (15.04)  
  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 11, the Resolution List and Disposition Table will be replaced with the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of Wixom, Michigan beginning with Supplement No. 11, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 2008-60 
(Res.)  7-22-08 Charter amendment for road maintenance Charter, § 9.2 2008-64 
(Res.)  8-12-08 Charter amendment for safety paths and sidewalks Charter, § 9.2 2009-01  9-22-09 Fire prevention code 1       Rpld 8.04.010-8.04.040       Added 8.04.010, 8.04.020 2010-01  7-13-10 Rental unit regulations 1 5.25.010-5.25.090 2010-02  8-10-10 Solid waste fees 1 13.24.090 2010-03  8-24-10 Rezoning Not codified 2011-01  3- 8-11 Noise and nuisances 1 8.36.010-8.36.070 2011-02  3- 8-11 Alternate penalties 1 9.04.040 2011-03  3- 8-11 Peace and decency offenses 1       Rpld 9.12.010-9.12.270       Added 9.12.010-9.12.130 2011-04  3- 8-11 Property offenses 1       Rpld 9.16.010-9.16.170       Added 9.16.010-9.16.130 2011-05  3- 8-11 Minors 1       Rpld 9.20.010-9.20.100       Added 9.20.010-9.20.080 2011-05(Res.)  3- 8-11 Property maintenance code 15.04.015 2011-06  3- 8-11 Fraud 1       Rpld 9.24.010-9.24.150       Added 9.24.010-9.24.060 2011-07  3- 8-11 Alcoholic liquor 1       Rpld 9.28.010-9.28.070       Added 9.28.010-9.28.070 2011-08  3- 8-11 Controlled substances 1       Rpld 9.32.010-9.32.080       Added 9.32.010-9.23.030 2011-09  3- 8-11 Firearms 1       Rpld 9.40.010-9.40.100       Added 9.40.010-9.40.090 2011-10  3- 8-11 Housing discrimination 1       Rpld 9.44.010-9.44.080 2011-11  3- 8-11 Vehicle code 1       Rpld 10.04.010-10.04.060       Added 10.04.010-10.04.060 2011-12  3- 8-11 Parking bureau 1       Rpld 10.08.010-10.08.060 2011-13  3- 8-11 Motorcycles, etc. 1       Rpld 10.12.010-10.12.100 2011-14  3- 8-11 Snowmobiles 1       Rpld 10.16.010-10.16.120       Added 10.16.010-10.16.040 2011-15  3- 8-11 Motor carrier safety 1       Rpld 10.20.010-10.20.190       Added 10.20.010-10.20.030 2011-16  3- 8-11 Railroads 1       Rpld 10.24.010-10.24.030 2011-17  3-22-11 Public offices 1       Rpld 9.08.010-9.08.030       Added 9.08.010-9.08.050 2011-18  3-22-11 Glue sales 1       Rpld 9.36.010-9.36.060 2011-19  4-26-11 Business licenses 1       Rpld 5.04.010-5.04.200       Added 5.04.010-5.04.130 2011-20  6-28-11 Water service liens 1 13.04.610 2011-21  6-28-11 Sewer service liens 1 13.08.040 2012-01  6-12-12 Synthetic marijuana 1       Added 9.32.040-9.32.046 2012-02  7-24-12 Possession of marijuana 1       Added 9.32.050 2012-03  7-24-12 Fireworks 1       Added 9.12.140 2013-01  2-26-13 Vehicle code penalties 1 10.04.030 2013-02  2-26-13 Purchase of alcohol by minors 1 9.28.040F 2013-03  5-14-13 Rezoning Not codified 2013-04  7-23-13 Rezoning Not codified 2013-05  8-27-13 Fireworks 1 9.12.140 2013-06 10- 8-13 Disorderly persons 1 9.12.030 2014-01  1-28-14 Medical marihuana 1       Added 18.01.050 2 18.24.080- 
18.24.100 3       Added 18.12.160 2014-02  5-27-14 Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers 1       Rpld 5.10.010-5.10.130       Added 5.10.010-5.10.220 Ord. of   6-24-14 Signs       Rpld 18.16.010- 
18.16.160       Added 18.16.010- 
18.16.200 2015-01  1-13-15 Rezoning Not codified 2015-02  1-27-15 Review of plats 1 16.12.020(E) 2015-03  3-10-15 Inmate health care costs 1       Added 8.29.010- 
8.29.050 2015-04 10-27-15 Collection of costs in extraordinary response situations 1 8.28.030 2016-01  1-26-16 Rezoning Not codified 2016-02  6-28-16 Payment to tree fund in lieu of replacement tree       Added 17.12.100.K 2016-03  6-28-16 Definition of tree; payment in lieu of landscaping and screening requirements 1 18.24.110 2       Added 18.14.020.L 2016-04  2- 9-16 Sewer tap-in fees agreements 1 13.08.020 2 13.08.295 2016-05  9-13-16 Cutting of trees and vegetation in easements 1       Added 17.12.090 2017-01  1-24-17 Performance guarantees 1       Added 19.01.010- 
19.01.130, 
19.01.210- 
19.01.320 2017-02  5- 9-17 State construction codes 1       Rpld 15.04.010- 
15.04.026       Added 15.04.010- 
15.04.060 2       Rpld 15.04.030       Added 15.04.070 3       Added 15.04.080, 
15.04.090 4       Added 15.04.110- 
15.04.130 5       Rpld 8.04.010, 
8.04.020 2017-03  6-13-17 Michigan Air Line Trailway       Added 12.18.010- 
12.18.090 2017-04  6-13-17 Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers 1       Rpld 5.10.010- 
5.10.230       Added 5.10.010- 
5.10.022, 5.10.040- 
5.10.044, 5.10.050, 
5.10.051, 5.10.060, 
5.10.061, 5.10.070- 
5.10.081 2017-06 10-10-17 Purchase of alcoholic beverages by minors 1 9.28.040 2017-51(Res.) 10-24-17 Filing date for general elections 1, 2 Charter, § 3.8(note) 2017-07 12-12-17 Peddlers and Solicitors 1 5.10.020 2 5.10.074 2018-01  1- 9-18 Rezoning Not codified  
