CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF WALKER, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted August 10, 1993 
Effective August 26, 1993 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WALKER, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Norman R. Dole 
Mayor 
____________ 
J. Stewart Van Soestberg 
Donald Knottnerus 
Gloria Hilton 
Joseph Rogers 
Robert Marz 
Steven Versluis 
City Commission 
____________ 
Joseph Fendt 
City Manager 
____________ 
Richard Butler 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Linda Wiser 
City Clerk 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
OFFICIAL> 
of the 
CITY OF 
WALKER, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Gary Carey Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
First Ward 
Dan Kent 
Steven Gilbert 
Second Ward 
Roxanne Deschaine 
Carol Glanville 
Third Ward 
Melanie Grooters 
Elaina A. Huizenga 
City Commission 
____________ 
Darrel Schmalzel 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jeff Sluggett 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sarah J. Bydalek, MMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Walker, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through August 27, 1991, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Linda Davis, Senior Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Linda Wiser, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
Adopting Ordinance 
Ordinance No. 93-422 
An Ordinance to Adopt a Recodified Code of Ordinances for the City of Walker, Michigan. 
The City of Walker Ordains: 
    Section 1. Repeal of existing "Code of Ordinances" and Adoption of Recodified "Code of Ordinances." Pursuant to the authority granted under Section 5b of Act 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909, as amended, "Code of Ordinances, City of Walker, Michigan," as adopted April 13, 1976, as amended, consisting of Chapters 1 through 21 and Appendices A and B (the "1976 Code"), is hereby repealed in its entirety, and recodified "Code of Ordinances, City of Walker, Michigan," consisting of Chapters 1 through 94 and Appendix A (the "Code"), is adopted. 
    Section 2. Ordinances Repealed; Saving Clause and Exceptions to Repeal. On the effective date of this Ordinance, all general and permanent ordinances of the City enacted on or before December 22, 1992, and not included in the Code or not recognized and continued in force by reference in the Code, are repealed. However, nothing in this Ordinance or in the Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right establish or accruing, before the effective date of this Ordinance or the Code, and all prosecutions, suits, actions and proceedings commenced under the 1976 Code of Ordinances, as amended, are hereby declared to be preserved and saved in full force and effect. Further, this repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that was repealed by any ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance; nor shall this Ordinance or the Code be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any ordinance as provided in Section 1-5 of the Code. 
    Section 3. Additions and Amendments to Code. All additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in a form so as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the additions or amendments a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Walker, Michigan," shall be construed to include the additions and amendments. Ordinances adopted after December 22, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 4. Penalties for Violations; Other Remedies. Unless a different fine or penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of the Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant to the Code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment, as provided in Section 1-11 of the Code. Unless a different fine or penalty is expressly provided, the penalty provided by this Section of this Ordinance and by Section 1-11 of the Code shall apply to any addition or amendment to the Code whether or not the penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition, the City may pursue all other available remedies for violations, including, without limitations, abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses and permits. 
    Section 5. Code Maintenance; Availability. A copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for inspection by any public. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or the person designated by the City Clerk, to maintain this copy of the Code and to keep it up-to-date by inserting in the appropriate places of the Code all additions and amendments to the Code (as provided by Section 3 of this Ordinance) when the additions or amendments have been printed in page form, and by removing from the Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed or otherwise effectively amended or revised by the City Commission. 
    Section 6. Unlawful to Alter or Tamper with Code. It is unlawful for any person to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner for the purpose of causing a law of the City of Walker to be misrepresented. Any person violating this Section shall be punished as provided in Section 4 of this Ordinance. 
    Section 7. Severability. The various parts, sections and clauses of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. 
    Section 8. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon publication in a newspaper in general circulation within the City of Walker. 
First Reading: July 27, 1993 
Second Reading: August 10, 1993 
Effective Date: August 26, 1993 
/s/ Norman Dole 
      Norman Dole, Mayor   /s/ Linda Wiser 
      Linda Wiser, Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
  
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 10-584  6-14-10 Included 28 10-588 10-11-10 Included 28 10-589 10-11-10 Included 28 10-590  9-27-10 Omitted 28 10-591 11- 8-10 Included 28 10-592  1-10-11 Included 29 11-593  1-24-11 Included 29 11-594  2-28-11 Included 29 11-595  3-28-11 Included 29 11-596  3-28-11 Omitted 29 11-597  5- 9-11 Included 29 11-598  7-11-11 Included 30 11-599  7-11-11 Included 30 11-600  7-27-11 Included 30 11-601  8-22-11 Included 30 11-602  9-26-11 Included 30 11-603  9-26-11 Included 30 11-604  2- 1-12 Included 31 12-605  2-25-12 Included 31 12-606  4-28-12 Included 31 12-607  6-18-12 Included 31 12-608  6-28-12 Included 31 12-609  8-18-12 Included 32 12-610  9-29-12 Included 32 13-611  1-28-13 Included 33 13-612  2-11-13 Included 33 13-613  4-22-13 Included 33 13-614  6-10-13 Included 33 13-615  6-10-13 Included 33 13-616  6-10-13 Included 33 13-617  6-24-13 Included 33 13-618  7-22-13 Included 34 13-619 10-14-13 Included 34 13-620 12-21-13 Included 34 13-621 12-21-13 Included 34 14-622  7-28-14 Included 35 15-623  2- 9-15 Included 36 15-624  2- 9-15 Included 36 15-625  8-24-15 Included 37 15-626 10-26-15 Included 37 16-627  3-28-16 Included 38 16-628  6-27-16 Included 38 16-629  6-27-16 Included 38 16-630  9-26-16 Included 39 16-631  9-26-16 Included 39 16-632  9-26-16 Included 39 16-633 11-28-16 Omitted 40 16-634  1- 9-17 Included 40 17-635  7-10-17 Included 40 17-636  7-10-17 Included 40 17-637  7-10-17 Included 40 17-638  7-10-17 Included 40 17-639 10-23-17 Included 41 18-640  2-12-18 Included 42 18-641  4-23-18 Included 42 18-642  6-11-18 Included 42 18-643 10-22-18 Included 43 18-644 11-12-18 Included 43 18-645  1-14-19 Included 44 19-646  5-20-19 Included 44 19-647  5-20-19 Included 44 19-648  5-20-19 Included 44  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Walker, Michigan" and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Walker Code." 
(Code 1976, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, § 4.9. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances passed by the city commission, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless otherwise indicated: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Walker, as approved at an election held on November 6, 1962, and any amendments thereto. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Walker in Kent County, Michigan. 
    City commission. The words "city commission" or "the commission" shall mean the City Commission of the City of Walker, Michigan. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Walker, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be excluded in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be included. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to the provisions of this Code falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day. 
    County. The term "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean Kent County, Michigan. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Municipal civil infraction. An act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, etc. Except as otherwise specifically provided, whenever any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title alone, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Walker, Michigan." Whenever in accordance with the provisions of this Code any specific act is required to be done by any designated officer or official of the city, such act may be performed by any duly authorized deputy or agent or other member of his department. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word "person," as applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place, square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 1-4; Ord. No. 94-434, § 1, 5-10-94) 
Sec. 1-3. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-4. - Expiration date for licenses issued under Code. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all licenses required by and issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire on June 30 next following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1976, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(6)  Ordinance No. 71-150, being chapter 94, Zoning of this Code, and amendments thereto; 
(7)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1976, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-7. - History notes; references; cross references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code and any reference or cross reference to any provision of the Charter, any ordinance, state law or other section of this Code appearing after sections of this Code are not part of the Code and have no legal effect. They are for informational purposes only. 
(Code 1976, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Walker, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Walker, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which such section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1976, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code and ordinances. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold one or more sections or a part of a section of this Code or of an ordinance passed by the commission after the effective date of this Code invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of the Code or ordinance nor the context in which such section, sections or part of a section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section, sections or part of a section so held invalid. 
(Code 1976, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalties and sanctions for violations of Code and city ordinances; continuing violations; injunctive relief. 
(a)  Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in the Code or ordinance as a civil infraction or municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus costs required or permitted by law) and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by this Code or any ordinance; provided, however, that a misdemeanor violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus costs required or permitted by law) and/or imprisonment not exceeding 93 days, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days. 
(c)  The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of Act. No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within any six-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance) and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(d)  A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
(e)  Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(f)  In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 1-8; Ord. No. 94-434, § 2, 5-10-94; Ord. No. 18-640 , § 1, 2-12-18) 
Charter reference- Penalties for violation of ordinances, § 4.6. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Court, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 46; planning commission, § 58-26 et seq.; downtown development authority, § 58-61 et seq.; downtown redevelopment management board, § 58-91 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 78; administration and enforcement of zoning chapter, § 94-31 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 94-56 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Furnishing false information to city employee or official, § 50-39. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Official information not to be utilized for personal profit. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall unfairly utilize information acquired by reason of his relationship with the city to make any arrangement, contract or investment for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain a direct or indirect personal profit. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1) 
Cross reference- Appointment and powers and duties of building official, § 18-31. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq. 
Sec. 2-27. - Exercising official power or influence for personal profit. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall unfairly exercise or attempt to so exercise his power or influence as an officer or employee of the city in order to affect the operations or dealings of the city for the purpose of acquiring a direct or indirect personal profit. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-28. - Notification to city commission of personal real estate transactions. 
    Each officer and employee of the city shall notify the city commission, in writing, of any dealings or transactions in which he engages while he is an officer or employee of the city relating to real estate located in the city. Such notice shall be filed within ten days after the completion of such dealing or transaction, stating the nature of the real property, the interest in the property which was acquired or conveyed, and with whom such dealings were conducted. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-29. - Violation of section 2-26, 2-27 or 2-28 grounds for removal. 
    If, after a hearing, the city commission determines that any officer or employee of the city has knowingly violated any provision of section 2-26, 2-27, or 2-28, such a violation shall constitute misconduct, within the meaning of section 7.7 of the Charter, which would warrant removal from office of such officer or employee. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4) 
Secs. 2-30-2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department heads means the assistant city manager, accountant, building official, assessor, personnel director, public works superintendent, police chief, deputy fire chief, income tax admini- strator, planning director, and any other appointed office or position so designated by resolution of the city commission. 
    Employees means all employees of the city other than department heads. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6(a)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-42. - Creation and appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of city manager of the city. The city manager shall be an officer of the city and shall have the power and perform the duties set forth in this division. The city commission shall appoint the city manager by majority vote of all the members then serving. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6(b)) 
Sec. 2-43. - Qualifications. 
    The city manager shall be chosen by the city commission on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications in the profession of public management. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or state, but during his tenure of office, he shall reside in the city; provided, however, that in case a nonresident is appointed, the city commission may in its sole discretion authorize a reasonable period of time to comply with this requirement. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6(c)) 
Sec. 2-44. - Tenure. 
    The manager shall be appointed for a term specified by resolution of the city commission at the time he is hired or from time to time thereafter. If no term is specified, the appointment shall be for an indefinite term. The city commission shall have the authority to enter into a contract with the city manager. The city manager shall be removable at any time by the pleasure of the city commission upon a vote for removal by at least a majority of members of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6(d)) 
Sec. 2-45. - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative agencies of the city. He shall be responsible to the city commission and, except as otherwise provided in the Charter, shall have power and be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and remove department heads, subject to the approval of the city commission; 
(2)  Appoint and remove employees of the city; 
(3)  Prepare and submit the budget annually to the city commission for approval in accordance with section 2-81, and upon approval of the budget by the city commission, administer the budget annually; 
(4)  Keep the city commission informed of the current financial condition and future needs of the city as requested by the city commission; 
(5)  Prepare and submit to or for the city commission reports annually or more frequently if requested by the city commission, on all affairs and departments of the city; 
(6)  Delegate to other officers and/or employees of the city any duties conferred upon him by this section and hold them responsible for their faithful discharge; 
(7)  Attend meetings of the city commission, unless excused by the city commission, and any other meetings as directed by the city commission; 
(8)  Implement and enforce all resolutions, policies and decisions of the city commission and all collective bargaining agreements entered into by the city commission; 
(9)  Communicate with the department heads of the city concerning decisions, policies and resolutions of the city commission, and any other matters pertaining to the performance of their duties and functions; 
(10)  Arrange for and attend a meeting at least every two months with the department heads and the city commission, or a committee thereof, as determined by the city commission, to discuss the affairs of the city; 
(11)  Purchase materials, supplies and equipment for all departments of the city;provided that all purchases exceeding $1,000.00 shall be subject to approval of the city commission; 
(12)  In conjunction with the mayor and other members of the city commission, represent the city at intergovernmental meetings and activities; 
(13)  Submit weekly a written record of absences, including vacation days, sick days, and personal days, to the personnel director; and 
(14)  Perform such other duties as may be legally required by the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6(e)) 
Sec. 2-46. - Absence or disability. 
    In the absence or disability of the city manager, the assistant city manager shall perform the duties of the city manager during such absence or disability; provided, however, that in the event of an absence or disability of more than two weeks, the city commission may, by resolution, appoint a person as interim city manager who shall perform the duties of the city manager until he shall return. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6(f)) 
Secs. 2-47-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPENSATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create a local officers' compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 

Sec. 2-56. - Created; purpose. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 117.5), the city commission hereby creates a local officers' compensation commission, which shall determine the salaries of all local elected officials. 
(Code 1976, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-57. - Composition. 
    The commission shall consist of seven members who are registered electors of the city and who are appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the members of the city commission who are elected and serving. 
(Code 1976, § 2-37; Ord. No. 04-520, § 1, 10-25-04) 
Sec. 2-58. - Terms of members; vacancies. 
(a)  To effectuate the change from a five-member commission to a seven-member commission as required by Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 117.5c), as amended, due to an increase in the city's population, the terms of the five members presently serving on the commission are hereby terminated and a new seven-member commission shall be appointed pursuant to section 2-57 and subsection (b) within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance amending section 2-57 to establish a seven-member commission. 
(b)  The members first appointed to the compensation commission following the effective date of the ordinance amending section 2-57 to establish a seven-member commission shall be appointed one each for respective terms of one, two, three, four, five, six, and seven years provided that each of such initial terms shall end on September 30 of the respective year following appointment. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. 
(1)  As vacancies occur in the original terms of the first members of the compensation commission, a successor shall be appointed before October 1 for a full term of seven years, and after the original appointments, each member of the compensation commission shall be appointed for a term of seven years except as provided in subsection (b)(2). 
(2)  If any vacancy shall occur in the membership of the compensation commission, such vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment of the mayor and confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city commission. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-38, 2-39; Ord. No. 04-520, § 2, 10-25-04) 
Sec. 2-59. - Noneligibility of government employees. 
    No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the compensation commission. 
(Code 1976, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-60. - Election of chairman and secretary; quorum; compensation of members. 
(a)  The compensation commission shall elect a chairman and a secretary from among the members of the compensation commission in each year for terms expiring at midnight on the following September 30. 
(b)  A majority of the members of the compensation commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The compensation commission shall take no action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the compensation commission. 
(c)  The members of the compensation commission shall receive no compensation but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1976, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-61. - Determinations of commission. 
(a)  The compensation commission shall determine the salaries of all elected officials of the city. The compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in every odd year and the compensation commission shall make its determination within 45 calendar days on which the compensation commission meets and a quorum of members is present. The determinations of the compensation commission shall be immediately filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The determinations of the compensation commission shall be effective 30 days following their filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city commission by a resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members of the city commission elected to and serving on such legislative body. In case of rejection by the city commission, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 2-42) 
Secs. 2-62-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances promising or guaranteeing payment of money to city or authorizing issuance of bonds not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, § 1-5(1); appropriation ordinances and ordinances providing for levee of taxes and for annual budgets not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, § 1-5(2); fiscal year, adoption of budget for downtown development authority, § 58-68; fiscal year, budget for downtown redevelopment management board, § 58-96; disposition of surplus funds from special assessments, § 66-23. 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-81. - Budget procedure. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city commission, the budget shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the procedure in this section. 
(b)  In accordance with section 9.2 of the Charter, each department head shall submit to the city clerk an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal year for the department or activities under his control. The city clerk shall forward these estimates to the budget committee and the city manager. The city commission shall then conduct a special meeting at which all department heads shall review their itemized estimates of expenditures as originally submitted to the city clerk. Following the special meeting, the budget committee and the city manager shall review the budget recommendations of the city commission. The city manager shall, in conjunction with the budget committee, prepare the complete itemized budget proposal for the next fiscal year in compliance with section 9.3 of the Charter and submit it to the city commission. The budget shall then be reviewed and approved by the city commission in accordance with the procedure set forth in sections 9.4 and 9.5 of the Charter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6(g)) 
Sec. 2-82. - Recovery of expenses related to utility line failure or railroad fire. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is adopted to provide authority and a mechanism for the reimbursement of costs for certain fire and emergency services rendered by the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Assessable costs means charges and fees incurred by the city including, without limitation, the: per-hour charges for city vehicles established by resolution of the city commission; costs of personnel, supplies and equipment of the city utilized in connection with the incident; costs charged to the city for the services of a hazmat unit including, without limitation, personnel, supplies and equipment; and any costs charged to the city for services of a third party, and administration, billing and collection costs, including attorneys' fees. 
    Hazardous condition means an occurrence resulting in a risk to the physical welfare of persons or property in the immediate area of the situation (such as downed utility lines or gas leaks not in an occupied structure), requiring a fire department or emergency services response. 
    Person means a natural person, corporation, partnership or any other entity with legal capacity. 
    Railroad means any person, its respective lessees, trustees, or receivers, or other legal entity operating in this state either as a common carrier for hire or for private use as a carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary rails and includes any person, lessee, trustee, or receiver or other legal entity owning railroad tracks. 
    Railroad fire means a burning rail car or contents, or burning vegetation (e.g., grass, brush) adjacent to the railroad rails, track, or roadbed originating from railroads/trains passing over the rails, track or roadbed after the fire department or other city department is on scene for one hour. 
    Utility means all persons, organizations, municipal or other authority that provides gas, electric, water, steam, sewer, energy, telecommunications, cable television or other services of a similar nature. 
    Utility line failure means downed power lines; gas pipeline breaks (including ruptures and punctures); the disabling of any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect or transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals, water, steam, or sanitary or storm sewage; or other mishaps occurring in connection with the activities of utilities or their suppliers after the fire department or other city department is on scene for one hour. 
(c)  Responsible parties. Persons owning, maintaining or operating a railroad or utility are responsible for and shall pay the assessable costs incurred by the city in responding to a hazardous condition occasioned by a railroad fire or utility line failure. 
(d)  Billing and collection. Following the conclusion of a railroad fire or utility line failure, the fire chief shall prepare and transmit an invoice to the responsible party or responsible parties for payment. The invoice shall demand full payment within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the bill. Any additional expenses that become known to the fire chief following transmittal of the bill to a responsible party shall be billed in the same manner on a subsequent bill. For any amounts due that remain unpaid after 30 days, the city shall impose a late charge of one percent per month or fraction thereof. Failure to pay the invoice within 30 days of the date of mailing shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(e)  Other remedies. The recovery of assessable costs imposed under this section shall not relieve or limit the liability of any responsible party under any other local ordinance, state or federal law, rule or regulation. The remedies provided for in this section shall apply in all circumstances except where, pursuant to section 2-83, billing has already occurred. 
(f)  Appeal procedure. A person who receives a bill under this section may request a meeting with the fire chief or his designee to appeal all or part of the assessable costs. The person must request a meeting in writing within 14 calendar days of the date of the billing. The fire chief or his designee may affirm, modify or waive the assessable costs if he finds that: 
(1)  An error was made with respect to the nature of the incident; 
(2)  An error was made in calculating the assessable costs; or, 
(3)  The person to which the bill was sent is not liable under the terms of this section. 
The fire chief or his designee shall mail his determination regarding the appeal within 14 days of the scheduled meeting, which determination shall identify the basis for the decision. 
If, after receiving the fire chief or his designee's determination, the person is not satisfied, it may request an opportunity to appear before the city manager to seek relief from the assessable costs charged. Such an appeal must be made in writing within 14 calendar days of the mailing of the fire chief or his designee's determination and must identify why the billing should be modified or overturned. The city manager shall consider the grounds for relief stated herein as well as the following factors: 
(1)  The degree to which the imposition of assessable costs presents a unique situation unlikely to be repeated; and 
(2)  Whether granting the appeal would do harm to the intent and purpose of this section. 
Failure to file a timely written request of appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to relief and further constitutes an agreement to pay the costs involved. The city manager is authorized to affirm, modify or overturn the fire chief or his designee's determination with respect to the imposition of assessable costs in the event of an appeal. 
(g)  Enforcement. If any responsible party fails to reimburse the city for the costs described in this section, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction, and may take any other lawful action, to collect such costs. In addition, if a responsible party who fails to reimburse the city for the costs described in this section is an owner or taxpayer of the property on which a railroad fire or utility line failure occurred, the city may add such costs to the tax roll as to such property and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against such property. The recovery of costs does not limit or modify the liability of any responsible party under local ordinance, or state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 09-570, § 1, 3-23-09) 
Sec. 2-83. - Recovery of expenses related to hazardous materials. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is adopted to provide authority and a mechanism for the reimbursement of fire and emergency service costs incurred by the city in response to a suspected or actual hazardous materials release. 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Assessable costs means charges and fees incurred by the city including, without limitation, the: per hour charges for city vehicles established by resolution of the city commission, costs of personnel, supplies and equipment of the city utilized in connection with the incident, costs charged to the city for the services of a HazMat unit including, without limitation, personnel, supplies and equipment, and any costs charged to the city for services of a third party, and administration, billing and collection costs, including attorneys' fees. 
    Hazardous materials means materials which pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human life, health and safety, including, but not limited to, hazardous substances as defined in 42 USC section 9601(14), as amended, or other substances that have been classified by the state or federal government or any of their departments or agencies to be hazardous or toxic. 
    HazMat unit means any vehicle provided by a third-party equipped with apparatus and operated by third-party personnel to provide emergency service at the request of the city in response to a suspected or actual release or other similar occurrence involving hazardous materials. 
    Release means any actual or threatened leaking, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment (including air, soil, ground water and surface water). 
    Responsible party means any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any other legal entity that causes or is responsible for a release of a hazardous material, either actual or threatened, or is an owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of property onto which or from which hazardous materials release. 
(c)  Duty to remove . In the event of a release of any hazardous materials, it is the duty of all responsible parties to remove such hazardous materials immediately and to undertake and complete a total cleanup of the area in such a manner as to ensure that the hazardous materials are fully removed and the area is fully restored to its condition prior to the release of hazardous materials, or to conditions or standards established by the state department of environmental quality pursuant to applicable law or regulation. If the responsible party or parties fail to comply with this section, the city shall have the right to enter onto the property immediately and remove and conduct a cleanup of all such hazardous materials by city employees or by third parties. 
(d)  Responsible parties; reimbursement of city. When the city fire department or other city department responds to a call for assistance which involves hazardous materials, the responsible parties shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to reimburse the city, its agents, contractors and employees for all assessable costs incurred by the city. In addition, responsible parties who fail to comply with subsection 2-83(c) shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to reimburse the city, its agents, contractors and employees for all assessable costs incurred by the city in connection with the removal and cleanup of hazardous materials and the restoration of the property pursuant to subsection 2-83(c). 
(e)  Discretion of city. The decision to request the services of the HazMat unit or the services of any third party in connection with an incident involving hazardous materials shall be solely in the discretion of the fire chief or the commanding officer at the scene of the incident. 
(f)  Billing and collection. Following the conclusion of a hazardous materials incident, the fire chief shall prepare and transmit an invoice to the responsible party or responsible parties for payment. The invoice shall demand full payment within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the bill. Any additional expenses that become known to the fire chief following transmittal of the bill to a responsible party shall be billed in the same manner on a subsequent bill. For any amounts due that remain unpaid after 30 days, the city shall impose a late charge of one percent per month or fraction thereof. Failure to pay the invoice within 30 days of the date of mailing shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(g)  Appeal procedure. A person who receives a bill under this section may request a meeting with the fire chief or his designee to appeal all or part of the assessable costs. The person must request a meeting in writing within 14 calendar days of the date of the billing. The fire chief or his designee may modify or waive the assessable costs if he finds that: (1) an error was made with respect to the nature of the incident; (2) an error was made in calculating the assessable costs; (3) the person(s) is not liable because the release was caused solely by a third party; or, (4) the person to which the bill was sent is not liable under the terms of this section. The fire chief or his designee shall mail his determination regarding the appeal (i.e., to affirm the initial billing or modify or waive the assessable costs) within 14 days of the scheduled meeting, which determination shall identify the basis for the decision. 
    If, after receiving the fire chief or his designee's determination, the person is not satisfied, it may request an opportunity to appear before the city manager to seek relief from the assessable costs charged. Such an appeal must be made in writing within 14 calendar days of the mailing of the fire chief or his designee's determination and must identify why the billing should be modified or overturned. The city manager shall consider the grounds for relief stated herein as well as the following factors: (1) the degree to which the imposition of assessable costs presents a unique situation unlikely to be repeated and (2) whether granting the appeal would do harm to the intent and purpose of this section. 
    Failure to file a timely written request of appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to relief and further constitutes an agreement to pay the costs involved. The city manager is authorized to affirm, modify or overturn the fire chief or his designee's determination with respect to the imposition of assessable costs in the event of an appeal. 
(h)  Enforcement. If any responsible party fails to reimburse the city for the costs described in this section, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction, and may take any other lawful action, to collect such costs. In addition, if a responsible party who fails to reimburse the city for the costs described in this section is an owner or taxpayer of the property on which the release of hazardous materials occurred, the city may add such costs to the tax roll as to such property and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against such property. The recovery of costs does not limit or modify the liability of any responsible party under local ordinance, or state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 09-570, § 2, 3-23-09; Ord. No. 13-616, § 1, 6-10-13 ) 
Sec. 2-84. - Issuance of permits, approvals or contracts to persons indebted to the city. 
    The city shall not review or act on a request for the approvals of plans, plats, permits, contracts or similar matters if the applicant is in default of real or personal property taxes due to the city or if the applicant is otherwise financially indebted to the city. Pending appeals filed in good faith in a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction shall not prohibit the city from acting as requested. 
( Ord. No. 13-615, § 1, 6-10-13 ) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Unlawful to frequent or operate establishment where intoxicating liquor is illegally sold, § 50-25. 
State Law reference- Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "alcoholic liquor," "beer," "wine," "spirits" and all other terms which are used in this chapter and which are defined in the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Act No. 58 of the Public Acts of 1998, as amended shall have the meanings ascribed to them in such act. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1; Ord. No. 13-613, § 1, 4-22-13 ) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Consumption of liquor in public place; exception. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor in any public street, city park, or other such public place in the city. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not prohibit the sale, possession, or consumption of beer and wine sold by a city-approved nonprofit organization within City Central Park during the annual Walker City Festival on dates designated by the city commission and pursuant to and in compliance with a special license issued to the nonprofit organization by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission for the sale of beer and wine for on-premises consumption. The sale, possession, or consumption of beer and wine permitted under this subsection shall be limited to the licensed premises within City Central Park under the special license. 
(Code 1976, § 10-40.1; Ord. No. 04-508, § 1, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 05-527, § 1, 3-28-05) 
Sec. 6-3. - Public intoxication; endangering life, property or creating a disturbance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in a public place and either to endanger directly the safety of another person or property or to act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1976, § 10-40) 
State Law reference- Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 6-4. - License requirements for on-premises consumption. 
(a)  No person shall sell any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in any establishment in the city without first obtaining a license as required by all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  Applications for the approval of an on-premises license as required by law shall be made to the city clerk in writing, signed by the applicant (if an individual) or by a duly authorized agent thereof (if a partnership or corporation), verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain, at a minimum, the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or, in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; or, in the case of a corporation, the objects for which organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and the names and addresses of all stockholders. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The nature of the applicant's principal business. 
(4)  The length of time the applicant has been in business of that character or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under the license. 
(6)  A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in the application, and the disposition of the other application. 
(7)  A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or requirement contained in this ordinance or the laws and regulations of the State of Michigan. 
(8)  A statement that neither the applicant nor the establishment at which the license will be used will violate any local, state or federal laws and regulations in the conduct of its business. 
(9)  The application shall be accompanied by building and similar plans showing the entire structure and premises and the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, and where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control. The plan shall further identify in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter the establishment's dining table capacity, counter space for the dispensing and sale of spirits, and the square footage for associated dining table capacity, seating capacity, and kitchen and food storage facility areas. 
(10)  The applicant shall provide as a part of the application all information which is required by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission for an application to the state for the license and, in addition, any other information deemed necessary by the city commission to adequately review the application as provided by this chapter and authorized by law. 
(c)  The city clerk, after receiving an application under this section and any associated fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city commission, shall refer the application to the director of the department of public safety and the director of the community development department for each department's review and recommendation to the city commission. After receiving reports from such offices, the city clerk shall present the application to the city commission for its review and possible approval or disapproval. If approved, the city clerk shall furnish a resolution of approval to the applicant, which he or she shall forward to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
(d)  The city commission may not approve an application for an on-premises license, and may object to the renewal or request revocation of any existing license for, where the applicant or licensee has engaged in, or has permitted to occur on or involving the licensed premises, any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Previous revocation or nonrenewal of a license held by the licensee or applicant for cause. 
(2)  Violation of any of the restrictions on licenses set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  Maintenance or permitting the existence of a nuisance of any kind upon the premises. 
(4)  Fraudulent information provided upon an original application or application for renewal to any governmental entity. 
(5)  The consumption of spirits, if licensed to sell only beer or wine, or both beer and wine. 
(6)  Dancing or live entertainment open to the public, with or without an admission charge, without a valid permit. 
(7)  Disorderly conduct or action which disturbs the peace and good order of the neighborhood. 
(8)  Incidents of prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or larceny on the premises. 
(9)  Gambling activity on the premises. 
(10)  Any unlawful possession, sale, or use of controlled substances or alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(11)  Use of interior lighting which is insufficient to enable a person with average vision to clearly see all unobstructed areas within the premises. 
(12)  The violation of any provision of the city code, or any violation of Michigan or federal law which is designed to protect the public health, safety or welfare, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to any such Michigan or federal law has occurred. 
(13)  Nonpayment of any federal, State of Michigan, or local tax or special assessment. 
(14)  Failure by the licensee, or the licensee's agent or employee to fully cooperate with any federal, state, county or city official, including city firefighters and police officers acting in the line of duty. 
(15)  Where the application is submitted by a partnership in which not all of the members of the partnership qualify to receive a license as provided by this chapter and any other applicable laws and regulations. 
(16)  Where the application is submitted by a corporation, partnership in which not all of the officers, managers or directors thereof, would be eligible to receive a license for any reason. 
(17)  Where the applicant does not own the premises for which a license is sought or who does not have a lease for the premises (or who will not own the premises or have an option to lease the premises) for the full period for which the license is issued; or a person, corporation or partnership that, as determined by the city commission, does not have sufficient financial assets to carry on or maintain the business. 
(18)  A person whose license is in escrow if the city commission finds that the owner of the escrowed license is in violation of any local, state or federal law or regulation, or if the license is held in escrow for more than one year. 
(19)  Any law enforcement official or member of the city commission. 
(20)  Any premises where it is determined by the city commission that the premises do not, or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations, have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise or nuisance control. 
(21)  Any premises where the city commission determines that the proposed location is inappropriate, considering factors including, without limitation, the desirability of establishing a location in developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated, undeveloped areas; the impact on adjacent residents and property owners; traffic safety; accessibility to the site from abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity; distance from public or private schools for minors; proximity of an inconsistent zoning classification; and accessibility from primary roads or state highways. 
(22)  Any premises where any real or personal property taxes, special assessments, sewer charges or water charges, or any other obligations due and payable to the city are delinquent and remain unpaid. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in determining whether to approve an application for a license, the city commission may review and consider any factors it deems relevant and appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(f)  Following approval of an application for a license by the city commission, the applicant shall provide to the city clerk a complete copy of the final application filed with the state. If the applicant fails to file an application for a license with the state within 180 days of the date of issuance of approval by the city commission as provided by this section, the approval granted by the city commission for the license shall automatically lapse and be of no further force or effect. 
(g)  If the licensee (or any successors in interest) fails to maintain full compliance with the requirements of this chapter or other applicable laws, the city commission may recommend that the license not be renewed or request revocation of the license at its sole discretion. 
(h)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the city commission is under no obligation to approve any available license within the city at any time. No applicant shall have a right to the issuance of a license and the city commission reserves its rights to exercise discretion to determine which applications, if any, to approve as it deems to be in the best interests of the city. Further, no applicant has the right to have its application processed and the city commission reserves its right to take no action with respect to any application for approval filed with the city. The city commission may maintain a list of all applicants and review the list when, in its discretion, it determines that the issuance of a license is in the best interests of the city at large and for needs, benefit, and convenience of its citizens. 
(i)  This chapter shall not operate to limit any power or authority vested in the city commission under applicable laws, regulations and constitutions, and shall be vested authority and not in derogation of that authority. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2(a)-(d); Ord. No. 94-431, § 1, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 13-613, § 2, 4-22-13 ) 
Sec. 6-5. - Procedure and criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. Before filing an objection to the renewal of or a request for revocation of an on-premises license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the city commission shall serve the license holder with notice of a hearing on the matter to be held by the city commission. The notice shall be served by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to the hearing, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The nature of the action under consideration by the city commission (i.e., objection to renewal or request for revocation). 
(2)  The reasons for the proposed review. 
(3)  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
(4)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses, if any, and has the right to be represented. 
    Within a reasonable time following the hearing, the city commission shall provide the license holder and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission with a written statement of its findings and determination. 
(b)  Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The city commission may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of an on-premises license if it determines, based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, that any of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The licensee has violated any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Any of the criteria described in section 6-4(d) apply to the licensee or to the premises; or 
(3)  The licensee has not engaged in, or has discontinued or terminated, the sale of beer and wine or spirits under the license at the premises for 12 or more consecutive months. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2(e); Ord. No. 94-431, § 2, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 13-613, § 3, 4-22-13 ) 
Sec. 6-5A. - Nudity prohibited. 
(a)  A licensee shall not allow in or upon the licensed premises any person in a state of nudity. 
(b)  A licensee shall not hire, employ, or procure a person to appear in or upon the licensed premises in a state of nudity. 
(c)  No person shall appear in or upon premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor in a state of nudity. 
(d)  A licensee shall not allow in or upon the licensed premises the showing of films, television, slides, or other electronic reproductions which depict scenes wherein any person appears in a state of nudity. This prohibition does not apply to any public broadcast television transmission from a federally licensed station. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, "nudity" means a state of undress to so as to expose to the view of another person the following body parts without any covering or with less than a fully opaque covering: 
(1)  The whole or part of the pubic region; 
(2)  The whole or part of the anus; 
(3)  The whole or part of the buttocks; 
(4)  The whole or part of the genitals; or 
(5)  Any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola. A woman's breast feeding of a baby does not constitute nudity irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, "licensee" means a person or entity having a license to sell alcoholic liquor and the owners, officers, agents, and employees of such person or entity. 
(g)  A violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 (plus costs of prosecution) or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this section. A violation of this section shall also constitute a basis for the city commission to recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a liquor license or permit pursuant to section 6-5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-507, § 2, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 6-6. - City license for sale for on-premises consumption. 
    No person shall engage in the business of selling alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in any establishment in the city without first obtaining a business license and paying any applicable fee in accordance with chapter 22, article I. Licenses required by this section are not transferable. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3; Ord. No. 09-568, § 1, 3-9-09) 
Sec. 6-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-613, § 4, adopted April 22, 2013 , repealed § 6-7, which pertained to recommendation of city commission as to issuance of state license for specially designated merchants and distributors and derived from the Code of 1976, § 4-4. 
Sec. 6-8. - Restriction on hours and days of sale. 
(a)  December 24, December 25. No alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail between the hours of 11:59 p.m. on December 24 and 12:00 noon on December 25. 
(b)  State regulations. Wherever closing hours established by the state liquor control commission or by the statutes of the state are more restrictive than provided in this section, the closing hours shall be as provided by such regulations or state statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 4-8; Ord. No. 09-568, § 2, 3-9-09; Ord. No. 11-594, § 1, 2-28-11) 
Sec. 6-9. - Requirements for establishments selling spirits for on-premises consumption; waiver. 
(a)  In addition to other requirements of this chapter, all establishments with a class C or class B license issued by the state, in which spirits are sold for consumption on the premises, shall have a dining table capacity for 125 or more persons and, if additional counter space is provided for the dispensing and sale of spirits, such counter space shall accommodate not more than 20 percent of the seating capacity of the entire dining room. 
(b)  No establishment shall be considered to have the dining table capacity and seating capacity required by subsection (a) unless the square footage of the dining area shall provide for not less than 15 square feet of space per patron and unless such establishment shall have combined kitchen and food storage facilities having a square footage equal to at least 65 percent of the square footage of the dining table area. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) may be waived by the city commission for an establishment seeking the issuance or transfer of a class C license only if the city commission determines in its discretion that the waiver is in the best interests of the city and the public, the city commission determines in its discretion that the standards in section 6-4 are satisfied, and the establishment satisfies all of the following criteria, as determined by the city commission: 
(1)  The establishment has a dining table capacity of not less than 100 persons based on 15 square feet of space per patron as provided in subsection (b); 
(2)  The establishment has combined kitchen and food storage facilities having a square footage equal to not less than 50 percent of the square footage of the dining table area; 
(3)  The gross receipts of the establishment from the sale of food and other goods and services excluding beer, wine, spirits, or other alcoholic liquor are reasonably expected to exceed 60 percent of the total monthly gross receipts of such establishment; and 
(4)  The establishment does not have a "drive thru" or "drive up" window for the sale of food, beverages, or other items to customers in vehicles. 
(5)  The establishment has operated as a bona fide restaurant within the city for at least one year prior to the application for a waiver without a class C or other license to sell alcoholic liquor. 
(6)  The seating available at a bar or similar counter space for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to no more than ten patrons. 
    Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the city commission's discretion under section 6-4 of this article or any discretion of the city commission in reviewing the waiver, it being the intent of this subsection to reserve the city commission's discretion to the fullest extent of the law. The city commission shall consider an application for a waiver for the issuance of a new license as provided in this section. Before approving any transfer of a class C license of an establishment with a waiver under this subsection, the city commission shall review the application for transfer by applying the standards and criteria for the waiver in this section except that subsection (6) shall not apply to a transfer to a new owner at the same location. 
(d)  A person who wishes to obtain a waiver pursuant to subsection (c) shall file an application, in duplicate, with the city clerk requesting the approval of the city commission for such waiver. Such application shall be accompanied by financial statements from similar establishments operated by the applicant for their last full fiscal year preceding the application or other pertinent financial information showing that the establishment will derive at least 60 percent of its total monthly gross receipts from the sale of food and other goods and services excluding beer, wine, spirits, and other alcoholic liquor. An establishment obtaining a waiver and a class C license under subsection (c) shall at all times thereafter derive at least 60 percent of its total monthly gross receipts from the sale of food and other goods and services excluding the sale of beer, wine, spirits, or other alcoholic liquor. The establishment shall also submit to the city clerk on April 1 of each year an annual report showing monthly gross receipts in the form required by the clerk and such additional information as the city clerk shall require to determine whether or not the establishment is complying with the monthly gross receipt requirement of this subsection. The establishment shall also maintain accurate records of receipts and disbursements at all times in such a manner that receipts from the sale of food and beverages other than beer, wine, spirits, or other alcoholic liquor can be readily distinguished from receipts from the sale of beer, wine, spirits, or other alcoholic liquor. The establishment shall make such records available for inspection upon request by the city manager and his or her designee at any time during normal business hours. The city commission may revoke the waiver and seek revocation or nonrenewal of the license, pursuant to section 6-4 and section 6-5, if the establishment fails to continue to comply with the criteria for the waiver in subsection (c), fails to file its annual report or other required information pursuant to this subjection, fails to comply with any other provision of this subsection, or fails to comply with any other provision of this chapter. In addition, the city may seek all other remedies available at law or equity. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate violation and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to section 1-11 of the City Code in addition to other legal or equitable remedies available to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-5; Ord. No. 96-489, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 06-544, § 1, 3-27-06; Ord. No. 12-606, § 1, 4-28-12) 
Sec. 6-10. - Ventilation requirements for sales premises. 
    Adequate ventilation shall be provided in every establishment licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, with the use of fans, windows, transoms, ducts or other suitable means where there shall be sufficient air change to remove any objectionable odors. All air conditioning or hot air heating systems shall be provided with a makeup air supply duct which will supply a minimum of ten percent fresh air from outside to any area in which customers are served. If exhaust fans are used, there shall be adequate fresh air supplied to maintain a positive pressure in the licensed establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 4-6; Ord. No. 13-613, § 5, 4-22-13 ) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 6-11. - Lighting requirements for sales premises. 
    Adequate natural or artificial lighting shall be provided in all parts of an establishment where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for proper lighting of his premises and at no time shall he permit or allow the standard of light to be reduced below three footcandles at table height in the darkest part of each room in the establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 4-7) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 6-12. - Employment of minors in sales establishments; proof of age document. 
(a)  No person shall be employed to serve or handle any alcoholic liquor in any establishment where such liquor is sold for consumption on the premises, unless such person shall have attained the age of 18 years. 
(b)  All licensees must have in their possession a birth certificate or other official document showing the place and date of birth of each employee, which shall be available for inspection by police officers at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13) 
Sec. 6-13. - Employees on sales premises prohibited from drinking or fraternizing with customers or soliciting the purchase of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person having the management, ownership or control of any premises wherein any alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall permit any person employed in such business to drink alcoholic liquor with or visit or fraternize with any of the patrons of such place of business. 
(b)  No person having the management, ownership or control of any premises referred to in subsection (a) shall permit any female person to be present or remain upon such premises who shall solicit any customer or patron of such place to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage for himself, herself or any other person therein. This subsection shall not apply to any female waitress, manager or licensee regularly employed on the premises who accepts or serves an order to any customer or patron in the regular course of her employment. 
(Code 1976, § 4-16) 
Sec. 6-14. - Dancing on sales premises. 
    No dancing by patrons shall be permitted on any premises for which a license has been issued for the sale of any alcoholic liquor, unless expressly authorized by ordinance. This section shall not be construed to prohibit professional entertainment or floorshows. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14) 
Sec. 6-15. - Disorderly conduct on sales premises. 
    No person having the management, ownership or control of any premises in the city where any alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall permit any boisterous conduct, or, in any manner, the disturbance of the peace and good order of the neighborhood; nor shall any person frequenting such premises make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion, by which the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15) 
Sec. 6-16. - Sale or delivery to intoxicated or disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, furnish or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any drunken or intoxicated person, to any disorderly person or to any habitual drunkard. 
(Code 1976, § 4-9) 
Sec. 6-17. - Sale or delivery to persons under 21 years of age. 
(a)  Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the person has attained 21 years of age. Subject to subsection (d), a person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition to other penalties may be ordered to perform community service. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  If a violation occurs in an establishment that is licensed by the liquor control commission ("commission") for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a person who is a licensee or the clerk, agent or employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) unless the licensee or the clerk, agent or employee of the licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person less than 21 years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action. 
(d)  A licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) unless enforcement action under section 6-19 is taken against the person less than 21 years of age who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed or attempted to consume, or possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor and, if applicable, enforcement action is taken under this section against the person 21 years of age or older who sold or furnished the alcoholic liquor to the person who is less than 21 years of age. However, this subsection does not apply under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The person against whom enforcement action is taken under section 6-19 or the person 21 years of age or older who sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the person less than 21 years of age is not alive or is not present in this state at the time the licensee is charged. 
(2)  The violation of subsection (a) is the result of an undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of age purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the city attorney or local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(3)  The violation of subsection (a) is the result of an undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of age purchased or received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the city police department, state police, the commission or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action. However, any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person less than 21 years of age shall have been under the direction of the city police department, state police, the commission or the local police agency and shall have been part of the undercover operation. 
(e)  If a person less than 21 years of age participates in an undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of age is to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor under the supervision of a law enforcement agency, his or her parents or legal guardian shall consent to the participation if that person is less than 18 years of age. 
(f)  In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person less than 21 years of age, a motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action brought under this section. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
    Corrective action means action taken by a licensee or a clerk, agent or employee of a licensee designed to prevent a person less than 21 years of age from further possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. Corrective action includes, but is not limited to, contacting a law enforcement agency and ejecting the person less than 21 years of age and any other person suspected of aiding and abetting the person less than 21 years of age. 
    Diligent inquiry means a diligent good faith effort to determine the age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an official Michigan operator's or chauffeur's license, an official Michigan personal identification card, or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the identity and age of the person. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10; Ord. No. 95-471, § 2, 10-24-95) 
Sec. 6-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 97-494, § 11, adopted March 24, 1997, repealed § 6-18. Formerly, such section pertained to possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor by persons under 21 in a motor vehicle and derived from § 4-11 of the 1976 Code; Ord. No. 95-471, § 3, 10-24-95. 
Sec. 6-19. - Purchase, consumption, possession of alcoholic liquors or attempts of the same by persons under 21 years of age; fines and sanctions; exemptions. 
(a)  A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. A minor who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.00. The court may order a person under this subsection to participate in substance abuse services, perform community service, and/or to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (d). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection or a federal or state law or local ordinance substantially corresponding to this subsection. 
(2)  If the violation occurs after one prior judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $200.00, or both. The court may order a person under this subsection to participate in substance abuse services, perform community service, and/or to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (d). 
(3)  If the violation occurs after two or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60 days if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. The court may order a person under this subsection to participate in substance abuse services, perform community service, and/or to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (d). 
(b)  An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or, notwithstanding subsection (a), a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(c)  If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(2) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(2), the court may take any action authorized in Section 703(3) of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1703(3), as amended, including but not limited to deferring further proceedings, placing the individual on probation, discharging the individual, dismissing the proceedings, or entering an adjudication of guilt. A misdemeanor violation of subsection (a) successfully deferred, discharged, and dismissed under this subsection is considered a prior judgment for the purposes of subsection (a)(3). 
(d)  The court may order an individual found responsible for or convicted of violating subsection (a) to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated community mental health entity as defined in section 100a of the Mental Health Code, 1974 PA 258, MCL 330.1100a, to determine whether the individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. The court may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsection (a) to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. The parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation. 
(e)  The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of a second or subsequent violation of subsection (a) or of violating subsection (b) as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, being MCL 257.319, as amended. 
(f)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request that the minor submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(g)  This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(h)  The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of subsection (a): 
(1)  A minor who (or who accompanies a person who) has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against the person. 
(2)  A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care concern. 
(3)  A minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution and who consumes alcoholic liquor in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member, if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(4)  A minor who consumes sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple. 
(5)  A minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
a.  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
b.  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the police department, the state police, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or a local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(i)  Nothing in this section shall limit the civil or criminal liability of a vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. 
(j)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
a.  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
b.  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(2)  "Emergency medical services personnel" means that term as defined in section 20904 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20904. 
(3)  "Health facility or agency" means that term as defined in section 20106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106. 
(4)  "Minor" means a person less than 21 years of age. 
(5)  "Prior judgment" means that term as defined in section 703(18)(d) of Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1703(18)(d), as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12; Ord. No. 95-471, § 4, 10-24-95; Ord. No. 97-494, § 2, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 14-622, § 1, 7-28-14 ; Ord. No. 18-640 , § 2, 2-12-18) 
Sec. 6-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-640 , § 3, adopted Feb. 12, 2018, repealed § 6-20, which pertained to enforcement of section 6-18 and 6-19 and derived from Ord. No. 95-471, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 1995. 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; certain businesses regulated by zoning ordinance, § 94-376 et seq. 
State Law reference- Offenses relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq.; offenses concerning coin-operated devices, MCL 752.811. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-621, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2013, repealed Art. II, §§ 10-26-10-50, which pertained to amusement parlors and derived from Code 1976, §§ 10-101-10-110; Ord. No. 94-451, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 1994; and Ord. No. 12-607, §§ 1-3, adopted June 18, 2012. 

Secs. 10-26-10-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-66. - Finding and declaration of fact. 
    The city commission finds and declares that the interests of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city require the regulation and licensing of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in this city. 
(Code 1976, § 14-1) 
Sec. 10-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attendant means any person who is admitted to an outdoor assembly, whether admission is granted in consideration of the payment of money, the rendering of services or freely. 
    Licensee means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this article. 
    Outdoor assembly or assembly means any event attended by more than 500 attendants, except any event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed structure and except any event of four hours' duration or less. 
    Sponsor means any person organizing, promoting, conducting or causing to be conducted an outdoor assembly. 
(Code 1976, § 14-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-68. - Compliance with article. 
    No assembly shall be conducted within the city unless the provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Code 1976, § 14-33) 
Sec. 10-69. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, his employees or agents, to: 
(1)  Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance. 
(2)  Conduct or permit, within an assembly, any obscene display, exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement. 
(3)  Permit any person on the premises of an assembly to cause or create disturbances by obscene or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess intoxicating liquor while on the premises of an assembly. 
(5)  Permit any person at an assembly to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances, as defined in state law. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of subsection (a) is a separate offense and is hereby declared a nuisance per se, immediately enjoinable in a court of competent jurisdiction, and is punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of subsection (a) is a sufficient basis for the revocation of the license issued under this article and for immediate enjoining of further conduct of the assembly. 
(Code 1976, § 14-3) 
Sec. 10-70. - Security personnel. 
    Whenever the duration and size of an assembly shall be such as to reasonably require them, provision shall be made for such security personnel as are necessary to provide for adequate protection of the maximum number of attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and for the protection of property in and around the site of the assembly. 
(Code 1976, § 14-34) 
Sec. 10-71. - Medical facilities. 
    If an assembly is intended to last more than 14 hours and the maximum number of attendants exceeds 2,000, the licensee shall provide adequate emergency medical facilities on the premises of the assembly. 
(Code 1976, § 14-40) 
Sec. 10-72. - Fencing. 
    The premises used for an assembly shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient height and strength to preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which will have sufficient gates properly located to provide ready and safe ingress and egress. 
(Code 1976, § 14-35) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 10-73. - Access and traffic control. 
    The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic. Access to the premises shall be from a highway or road which is a part of the major road system, or which is a highway maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided under the premises and kept open for access by ambulances, fire equipment and other emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1976, § 14-36) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
Sec. 10-74. - Parking space for motor vehicles. 
    The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles, and in no case shall he provide less than one automobile parking space for every four attendants. 
(Code 1976, § 14-37) 
Sec. 10-75. - Camping and trailer parking facilities. 
    If attendants are permitted to remain on the premises of an assembly between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., camping and trailer parking facilities shall be provided on the premises in accordance with the public health code and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provisions of state law or local ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 14-38) 
Sec. 10-76. - Food service. 
    If food service is made available on the premises of an assembly, it shall be only through a food service establishment, temporary food service establishment or vending machine location, licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of applicable state law or local ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 14-39) 
Sec. 10-77. - Water facilities. 
    Provision shall be made at an assembly for potable water sufficient in quantity to ensure that adequate amounts are available under conditions of peak demand. 
(Code 1976, § 14-46) 
Cross reference- Water, service, § 86-26 et seq. 
Sec. 10-78. - Shower facilities. 
    Where an assembly is to continue for more than 36 hours, the licensee shall provide shower facilities sufficient to provide one showerhead for each 100 male attendants and one showerhead for each 100 female attendants. 
(Code 1976, § 14-44) 
Sec. 10-79. - Toilet facilities and lavatories. 
    Toilet fixtures for each sex and lavatories shall be not less in number than at the ratio specified in the following table, computed separately on the basis of the maximum number of attendants of each sex having access at any time to an assembly: 
Facilities Male Female Toilets 1:300 1:200 Urinals 1:100 Lavatories 1:200 1:200  
(Code 1976, § 14-45) 
Sec. 10-80. - Solid waste disposal. 
    The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on and removal from the premises. Storage shall be in covered containers provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the city with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a refuse collector, which agreement shall ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(Code 1976, § 14-42) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 62. 
Sec. 10-81. - Liquid waste disposal. 
    The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto. If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with state law and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and the licensee shall provide the city with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid wastes from the premises so as not to cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(Code 1976, § 14-41) 
Sec. 10-82. - Vermin and insect control. 
    The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food or equipment or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. 
(Code 1976, § 14-43) 
Secs. 10-83-10-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-96. - Required. 
    No person shall sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor assembly in the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 14-14) 
Sec. 10-97. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in writing and submitted to the city clerk at least 45 days prior to the proposed effective date of the license. Such application shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. Where the applicant is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors or members. 
(2)  A statement of the character and type of proposed assembly. 
(3)  The address and legal description of the premises on which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit evidence of his right to use the premises for the proposed assembly. 
(4)  The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. 
(5)  A statement of the maximum number of people who will be in attendance at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the method used to determine the number of attendants. 
(6)  Proof that the maximum requirements of sections 10-70 through 10-82 have been complied with or a statement that proof of compliance with such requirements will be filed with the clerk not later than ten days prior to the proposed effective date of the license. 
(b)  Applicant's insurance. Before the issuance of a license under this article, the applicant shall obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less than $100,000.00 and property damage insurance with a limit of not less than $25,000.00 with a company authorized to do business in the state, which insurance shall insure the licensee against liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. Proof of such insurance shall be furnished the city clerk prior to issuance of the license. 
(c)  Fee. Each application for a license required by this article shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00. 
(Code 1976, §§ 14-15-14-17) 
Sec. 10-98. - Issuance or denial generally. 
    Within 25 days after the filing of the application for a license under this article, the city manager shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny the license. Within five days of such action, where conditions are imposed as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license or where a license is denied, notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail, and in the case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice. 
(Code 1976, § 14-18) 
Sec. 10-99. - Contents. 
    A license issued under this article shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 14-19) 
Sec. 10-100. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of a license issued under this article shall be 12:00 noon of the day preceding the day attendants are first allowed upon the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 14-20) 
Sec. 10-101. - Posting; not transferable. 
    A license issued under this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Code 1976, § 14-21) 
Sec. 10-102. - Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. 
    A license required by this article may be denied, suspended or revoked if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this article or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant thereto or with any other applicable provisions of state or local law; or 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting documents. 
(Code 1976, § 14-22) 
Secs. 10-103-10-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION, RADIO AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRODUCTIONS 

Sec. 10-201. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this article the phrase "motion picture, television, radio and photographic production" or a variant of the same means all activity attendant to staging or shooting (video taping or filming or digital recording) motion pictures, television shows, programs or commercials, and to the taking of single or multiple photographs where the photographer sets up stationary equipment on public or private property or the public right-of-way in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-202. - Required. 
    No person shall use any public right-of-way, or any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of producing, broadcasting, taking or making any motion picture, television, radio or photographic production unless he/she/it shall have first made application for and obtained, as prescribed in this article, a permit. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers or camera persons in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of news events. 
(2)  Productions conducted by the city's public, education and government access organizations, or by or at the direction of the city. 
(3)  Productions conducted within legally established motion picture/television/radio/photography studios. 
(4)  Video or multimedia broadcast or transmission of a live performance within a live entertainment venue on large-screen monitors (e.g., jumbotrons). 
(5)  Video or multimedia broadcast on the internet. 
(6)  Noncommercial private events (e.g., private parties or weddings). 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-203. - Application-Filing. 
    Any person desiring a permit to conduct motion picture, television, radio and photographic production activities under the provisions of this article shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the community development department, or by furnishing the required information in person or by first class mail, facsimile, or the internet to the community development department. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreements and insurance certificates required by this article before it will be processed. If the application satisfies the criteria of this article, the permit shall be issued within five working days of submittal or within seven working days of submittal if related activities require road closures, or include stunts or special effects. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-204. - Same-Contents. 
    The applicant for a permit required by this article shall supply the following information on the application: 
(1)  The name, mailing address and phone number of the person making the application, along with the name and contact information for the location manager; 
(2)  The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed activity is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective permittee, he/she/it shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating the owner's consent to the use of the site; 
(3)  A statement of the type of proposed motion picture, television, radio and photographic production involved; 
(4)  The dates and hours during which the proposed motion picture, television, radio and photographic production is to be conducted; 
(5)  An estimate of the maximum number of attendees expected at the motion picture, television, radio and photographic production for each day it is conducted; 
(6)  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, as follows: 
a.  A processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission to reimburse the city for the staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval. The processing fee shall be waived for charitable and nonprofit organizations which qualify under section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. The processing fee is nonrefundable. 
b.  A daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission to compensate the city for the use of public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming activity. 
c.  A monitoring fee to reimburse the city for staff time required to monitor the filming activity, and for reasonable costs for other city services or equipment approved for use during such activities, in an amount as determined at the time of the city's review of permit application. 
d.  The processing fee and the property use fee shall be waived for the following: 
1.  Productions conducted by a cable television company operating under a franchise granted by the city which are not conducted on public property, do not interfere with public right-of-ways, and which involve fewer than two motor vehicles; 
2.  Productions for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly; and 
3.  Productions directed or produced by a person currently enrolled in legitimate courses related to the production. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-205. - Same-Accompanying plans. 
    Each application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective permittee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1)  The size or area of the property to be used, including a sketch of the filming site showing placement of work trucks, location of production vehicles; 
(2)  Sketch of the "base camp" if any, showing any off-street locations for crew parking, restroom facilities, catering, and nonessential production vehicles; 
(3)  Traffic control plan of the exact filming location, listing roads or lanes to be closed, if any; 
(4)  Description of the duration of the proposed activity and daily hours of operation; 
(5)  Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal; 
(6)  Letter of notification to businesses/neighborhoods impacted by filming if required by the community development department; and 
(7)  Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-206. - Same-Investigation. 
    Upon receipt by the community development department, copies of the application for a permit required by this article shall be forwarded to the police chief, fire chief, and to such other appropriate public officials as the community development department deems necessary. Such officers, departments and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within four days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-207. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
    In processing an application for a permit required by this article the city shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1)  Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at its expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the location of the filming activity and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the filming activity. No permit shall be issued unless the police chief or his/her designee is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the permittee for the duration of the assembly. 
(2)  Notification. The permittee or his/her/its designee shall notify affected residents, occupants and businesses, in advance of filming and as instructed by the community development department, of the duration and location of filming activities, including information about planned special effects, road and lane closures, "no parking" requests, sidewalk usage and the time that any barricades will be placed on the street. 
(3)  Access. Production vehicles may not block parking lot access drives, fire hydrants, or be parked in fire lanes, and must allow a minimum of 20 feet of clearance between vehicles parked on either side of the road for emergency response vehicles to pass. 
(4)  Base camps. Base camps may not be located on a public street. Only the necessary production vehicles (i.e. grip and light truck) may be parked on a public street, if necessary, at the filming location. Crew parking, restroom facilities, catering, and other nonessential production vehicles shall be at a predetermined location. 
(5)  Outdoor filming. For production activities taking place outside of buildings, and which are expected to attract more than 500 attendees, the provisions of this article relating to outdoor assemblies shall also apply; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict the more restrictive provisions shall control. 
(6)  Insurance. As a condition of issuing such a filming permit, the permittee shall furnish insurance in an amount to be determined by the community development department but in no event in an amount less than $500,000.00 to protect the city against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to the city property arising out of the permittee's activities. An additional minimum of $5,000,000.00 of such general liability insurance coverage shall be required in the event motor vehicles, aircraft, helicopters, explosives or pyrotechnics are used in the activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general special endorsement form or the certificate of insurance (public liability) form provided by the community development department. The applicant shall also submit verification that adequate worker's compensation insurance coverage is maintained. 
(7)  Performance guarantee. Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall deposit in a form acceptable to the city a performance guarantee in an amount of $500.00 or such higher amount determined by the community development department to be reasonably required under the circumstances. The performance guarantee shall be conditioned upon the permittee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this article and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers, and employees and the city commission against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the filming activity and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the filming site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other waste resultant from the filming activity. 
(8)  Fire protection. The permittee shall be responsible to take adequate steps as determined by the fire chief to ensure fire protection. 
(9)  Hold harmless agreement. The permittee shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of any permit. 
(10)  Other units' approval. The permittee shall provide evidence that he/she/it has obtained any other approvals required by law from governmental entities with applicable jurisdiction (e.g., Kent County Road Commission). 
(11)  Other conditions. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the community development department may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of participants or of citizens of the city, including a limitation on the duration of the permit and the location of activities. As partial consideration for the use of any public rights-of-way or issuance of a permit, the city may condition its approval on the permittee's agreement to credit the "City of Walker, Michigan" in any final production released to the public. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-208. - Findings. 
    In processing an application for a permit required by this article, the community development department shall issue a permit as provided for in this article when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, it determines that: 
(1)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property or unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Adequate advance notice of any street closure shall be given in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. 
(3)  The activity will not involve conduct in violation of state, local, or federal laws, rules, or regulations. 
(4)  At the determination of the community development department, as well as the city police and fire departments, that conducting such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all property safety precautions will be taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designees. 
    The decision of the community development department to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing before the city commission at the next available meeting. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a permit and where a permit is denied, notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail within five days of such action. In the case of a permit denial, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the notice. 
    Permits issued pursuant to this article shall constitute a permit or license as well for purposes of chapter 54, article I. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-209. - Grounds for denial. 
    A filming permit, required by this article, may be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this article, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant to this article, or with any other applicable provision of state, local, or federal laws, rules, or regulations; 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-210. - Contents, posting, transferability. 
    A permit required by this article shall specify the name and address of the permittee, the kind and location of the filming activity, the maximum number of attendees permissible, the duration of the permit and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this article. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the filming activity, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-211. - Revocation. 
(a)  The community development department may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article whenever the permittee or his/her/its employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this article, including the conditions imposed upon issuance of the permit, or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other law. 
(b)  A permit shall automatically be revoked if riotous, disorderly, obscene, or otherwise unlawful conduct occurs at a filming location or if an assemblage exceeds 125 percent of the estimated attendance, as indicated on the application for a permit. In such instances the premises may be closed by the police department and the assembly disbursed. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-212. - Cost of additional services. 
    If deemed necessary by the community development department, additional police, code enforcement, fire, and other city services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant. Any additional city services will be provided/coordinated through the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-213. - Cleanup and restoration. 
    The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of the area, and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris within two hours of the completion of the activity or within such other time established in the permit to the city's satisfaction. The applicant shall be responsible for restoring any area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the city's satisfaction, the community development department shall have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and the applicant shall reimburse the city for such work within ten days of completing filming. In the event the applicant fails to so reimburse the city, the city may secure its reimbursement from the performance guarantee which shall be posted with the city to ensure faithful performance of such restoration. The amount of the performance guarantee shall in no way limit the applicant's liability or responsibility for the costs of repairs or restoration in the event these costs exceed the bond amount. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 10-214. - Administrative regulations. 
    The community development department director is hereby authorized to promulgate and enforce administrative regulations in the implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-581, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290, MSA 12.541. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Permitting animals or fowl to be at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal or fowl to run or to be at large in the public streets, land, alleys, vacant lots or other open or public places, or upon any private premises other than the premises of the owner of such animal or fowl, without the consent of the owner or occupant of such private premises. It shall be lawful for any such animal or fowl to be outside the premises of the owner thereof if in the immediate control of a competent person and on a suitable leash or controlled by another suitable method of physical restraint. 
(Code 1976, § 10-46; Ord. No. 95-476, § 1, 12-12-95) 
Secs. 14-2-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RACING PIGEONS 
DIVISION 1. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-26. - Purpose. 
    This article permits racing pigeons to be kept, bred, maintained and flown within the city, subject to compliance with the minimum requirements and conditions specified by this article. The requirements and conditions of this article are intended to prevent adverse impacts within the city related to the keeping, breeding, maintaining and flying of racing pigeons, such as dust, dirt, noise, odor, vermin, the attraction of other birds or animals, the potential spread of infection, disease or contamination and any other health or safety hazards or nuisance conditions. 
(Ord. No. 95-476, § 1, 12-12-95) 
Sec. 14-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Loft means the structure for the keeping or housing of pigeons as permitted by this article. 
    Mature pigeon means a pigeon of age six months or older. 
    Pigeon means a bird of the family Columbidae. 
    Racing pigeon (also commonly referred to as Racing Homer, Homing Pigeon or Carrier Pigeon) means a pigeon which through selective past breeding, has developed the distinctive physical and mental characteristics as to enable it to return to is home after having been released a considerable distance therefrom. When raised and used in the sport and hobby of racing carrier pigeons, racing pigeons shall not be considered fowl for purposes of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-476, § 1, 12-12-95) 
Sec. 14-28. - Requirements and conditions. 
    No person shall construct or maintain a loft, or keep, breed, maintain or fly racing pigeons or cause the same to be done, except in full compliance with the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  In general. The loft and pigeons shall be kept and maintained in a manner so as to minimize to the greatest extent possible any adverse impacts to the property on which they are kept, surrounding properties, and any other areas of the city, including, without limitation, dust, dirt, noise, odor, vermin, the attraction of other birds or animals, the potential spread of infection, disease or contamination or other health or safety hazards or nuisance conditions. 
(b)  Specific, minimum requirements and conditions. 
(1)  The loft shall: 
a.  Be constructed and maintained in compliance with all applicable building code regulations; 
b.  Be of sufficient size and design, and constructed of such material, so that it can be maintained in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition; 
c.  Be kept, at all times, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, in good repair, and in compliance with all applicable health and safety laws and regulations; 
d.  Provide at least one square foot of floor space for each mature pigeon kept therein; and 
e.  Comply with all applicable requirements provided by chapter 94 ("Zoning") of this Code, including, without limitation, size, height, bulk, yard, placement and use regulations. 
(2)  Pigeons shall be fed only within the confines of the loft. All feed for the pigeons shall be stored in sealed containers that will prevent intrusion by insects, rodents and other vermin. 
(3)  All pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited periods as necessary for exercise, training and competition. Pigeons shall not be released from the loft to fly for exercise, training or competition, except in compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  Each pigeon must be registered with a national pigeon racing organization. 
b.  Each pigeon released must have the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail, or be banded upon the leg with the name or initials of the owner or an identification or registration number stamped on the band. 
c.  No pigeon shall be released for flying until four hours after it has been fed. 
d.  The owner must be in possession of a valid, currently effective permit issued by he health department pursuant to Act No. 57 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974, MCL 433.351 et seq., as amended, and must be in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(4)  No more than 50 racing pigeons may be kept on any parcel which is zoned for residential purposes pursuant to chapter 94 of this Code, except that a maximum of 100 racing pigeons may be kept on a parcel if located within the "AA" agricultural zone district. 
(5)  The minimum parcel size for keeping racing pigeons on any parcel zoned for residential purposes or located with the "AA" agricultural zone district shall be one-half acre. 
(6)  The keeping of pigeons shall comply with all other local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 95-476, § 1, 12-12-95) 
Secs. 14-29-14-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 14-36. - Violation; notice of violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain a loft, or to keep, breed, maintain or fly racing pigeons, or cause the same to be done, except in full compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Upon determining that there has been a violation under this article, the building official shall serve a notice of violation on the owner of the pigeons directing the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, shall specify the nature of the violation, and shall be mailed to the permittee at the address listed in the permit application. The violation shall be abated within the time specified in the notice of violation. The failure of the building official to provide a notice of violation shall in no way excuse a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-476, § 1, 12-12-95) 
Sec. 14-37. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article (including, without limitation, the failure to abate a violation for which a notice of violation has been issued) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(c)  The building official is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) and municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations of this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-476, § 1, 12-12-95) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ventilation requirements for established licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, § 6-10; lighting requirements for establishments selling alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, § 6-11; unlawful consumption, sale and possession of intoxicating liquor at outdoor assemblies prohibited, § 10-69(4); fencing at outdoor assemblies, § 10-72; construction, installation or alteration of air contaminant source, § 34-81 et seq.; construction noise restricted, § 34-131(3); noise from loading and unloading of building materials restricted, § 34-131(4); noise from power tools or equipment restricted, § 34-131(6); soil redistribution, § 34-181 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation prevention, § 34-206 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; planning, ch. 58; buildings and structures on commerical dumps, § 62-84; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94; fences, walls and hedges, § 94-337; accessory buildings and swimming pools, § 94-338. 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Dangerous structures. 
(a)  No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or a menace to the health, morals or safety of the public. 
(b)  Any structure found in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such a nuisance may be abated and the cost of abating such nuisance may be charged against the premises and the owner thereof as a special assessment in accordance with the provisions of section 13.8 of the Charter. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 34-26 et seq. 
Secs. 18-2-18-25. - Reserved. 
Article II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-26. - Adoption, administration, and enforcement of State Construction Code. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
    Act means the State Construction Code Act, as amended (Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended, being MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
    Construction Code means the State Construction Code promulgated from time to time by the director of the department of consumer and industry services pursuant to section 4 of the Act consisting of the State Building Code, the State Residential Code, the State/Uniform Energy Code, the State Electrical Code, the State Mechanical Code, and the State Plumbing Code. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 8a and 8b of the Act, the city hereby adopts by reference the Construction Code. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the Construction Code and the Act within the city. 
(c)  The building official, and the building inspector, mechanical inspector, electrical inspector, and plumbing inspector, shall be the "enforcing agency" of the Construction Code within the city pursuant to the Act, shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the Construction Code and the Act, and shall be responsible for reviewing permit applications and issuing permits pursuant to the Construction Code. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of the Construction Code or the Act is responsible or a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction (as authorized by Section 21 of Act No. 359 of the Public Acts of 1947, as amended, and the City Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance). Repeat offenses shall be subject to the increased fines as provided by this section. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) violation of the same requirement or provision of the Construction Code or the Act (i) committed by a person within any 90-day period and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under the Construction Code or the Act shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not less than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, shall be not less than $500.00 each, plus costs. 
Each day on which any violation of the Construction Code or the Act occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense subject to separate sanctions. The city's building official, building inspector, mechanical inspector, electrical inspector and plumbing inspector are hereby designated as the authorized officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of the Construction Code or Act. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 18-27. - Construction Code board of appeals. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 14 of the Act, the city hereby establishes a construction code board of appeals consisting of five members appointed by the city commission. A member of the board of appeals shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of members of the board of appeals. The term of members of the board of appeals shall be three years. 
(b)  If the building official refuses to grant an application for a building permit, or if the enforcing agency makes any other decision pursuant or related to the Act, or the Construction Code, an interested person, or the person's authorized agent, may appeal in writing to the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the Construction Code or the rules governing construction have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the Construction Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. 
(c)  When an appeal is made, notice of the hearing before the board of appeals shall be given in the same manner as notice pursuant to section 94-61(4) of the City Code. The board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render and file its decision with a statement of reasons for the decision with the enforcing agency from whom the appeal was taken not more than 30 days after submission of the appeal. Failure by the board of appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision within the time limit is a denial of the appeal for purposes of authorizing the institution of an appeal to the state construction code commission. A copy of the decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed, before filing, to the party taking the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 18-28. - Appointment and general powers and duties of building officials. 
    The city manager shall appoint for an indefinite term a building official, subject to the approval of the city commission, who shall be and hereby is designated as the chief administrative official to administer and enforce the Construction Code and the Act. The building official shall be removable at any time at the pleasure of the city manager, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 18-29. - Records to be kept by building official. 
    The building official shall keep a reasonable and comprehensive record of all permits issued by him and of all orders and other acts made and taken by him, either by keeping a copy thereof or an accurate statement thereof, which record shall at all times be available to the officials of the city. He shall keep an account of all fees and other monies collected and received by him as such official and the names of the persons from whom such monies were obtained, and the date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 18-30. - Building permit fees. 
(a)  The fee for any permits issued pursuant to the Construction Code shall be established by resolution of the city commission pursuant to section 22 of the Act. No permit shall be issued unless such fee has been paid to the city treasurer. 
(b)  The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
(1)  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
(2)  Not more than 90 percent of the permit fee paid (excluding the first $60.00 which shall be nonrefundable) when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the Construction Code. 
(3)  No refund of the plan review fee shall be made when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled. 
The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original applicant no later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 02-492, § 1, 10-28-02; Ord. No. 06-546, § 1, 5-22-06) 
Sec. 18-31. - Permit fee where work commenced without permit. 
    If any job, installation, construction or development covered by the fees established in section 18-30 is commenced before a permit is obtained, 
an amount equivalent to 200 percent of the appropriate fee shall be paid before a permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 18-31.1. - State license; administrative fee. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, or other maintenance for which a building permit is required within the city, unless such a person shall have filed his state license, for residential work, or business name, for commercial or industrial work, with the city clerk. Such filing with the city clerk shall be on payment of an administrative fee, as established by resolution by the city commission, and shall extend from the date of filing until expiration of the city's current fiscal year on the following June 30. Homeowners of residential buildings, and building owners of commercial-industrial buildings, who are undertaking the building permit for their own use and occupancy shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the business of installing, altering, or repairing, within the city, any heating, air conditioning, solar or ventilating devices or equipment for which a permit is required, unless such person shall have filed his sate license with the city clerk. Such filing with the city clerk shall be on payment of an administrative fee, as established by resolution by the city commission, and shall extend from the date of filing until the expiration of the state license. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the business of installing, altering, or repairing, within the city, any electric wiring, devices, or equipment for the installation, alteration, or repair of which a permit is required unless such person shall have filed his state license with the city clerk. Such filing with the city clerk shall be on payment of an administrative fee, as established by resolution by the city commission, and shall extend from the date of filing until the expiration of the city's current fiscal year on the following June 30. No person shall be issued a permit for the installation, alteration, or repair of any electric wiring, devices, or equipment unless his license is filed as required herein. 
(d)  No person shall engage in the business of installation, alteration, addition or maintenance of any plumbing system for which a permit is required within the city, unless such master plumber shall have filed their state license with the city clerk. Such filing with the city clerk shall be on payment of a filing fee of $1.00 as required by P.A. 266 of 1929 and an administrative fee, as established by resolution by the city commission, and shall extend from the date of filing until April 30 of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 02-492, § 2, 10-28-02; Ord. No. 06-546, § 2, 5-22-06) 
Sec. 18-32. - Building permit application to be accompanied by city or county driveway permit; requirements for commercial and industrial driveways. 
(a)  All applications for building permits for dwellings, buildings or structures to be constructed on any street within the city shall be accompanied by a driveway permit obtained from the department of public works. Commercial and industrial drives shall be paved to the paved portion of the street, and paved curb and gutter shall be provided, and both drive and curb and gutter shall conform to the specifications and standards adopted from time to time by resolution by the city and shall be approved by the city engineer. All residential drives on any surfaced street within the city shall be paved from the city right-of-way line on the property to the paved portion of the street, and paved curb and gutter shall be provided where the surfaced street has curb and gutter; both drive and curb and gutter shall conform to the specifications and standards adopted from time to time by resolution by the city and shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  All applications for building permits for dwellings, buildings, or structures to be constructed upon state trunklines shall be accompanied by a driveway permit obtained from the county road commission. Commercial and industrial drives shall be paved to the paved portion of the street and paved curbs and gutters shall be proved as designed by the county road commission. Bond shall be posted covering such paving according to the requirements of the county road commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 18-33. - Establishment of home elevation and grading. 
    Before erecting any single-family or two-family residence, the permittee shall determine the elevation of the centerline of the roadway at the midpoint of the proposed structure. Where curb and gutter are present, the top of the curb shall be used in lieu of the street centerline. This elevation will be used to set the elevation of the home, with the top of the foundation wall or slab grade being established no greater than three and one-half feet above the centerline or the top of curb elevation. Where the building is proposed to be set back greater than 35 feet from the right-of-way, additional height can be allowed at the discretion of the building official or his designee commensurate with best management practices. 
    The grading plan, which shall accompany any application for a building permit, must depict the existing and proposed grades for the entire home site. Proposed side yard slopes must not exceed a grade of one on three. In addition, the permittee shall, to the maximum extent reasonably possible, direct drainage from the side yard to the front or rear of the property, without shedding it longitudinally onto neighboring properties. This includes, but is not limited to, surface water, roof drainage, and foundation drainage. Once the drainage has reached the front or rear of a property, it shall be directed to designated drainage easement, a natural drainage course, or the public right-of-way. Final grading shall be completed in accordance with the approved grading plan before a certificate of occupancy may be issued. 
    The building official or his designee shall approve a house grade based on these criteria after careful review of the street grade, neighboring existing house grades in the neighborhood, drainage conditions in the neighborhood, and any other factors relevant to the establishment of comparable drainage for all properties in the neighborhood. The permittee shall conform thereto in erecting any dwelling, building or structure. 
    Before erecting a single-family or two-family residence, a minimum building opening must be established. In the absence of an approved predetermined minimum building opening sealed by a professional engineer, the property owner assumes full responsibility for the establishment of a proper minimum building opening considering the existing site conditions. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 02-487, § 1, 8-26-02 ; Ord. No. 12-609, § 1, 8-18-12 ; Ord. No. 13-612, § 1, 2-11-13 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-609, § 1, adopted August 18, 2012, changed the title of § 18-33 from "Establishment of home elevation in relation to street grade" to "Establishment of home elevation and grading". 
Sec. 18-34. - Violations generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish, erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, convert, equip, use, occupy, maintain or move into or within the city any building or structure contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article, the Act, or the Construction Code, or to refuse or fail to obtain such permit, unless written consent shall have been given by the building official to the modification of such plans and drawings. 
(Ord. No. 01-478, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Secs. 18-35-18-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 18-90. - Adoption of property maintenance code. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference as the property maintenance code of the City of Walker, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 18-91. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 1, 9-22-08; Ord. No. 16-628, § 1, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 18-91. - Local standards. 
    The following local standards are adopted with respect to the city's enforcement of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code: 
(a)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Walker" in place of "[Name of jurisdiction]" 
(b)  Section 103.5. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the city in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be established by the city commission from time to time. 
(c)  Section 106.3. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Municipal civil infraction. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with a provision of this code, or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order served under this code, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties and remedies in sections 106.4. The building official is hereby designated as the code official charged with administering and enforcing this code, and is authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violations notices. Any action taken or initiated by the city shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate, which costs and lien may be collected or enforced through a single lot special assessment under section 66-26 of the city code, as amended, or in any other manner authorized by law. 
(d)  Section 106.4. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Violation penalties. The penalty for a violation of this code shall be a civil fine of not less than $50.00 plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation, and repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines, all as set forth in section 1-11 of the City Code, as amended. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The city may in a municipal civil infraction action initiated under this code request a court order to restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent occupancy of a building, structure or premises that is not in compliance with the provisions of this code, to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of a building, structure or premises, or to restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance, repair or alteration of a structure that is in violation of this code. The city may also seek injunctive or any other relief authorized under Section 106.5 of this code, section 1-11 of the City Code, or chapter 87 of Public Act 236 of 1961, being the Michigan Revised Judicature Act of 1961, as amended. 
(e)  Section 107.3. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; or 
(2)  Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address and posted in a conspicuous place on or about the structure affected by the notice. 
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served in accordance with chapter 48 of the City Code, as amended. 
(f)  Section 111.2. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Appeal board. The board of appeals shall consist of the members of the City of Walker construction code board of appeals. All appeals shall be governed by the procedures for appeals to the construction code board of appeals as provided by chapter 18 of the Walker Code of Ordinances, except as otherwise modified by this Code, as adopted. 
(g)  Sections 111.3 through 111.5. Deleted in their entirety. 
(h)  Section 112.4. Insert: "50" in place of "[Amount]" in the first instance and "500" in place of "[Amount"] in the second instance. 
(i)  Section 202. Amended as set forth in section 18-92 of this Code. 
(j)  Section 301.1. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of person for maintenance of all buildings, structures, premises and accessory buildings, whether occupied or unoccupied. 
(k)  Section 302.4. Deleted in its entirety. See City Code section 90-3, as amended. 
(l)  Section 302.10. Added to read in its entirety: 
Steps and stairs. Exterior steps and stairs shall comply with the requirements in sections 302.3, 305.4 and 305.5 and any walkway, passageway or stairway with a vertical drop of more than eight inches shall be provided with a step or steps not greater than eight inches in height. 
(m)  Section 302.11. Added to read in its entirety: 
Trees and shrubs. Trees and shrubs shall be trimmed or removed as necessary to prevent potential damage or further damage to a structure or accessory building. 
(n)  Section 304.14. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Insect screens. From May 1 through October 31, a tight-fitting insect screen maintained in good repair shall be fit over every operable window. Doors used for natural ventilation shall be fitted with screen doors in good repair and shall have a self-closing device in good working order. 
(o)  Section 305.3. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Interior surfaces, fixtures, and appliances. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, all interior fixtures, and all appliances required by this Code or otherwise present in the structure, shall be maintained in good repair, and kept in clean, operable and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(p)  Section 305.7. Added to read in its entirety: 
Exits and egress. No marked exit shall be partially or totally blocked. An exit or egress from any space shall open easily and shall not have a dead bolt, or locking device that requires a key or knowledge of a combination lock or code to unlock from the inside. Hasp hardware is prohibited on any exit door. 
(q)  Section 404.5. Amended to require the following minimum occupancy areas: 
Living room: 150 square feet (one or two occupants); 200 square feet (three to five occupants); 300 square feet (six or more occupants) 
Dining room: 50 square feet (one or two occupants); 80 square feet (three to five occupants); 150 square feet (six or more occupants) 
(r)  Section 502.3. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Hotels. Every hotel unit shall contain a separate, enclosed room containing a toilet, a lavatory sink and a bathtub or shower, and all such facilities shall be maintained in good repair. 
(s)  Section 507.2. Added to read in its entirety: 
Minimum requirements. The following minimum requirements shall apply to all subsurface or above-ground discharge systems coming from inside a structure: 
(1)  When not connected to the municipal storm sewer system, the location of all point source drainage outlets, including, but not limited to, roof drain outlets, foundation drain outlets, and surface drainage systems, shall be no closer than ten feet to an adjacent property line. 
(2)  The owner or occupant shall comply with the drainage requirements set forth in section 18-33 of the Walker Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
(t)  Section 602.1. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Facilities required. Every occupiable structure shall have approved heating facilities installed as required by this section, and all facilities shall be maintained in good repair. 
(u)  Section 602.2. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Residential occupancies. Every dwelling shall be provided with approved heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating. 
(v)  Section 602.3. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guest room on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October to May to maintain the room temperatures specified in section 602.2. 
(w)  Section 602.4. Insert: "October 1" in place of "[date]" in the first instance and "May 1" in place of "[date]" in the second instance. 
(x)  Section 701.1. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Fire code. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment. The provisions in this chapter are intended to supplement the International Fire Code, as may be adopted by the city from time to time, and the International Fire Code shall govern in the event of a conflict. 
(y)  Section 701.2. Amended to read in its entirety: 
Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment as required by the International Fire Code and shall maintain such facilities and equipment in good repair. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any structure that does not comply with this chapter or the International Fire Code as adopted. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 3, 9-22-08; Ord. No. 16-628, § 1, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 18-92. - Definitions. 
    Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions: 
    Accessory building means any structure other than a principal building which is located upon the same property as the principal building, including, without limitation, garages, sheds, swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, walls, fences, walkways, steps, driveways, antennas and tanks. 
    Animal means any living species other than a human, insect or plant not otherwise described. 
    Basic structural element means the parts of a building which provide the principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety, including, without limitation, plates, studs, joints, joists, rafters, stringers, stairs, subflooring, flooring, sheeting, (sic) lathing, roofing, siding, window frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry and all other essential components. 
    City means the municipal corporation that is the City of Walker and includes all authorized agents of the City of Walker when acting within the scope of their authority. 
    Domestic animal means animals which are customarily domesticated by man to live and breed in a tame condition. Other than household pets, domestic animals include such animals as horses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats and poultry. 
    Emergency means a condition of imminent danger calling for immediate action in order to avoid death, injury or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of real personal property. 
    Family means a person living alone in a single dwelling unit or two or more persons whose domestic relationship is of a continuing, nontransient character and who reside together as a single house-keeping unit in one dwelling unit. This definition shall not include a collective number of individuals occupying a motel, fraternity, sorority, society, club, boarding or lodging house, a state licensed residential facility providing resident services for more than six persons, and any other collective number of individuals whose domestic relationships is of a transient or seasonal nature. 
    Good repair means to be properly installed, stable and maintained sufficiently free of defects or deterioration so as to be functional for its present use and to be safe and sanitary. 
    Good workmanship means completing a task of construction, repair or replacement to commonly accepted industry standards, using materials, finishes and design equal to or equivalent to those being repaired or replaced. The result shall be free of defects, operate as intended and create no unsafe conditions. 
    Household pet means an animal such as a dog, cat, fish or bird, customarily kept within the residential living quarters for the pleasure of the occupants of a dwelling and not for sale or commercial purposes. 
    Interior fixture means those interior items and hardware which provide customary finished amenities and protection within a dwelling. Interior fixtures include, without limitation, doors, door knobs, latches, locks, hinges, handles, hooks, light fixtures, electric outlet or switch cover plates, vent or opening grates, railings and mirrors. 
    Kitchen means a room used or intended to be used for the preparation of food or for both the preparation and consumption of food, but not for any other living or sleeping purposes. 
    One-family dwelling means a building containing one dwelling unit. 
    Safe means a condition which is not likely to do harm to humans or to real or personal property. 
    Sanitary means free of grease, excrement, dirt, food residue, garbage, rust or similar matter which can harbor bacteria unsafe to humans or animals, or which produces strong odors, or which provides food for, or is an available source of food for, animals or insects. 
    Trash means waste materials and items which are broken or discarded and which are of little or no value, including, without limitation, plaster, paper, wrappings, plant cuttings, household furnishings, building materials, appliances, equipment, machinery, packing and clothing. 
    Two-family dwelling means a building containing two dwelling units. 
    Unsafe means a condition which is reasonably likely to do harm to humans or property if not corrected or stopped. 
    Vermin means rodents, birds and insects which are destructive of real or personal property or injurious to health. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 3, 9-22-08; Ord. No. 16-628, § 1, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 18-93. - Section 101.5 Utility service required. 
    Section 101.0 is amended by adding subsection 101.5 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    101.5 Utilities: Every occupied structure shall be supplied with hot and cold water, sewer service, and on-site sewage disposal system, heating capacity and electricity, unless otherwise provided for by this code. Services not contracted by the occupant shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 4, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-94. - Section 101.6 Utility services maintenance. 
    Section 101.0 is amended by adding subsection 101.6 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    101.6 Utilities and services maintained: No person, except as provided herein, shall cause any of the following utilities services, facilities or equipment to be shut off, disconnected, removed or otherwise terminated or interrupted when the utility, service, facility or equipment is being furnished to or used by another person: 
1.  Water 
2.  Sewer 
3.  Fuel 
4.  Heat 
5.  Hot Water 
6.  Electric 
7.  Ventilation or air conditioning 
    This section shall not apply to a necessary temporary interruption of service required for maintenance, repair or replacement or to any temporary interruption needed to act upon an emergency or hazardous condition. Any termination or interruption of water, sewer, gas or electric utility service for nonpayment of bills shall be deemed to be caused by the person who contracted with the utility for the service. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 5, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-94.1. - Section 102.3 Application of other codes. 
    Section 102.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    102.3 Application of other codes: Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the building codes, electrical codes, plumbing codes, mechanical codes, national fire codes and international fuel gas code which are being enforced on the date that this code is used. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 6, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-94.2. - Section 103.5 Fees. 
    Section 103.5 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as established by a resolution of the City Commission from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 7, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-95. - Section 105.5 Dwellings. 
    Section 105.0 is amended by adding subsection 105.5 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    105.5 Dwellings: No person or persons shall occupy or allow the occupancy of any structure or vehicle which is not designed or constructed for approved residence purposes. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 8, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-96. - Section 106.2 Civil infractions. 
    Section 106.2 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    106.2 Municipal civil infraction: A notice of violation order shall be served in accordance with Section 107. Except as otherwise provided herein, a person who violates any provision of this code is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this code shall be subject to increased fines as provided by Section 1-11(c)(2) of the City of Walker Code of Ordinances. The building official and building inspector are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violations notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the City of Walker Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) for violations under this code as provided by Chapter 3 of the Walker City Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 9, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-97. - Section 106.3 Action or proceeding. 
    Section 106.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    106.3 Prosecution: In the event a person fails to comply with any provision of this code, or a notice of violation or order secured in compliance with Section 107, the authorized city official shall institute an appropriate action or proceeding as provided in Section 106.2. The authorized city official, as necessary, may ask the jurisdiction's legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person: 
1.  To restrain, correct or remove the violation or to refrain from any further execution of work; 
2.  To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance, repair or alteration of such structure; 
3.  To require the removal of work in violation; 
4.  To prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with he provisions of this code; or 
5.  To take other appropriate action. 
Any action taken or initiated by the authorized city official(s) shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 10, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-98. - Section 106.6 Vacancy maintained. 
    Section 106.6 is amended by adding subsection 106.6 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    106.6 Vacancy maintained: Any structure that is vacant at the time a violation notice is issued for the shut-off of a required utility service or a hazardous, unsafe or unsanitary condition shall not be occupied until the cited violation has been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 11, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-560, § 12, adopted Sept. 22, 2008, repealed § 18-99, which pertained to Section 107.3 Method of service and derived from Ord. No. 05-534, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2005. 
Sec. 18-100. - Section 107.4 Sanctions. 
    Section 107.4 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    107.4 Sanctions: Sanctions for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Sections 106.2 and 106.3. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 13, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-560, § 14, adopted Sept. 22, 2008, repealed § 18-101, which pertained to Section 108.2 Closing of vacant structures and derived from Ord. No. 05-534, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2005. 
Sec. 18-102. - Section 108.6 Notice to vacate. 
    Section 108.0 is amended by adding a new subsection 108.6 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    108.6 Notice to vacate: Upon declaring a structure to be unfit for human occupancy and entry, the city shall issue a notice to vacate. The notice shall inform the occupants and owner of the basis for the notice, and order the occupants to vacate the affected structure. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 15, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-103. - Section 108.7 Failure to vacate. 
    Section 108.0 is amended by adding subsection 108.7 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    108.7 Failure to vacate: Any occupant that fails to comply with a notice to vacate issued under Section 108.6 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500, 90 days in jail, or both, as well as the costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 16, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-104. - Section 109.1.1 Emergency orders. 
    Section 109.0 is amended by adding subsection 109.1.1 immediately following Section 109.1 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    109.1.1 Emergency Orders: If the code official determines that any emergency condition exists or is likely to exist, the code official shall immediately attempt to verbally inform the owner and all occupants of the structure of nature of the condition. The code official shall also immediately attempt to verbally order the responsible person or owner to correct the condition. Such an order shall be effective immediately. Written notice called for by this code shall be prepared and mailed to the owner and occupants as soon as practicable after the verbal notice is given (or attempted to be given). Failure to comply with any emergency order is a violation of this code. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 17, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-577, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 2010, deleted § 18-105, which pertained to section 110.1 general and derived from Ord. No. 08-560, § 18, adopted Sept. 22, 2008. 
Sec. 18-106. - Section 110.3 Failure to comply. 
    Section 110.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    110.3 Failure to Comply: If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real property upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real property. Failure to comply shall also constitute a municipal civil infraction as provided by Section 106.2. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 19, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-107. - Section 111.2 Membership of the board. 
    Sections 111.2 through 111.2.5 are deleted and new Section 111.2 is added to read in its entirety as follows: 
    111.2 Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the members of the zoning board of appeals of the city. All appeals shall be governed by the procedures for appeals to the zoning board of appeals as provided by Chapter 94 of the Walker Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 20, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-108. - Section 111.3 Notice of meeting. 
    Section 111.3 is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 21, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-109. - Section 111.4 Open meeting. 
    Section 111.4 (including Section 111.4.1 Procedure) is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 22, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110. - Section 111.5 Postponed meeting. 
    Section 111.5 is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 23, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.1. - Section 111.6 Board decision. 
    Section 111.6 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    111.6 Board decision: The board of appeals may modify or reverse a decision of the code official by a concurring vote of at least four members. 
    111.6.1 Resolution: Every action of the board shall be by a concurring vote of at least four members, and true copies of the minutes which register that vote shall be furnished to the applicant and to the code official after approval of the minutes by the board. 
    111.6.2 Administration: The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 24, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.2. - Section 202.0 General definitions. 
    Section 202.0 is amended by the addition of definitions for the terms "accessory building," "animal," "basic structural elements," "city," "deterioration or deteriorated," "domestic animal," "family," "household pet," "interior fixtures," "kitchen," "one-family dwelling," "safe," "sanitary," "structure," "trash," "two-family dwelling," "unsafe," "vermin," to be placed in alphabetical order in relation to existing definitions in Section 202 and to read in their entirety as follows: 
    Accessory building: Any structure other than a principal building which is located upon the same property as the principal building, including, without limitation, garages, sheds, swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, walls, fences, walkways, steps, driveways, antennas and tanks. 
    Animal: Any living species other than a human, insect or plant not otherwise described. 
    Basic structural element: The parts of a building which provide the principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety, including, without limitation, plates, studs, joints, joists, rafters, stringers, stairs, subflooring, flooring, sheeting, (sic) lathing, roofing, siding, window frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry and all other essential components. 
    City: The municipal corporation that is the City of Walker and includes all authorized agents of the City of Walker when acting within the scope of their authority. 
    Deterioration or deteriorated: The fact or process of decay or degeneration which has progressed to the point where it has resulted in or will soon result in making an object or mechanism unsafe, unsanitary, inoperable, unusable or unsuitable for its intended use, including, without limitation, the advanced stage of rot, rust, mold, insect ingestion, infestation or destruction. 
    Domestic animal: Animals which are customarily domesticated by man to live and breed in a tame condition. Other than household pets, domestic animals include such animals as horses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats and poultry. 
    Emergency: A condition of imminent danger calling for immediate action in order to avoid death, injury or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of real personal property. 
    Family: A person living alone in a single dwelling unit or two or more persons whose domestic relationship is of a continuing, nontransient character and who reside together as a single house-keeping unit in one dwelling unit. This definition shall not include a collective number of individuals occupying a motel, fraternity, sorority, society, club, boarding or lodging house, a state licensed residential facility providing resident services for more than six persons, and any other collective number of individuals whose domestic relationships is of a transient or seasonal nature. 
    Good repair: To be properly installed, stable and maintained sufficiently free of defects or deterioration so as to be functional for its present use and to be safe and sanitary. 
    Good workmanship: Completing a task of construction, repair or replacement to commonly accepted industry standards, using materials, finishes and design equal to or equivalent to those being repaired or replaced. The result shall be free of defects, operate as intended and create no unsafe conditions. 
    Household pet: An animal such as a dog, cat, fish or bird, customarily kept within the residential living quarters for the pleasure of the occupants of a dwelling and not for sale or commercial purposes. 
    Interior fixture: Those interior items and hardware which provide customary finished amenities and protection within a dwelling. Interior fixtures include, without limitation, doors, door knobs, latches, locks, hinges, handles, hooks, light fixtures, electric outlet or switch cover plates, vent or opening grates, railings and mirrors. 
    Kitchen: A room used or intended to be used for the preparation of food or for both the preparation and consumption of food, but not for any other living or sleeping purposes. 
    One-family dwelling: A building containing one dwelling unit. 
    Rubbish: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other similar materials. 
    Safe: A condition which is not likely to do harm to humans or to real or personal property. 
    Sanitary: Free of grease, excrement, dirt, food residue, garbage, rust or similar matter which can harbor bacteria unsafe to humans or animals, or which produces strong odors, or which provides food for, or is an available source of food for, animals or insects. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or placed upon a property which is supported by the ground or which is supported by any other structure except a currently licensed vehicle. 
    Trash: Waste materials and items which are broken or discarded and which are of little or no value, including, without limitation, plaster, paper, wrappings, plant cuttings, household furnishings, building materials, appliances, equipment, machinery, packing and clothing. 
    Two-family dwelling: A building containing two dwelling units. 
    Unsafe: A condition which is reasonably likely to do harm to humans or property if not corrected or stopped. 
    Vermin: Rodents, birds and insects which are destructive of real or personal property or injurious to health. 
    Section 202.0 is further amended by amending the existing definitions of "basement," and "dwelling unit" with the following definitions to read in their entirety as follows: 
    Basement: That portion of an enclosed space under a building which is partially or wholly below grade and which has poured concrete, block, stone or similar durable bearing walls and a poured concrete floor. 
    Dwelling unit: A room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking, bathing room and sleeping facilities. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 25, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.3. - Section 301.4 Compliance. 
    Section 301.0 is amended by the addition of a new subsection 301.4 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    301.4 Compliance: All buildings, structures, premises and accessory buildings, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall meet or exceed the standards of this code. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 26, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.4. - Section 302.1 Sanitation. 
    Section 302.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    302.1 Sanitation: All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. Outdoor storage of material of value shall not be permitted on a front or side porch or deck. Material kept outside shall be stored in a safe and sanitary manner and shall not have openings which may provide harborage for vermin. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 27, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.5. - Section 302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. 
    Section 302.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    302.3 Sidewalks and Driveways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of good repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. Stairs shall comply with the requirements of Sections 305.4 and 305.5. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 28, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.6. - Section 302.4 Weeds. 
    Section 302.4 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    302.4 Weeds: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers or gardens. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 29, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.7. - Section 302.8 Motor vehicles. 
    Section 302.8 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    302.8 Motor vehicles: Except as provided for in other regulations, no currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. 
    Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes, and all work is performed by the vehicle owner. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 30, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.8. - Section 302.10 Steps. 
    Section 302.0 is amended by adding a subsection 302.10 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    302.10 Steps: Any walkway, passageway or stairway with a vertical drop of more than eight inches shall be provided with a step or steps not greater than eight inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 31, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.9. - Section 302.11 Trees and shrubs. 
    Section 302.0 is amended by adding a subsection 302.11 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    302.11 Trees and Shrubs: Trees and shrubs which have or could damage a structure or accessory building shall be trimmed or removed so as to prevent potential or further damage. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 32, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-560, § 33, adopted Sept. 22, 2008, repealed § 18-110.10, which pertained to Section 302.12 Vegetation and derived from Ord. No. 05-534, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2005. 
Sec. 18-110.11. - Section 304.5.1 Basement floors. 
    Section 304.0 is amended by adding section 304.5.1 immediately following section 304.5 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    304.5.1 Basement floors: Basement floors shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 34, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.12. - Section 304.13.2 Operable windows. 
    Section 304.13.2 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    304.13.2 Operable windows: Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be maintained in good repair and easily operable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 35, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.13. - Section 304.14 Insect screens. 
    Section 304.14 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    304.14 Insect screens: During the months of May through October, a tight fitting insect screen maintained in good repair shall be fit over every operable window. Doors used for natural ventilation shall be fitted with screen doors in good repair and shall have a self-closing device in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 36, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.14. - Section 304.15 Doors. 
    Section 304.15 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    304.15 Doors: All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in good repair. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guest rooms shall tightly secure the door. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 37, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.15. - Section 304.19 Exterior attachments. 
    Section 304 is amended by adding subsection 304.19 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    304.19 Exterior attachments: Exterior attachments to basic structural elements including, without limitation, gutters, downspouts, screening, vents, antennas, awnings, and utility connections shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 38, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.16. - Section 305.3 Interior surfaces. 
    Section 305.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    305.3 Interior surfaces: All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good repair, and in a clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 39, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.17. - Section 305.3.1 Interior flooring. 
    Section 305.3 is amended by adding a subsection 305.3.1 immediately following section 305.3 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    305.3.1 Interior flooring: All floors in any room where a water faucet is present shall be protected by an unbroken waterproof or water-resistant covering such as water-resistant paint, tile, linoleum or carpet. Such coating or covering shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 40, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.18. - Section 305.5 Handrails and guards. 
    Section 305.5 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    305.5 Handrails and guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. Guardrails shall be fitted with sufficient vertical balusters or masonry so that the narrow dimension of any opening below the guardrail is not greater than four inches. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 41, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.19. - Section 305.7 Interior fixtures. 
    Section 305.0 is amended by adding subsection 305.7 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    Section 305.7 Interior fixtures: Interior fixtures shall be maintained in full operating condition and in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 42, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.20. - Section 305.8 Interior equipment. 
    Section 305.0 is amended by adding a subsection 305.8 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    Section 305.8 Interior equipment: Appliances or facilities required by this code or otherwise present in the structure shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 43, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.21. - Section 305.9 Exits unblocked. 
    Section 305.0 is amended by adding a subsection 305.9 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    305.9 Exits unblocked: No marked exit shall be partially or totally blocked. An exit or egress from any space shall open easily and shall not have a dead bolt, or locking device which requires a key or knowledge of a combination lock or code to unlock from the inside. Hasp hardware is prohibited on any exit door. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 44, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.22. - Section 307.1 Trash and garbage removal. 
    Section 307.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    307.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage: All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All trash and garbage shall be removed from a structure, yard or premises at least once per week. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 45, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.23. - Section 308.3 Single occupancy. 
    Section 308.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    308.3 Single occupancy: Unless otherwise provided for by this code, each occupant of a one-family dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining the standards set forth in this code for the structure and property. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 46, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.24. - Section 403.1 Habitable spaces. 
    Section 403.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    403.1 Habitable spaces: At least one required window or skylight in a habitable room must open safely, readily and directly to the outdoors, unless mechanical ventilation which meets the requirements of this section is provided. Any opening window or skylight shall be maintained in good repair. A permanently and properly installed mechanical cooling or fresh air ventilation system controlled by the occupants and maintained in good repair may be used in place of natural ventilation provided provisions for natural light are maintained, and further provided that required means of egress provisions are met as provided by the Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 47, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.25. - Section 403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust. 
    Section 403.5 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust: Clothes dryer venting systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be vented to the outdoors. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 48, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.26. - Section 404.5 Minimum occupancy area requirements. 
    Section 404.5 is amended to provide that the minimum occupancy area in square feet for living rooms shall be 150 square feet for 1-2 occupants; 200 square feet for 3-5 occupants; and 300 square feet for six or more occupants. 
    Section 404.5 is further amended to provide that the minimum occupancy area in square feet for dining rooms shall be 50 square feet for 1-2 occupants; 80 square feet for 3-5 occupants; and 150 square feet for six or more occupants. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 49, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.27. - Section 502.3 Hotels. 
    Section 502.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    502.3 Hotels: Every hotel unit shall contain a toilet, a lavatory sink and a bathtub or shower. All such facilities shall be maintained in good repair and shall be located within a completely enclosed room or rooms used for no other purpose, except toilet and bathing. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 50, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.28. - Section 506.1 General. 
    Section 506.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    Section 506.1 General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system which is in good repair and free of leaks. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 51, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.29. - Section 507.0 Storm drainage. 
    Section 507.0 is amended by adding subsection 507.2 to read in its entirety as follows: 
    507.2 Minimum requirements: The following minimum requirements shall apply to all subsurface or above-ground discharge systems coming from inside a structure: 
When not connected to the municipal storm sewer system, the location of all point source drainage outlets, such as, but not limited to, roof drain outlets, foundation drain outlets, and surface drainage systems, shall be no closer than 10' to an adjacent property line. Requirements to direct the drainage to the front or rear of the property, and towards a designated drainage easement, a drainage course, or the public right-of-way, as outlined in section 18-33 of the City's Code of Ordinances, shall also be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 52, 9-22-08 ; Ord. No. 12-609, § 2, 8-18-12 ) 
Sec. 18-110.30. - Section 602.1 Facilities required. 
    Section 602.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    602.1 Facilities Required: Every occupiable structure shall have a permanent central heating system installed pursuant to a valid permit, and maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 53, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.31. - Section 602.2 Residential occupancies. 
    Section 602.2 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    602.2 Residential occupancies: Every dwelling shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the outside design temperature required for the locality by the mechanical code listed in Chapter 8. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 54, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.32. - Section 602.3 Heat supply. 
    Section 602.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    602.3 Heat supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guest room on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October to May to maintain the room temperatures specified in Section 602.2. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 55, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.32.1 - Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. 
    Section 602.4 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October to May to maintain a temperature of not less than 65ºF (18ºC) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 56, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.33. - Section 605.1 Installation. 
    Section 605.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    605.1 Installation: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 57, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.34. - Section 605.2 Receptacles. 
    Section 605.2 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    605.2 Receptacles: Every habitable space shall contain at least two separate and remote duplex outlets (except that a fixed ceiling or wall light fixture activated by a switch may be substituted for one of the required duplex outlets). Kitchens shall contain at least two duplex wall outlets and at least on fixed overhead light fixture, switch activated. Bathrooms shall contain at least one duplex outlet and one fixed light fixture, switch activated. Laundry area duplex outlets shall be properly grounded. Any new duplex outlet required by this code and located within six feet of a sink or in a bathroom shall be a ground fault interceptor device. All electrical outlets and fixtures shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 58, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 18-110.35. - Chapter 7 Fire safety requirements. 
    Chapter 7 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    Chapter 7 Fire safety requirements 
    701.0 General 
    701.1 Fire Code: The provisions of the International Fire Code currently adopted by the city shall govern the minimum conditions and standard for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided which shall be maintained in good repair. 
    701.2 Responsibility: The owner of premises shall be responsible to provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment as required by Section 701.1. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any structure that does not comply with the International Fire code currently adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-560, § 59, 9-22-08) 
Secs. 18-110.36-18-110.49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-478, § 4, adopted July 3, 2001, repealed Art. III, §§ 18-111-18-140, in its entirety. The former Art. III pertained to the plumbing code and derived from Code 1976, §§ 5-100, 5-102, 5-105-5-107; Ord. No. 92-404, §§ 6,7, adopted March 24, 1992; Ord. No. 94-446, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 1994; Ord. No. 95-468, § 14, adopted July, 25, 1995; Ord. No. 98-517, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 11, 1998; and Ord. No. 99-529, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 1999. 

Secs. 18-111-18-140. - Reserved 
ARTICLE IV. - ADDRESS NUMBERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 

Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Address number means the number assigned by the city to any property in the city in accordance with the regulations of the United States Postal Service. Address numbers shall be displayed as required by this article. Address numbers may be displayed by either Arabic numerals or script. 
    Street means the public roadway or private street approved in connection with a site condominium project under article XI, chapter 94, of this Code, as applicable, which abuts the borders or boundaries of a lot. 
(Code 1976, § 5-200; Ord. No. 96-480, § 1, 2-13-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-142. - Placement. 
    The placement of address numbers shall be accomplished in the following manner: 
(1)  Every residential principal building located not more than 90 feet from the closest street shall have its address number displayed on the front of the building in a manner readily visible to occupants of emergency vehicles on the street and in compliance with section 18-143. 
(2)  Every residential principal building located more than 90 feet from the closest street shall have its address number displayed on a post or on a regulation United States Postal Service mailbox located on the same side of the street as, and directly in front of, the building. The post or mailbox shall be located not more than ten feet from the street right-of-way. The address number on the post or mailbox shall be readily visible to occupants of emergency vehicles on the street. 
(3)  Every nonresidential principal building shall have its address number displayed in a manner readily visible to the occupants of emergency vehicles on the street in front of such building. 
(4)  If an address number cannot be placed in compliance with subsections (1) through (3) of this section, then address numbers shall be located in such manner as the building official shall determine is consistent with the intent of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-201; Ord. No. 96-480, § 2, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 18-143. - Size of numbers on buildings. 
    The size of any address number on a residential building shall be at least three inches in height if the building is not more than 50 feet from the street. The size of any address number on a residential building shall be at least four inches in height if the building is more than 50 feet from the street. 
(Code 1976, § 5-202; Ord. No. 96-480, § 3, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 18-144. - Visibility. 
    The color of an address number shall be in contrast to the immediate background on which it is mounted. The address number shall be displayed in such manner as will permit such address number to be readily visible during all hours of normal daylight. 
(Code 1976, § 5-203) 
Sec. 18-145. - Existing and new development. 
    All existing developed property and all property to be developed shall comply with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-204) 
Sec. 18-146. - Building permits and use and occupancy certificate. 
    All applicants for building permits for new construction or alterations of existing structures shall be given a copy of the requirements for numbering the buildings and shall agree to comply with the requirements of this article before any building permit shall be issued. In addition, the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy shall be conditioned upon compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-205) 
Sec. 18-147. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article (article IV) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $10.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code, except that the increased fines for repeat offenses under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $20.00, plus costs. 
(2)  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $50.00, plus costs. 
(Ord. No. 94-444, § 1, 9-27-94) 
Secs. 18-148-18-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning ordinance provisions relative to moving of buildings, § 94-345. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-166. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buildings means and includes any house, building or other structure. 
(Code 1976, § 5-67) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-167. - General duties of mover. 
    It shall be the duty of any person moving a building pursuant to a permit issued under this article to follow the route approved under section 18-189 and to observe all rules and regulations in force for the protection of paved streets and regulation of the business or occupation of building mover, and to move such building with all possible dispatch and in a manner least calculated to obstruct public travel on streets so occupied. 
(Code 1976, § 5-68) 
Sec. 18-168. - Procedure if moving interferes with wires or cables. 
    If it shall be found that, in moving any building, the building will come in contact with lines, wires or cables of the city or any person holding franchise rights within the city and having authority to string such wires or cables in connection therewith, it shall be the duty of the person moving the building to forthwith notify the proper municipal officer or the principal local officer or agent of such person holding such franchise rights, or both, as the case may be, that the moving of such building will interfere with such wires or cables. It shall also be the duty of the building mover to thereupon pay or arrange for the payment to such officer or agent all expenses for removing and replacing such equipment. If such expense so to be paid shall be paid to a municipal officer, the payment shall be deposited with the city treasurer and credited to the proper funds. 
(Code 1976, § 5-69) 
Sec. 18-169. - Building not to be left standing on street crossing; lights required if left standing in street overnight. 
    No person shall leave any building, while in progress of removal, standing over any street crossing at any time. If it shall be necessary for such building to stand overnight in any street or public place, the person having charge thereof shall place upon the building good and sufficient lights, shining a bright red light as a warning to persons passing over such street of the situation thereof, and such lights shall be kept burning during the night. 
(Code 1976, § 5-70) 
Sec. 18-170. - Work required to place building in final state when move completed. 
    When the moving of any building pursuant to this article is completed, it shall be the duty of the owner of the building to diligently complete all work, repairs, rejuvenation, structural changes or other activity necessary to place the building in its final state, fully conditioned for its new use or occupancy and in full accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the city. Such work shall be completed within a period of time not to exceed 90 days; provided that, upon application of the owner, the city manager may extend the time by one additional 30-day period. 
(Code 1976, § 5-71) 
Sec. 18-171. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article (article V, division 1 or division 2) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines provided as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-444, § 2, 9-27-94) 
Secs. 18-172-18-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Permit to move buildings required by zoning ordinance, § 94-32. 

Sec. 18-181. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move any building within the city without a permit so to do issued by the building official in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1976, § 5-82) 
Sec. 18-182. - Application. 
    Application for a permit under this division shall be in writing and filed with the building official. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  A photograph and description of the building to be moved. 
(3)  The present location and proposed new location, with a scale plan thereof. 
(4)  A scale drawing of any proposed changes of the building. 
(5)  The zoning regulation of the new location. 
(6)  The route over which it is proposed to move the building. 
(7)  The estimated time required to move the building. 
(8)  A statement that satisfactory arrangements have been made for the temporary removal of all wires, lines and cables, if any, in accordance with section 18-168. 
(Code 1976, § 5-83) 
Sec. 18-183. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-526, § 1, repealed § 18-183, which pertained to applicant to be licensed mover and derived from Code 1976, § 5-84. 
Sec. 18-184. - Applicant's bond. 
    An applicant for a permit under this division shall deposit with the city clerk a surety bond, with a surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety, in the amount of $2,000.00. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance by the applicant, his agents, servants and employees, of all the rules and regulations imposed by the city relating to the business or occupation of moving buildings and the payment of all sums or charges accruing to the city by reason of any work or services performed by the city or any of its departments on behalf of the applicant in connection with the moving of any building. 
(Code 1976, § 5-85) 
Sec. 18-185. - Applicant's insurance. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit under this division shall indemnify and reimburse the city for all loss, injury or damage to any tree, pavement, street, sewer, water main, sidewalk, awning, wire, fire alarm, telegraph, telephone or other pole or wires and cables or any other property of the city of any nature whatsoever, which loss, injury or damage arises out of or by reason of the carrying on of the activity of building mover by the applicant. For purposes of so indemnifying and reimbursing the city, the applicant shall furnish an insurance policy which shall provide for insurance against injuries or damages to the city or its property, such insurance to insure the applicant and the city against the liabilities which this section requires the applicant to indemnify the city against. 
(b)  The applicant for a permit under this division shall further indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all claims and liabilities of any nature whatsoever which claims or liabilities arise out of or by reason of the carrying on of the activity of the applicant as a building mover. The applicant shall furnish to the city clerk a duplicate policy of insurance, insuring the applicant and the city against any and all legal liability by reason of any damage to persons or property arising out of the applicant's activities as a building mover. Such insurance shall further insure the applicant and the city against any and all legal liability to the city by reason of the obligations imposed by this section with reference to damage to property of the city or claims or liabilities as set forth in this section. Such policy of insurance shall be in the minimum amounts of $100,000.00 for each person and $300,000.00 for each accident in the event of bodily injury, and $25,000.00 for property damage. Such policy of insurance shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney as to compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 5-86) 
Sec. 18-186. - Owner's bond. 
    Before a permit is issued under this division, the owner of the building to be moved shall file with the city clerk a surety bond, in the amount of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the owner's full compliance with the provisions of section 18-170. 
(Code 1976, § 5-87) 
Sec. 18-187. - Fee. 
(a)  Before a permit shall be issued by the building official under this division, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer, as a permit fee, the following sums for the estimated length of time it will take to move such building in or upon any public sidewalk, street, lane, alley or other public place in the city: 
(1)  For the first 24 hours ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  For the second 24 hours ..... 65.00 
(3)  For the third 24 hours ..... 75.00 
(4)  For the fourth 24 hours ..... 85.00 
(5)  For each additional 24 hours ..... 60.00 
(b)  If it shall take longer to move the building than estimated, the permit holder shall pay the additional charges required by this section, and if it shall take less than the time estimated, the building official, upon satisfactory proof, shall authorize the remittance of the excess amount paid. Any portion of a day shall be considered 24 hours in determining the amounts due under this section. 
(Code 1976, § 5-88) 
Sec. 18-188. - General prerequisites to issuance. 
(a)  The building official shall not issue a permit under this division unless he finds that the following conditions concerning the building are met: 
(1)  That it is structurally sound so as to be moved. 
(2)  That it conforms to the standards of the building code of the city. 
(3)  That it will meet all of the requirements of the zoning chapter of this Code and building code of the city when placed on its new foundation. 
(4)  That it conforms architecturally and structurally with the buildings within 500 feet of the location to which the building is to be moved. 
(b)  In determining whether or not architectural and structural requirements are met, the building official shall take into account the size, shape, architectural and structural design and exterior appearance of the building as compared to the buildings within 500 feet of the site to which the building will be moved. 
(Code 1976, § 5-89) 
Sec. 18-189. - Approval of proposed route prerequisite to issuance. 
    No permit to move any building shall be issued by the building official until approval of the proposed route has been secured in writing from the chief of police and the fire chief. If it is determined that a different route than that specified in the permit application would be more advantageous to the public safety, the building official shall require such changed route before issuing the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5-90) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; waste hauler license, § 62-56 et seq.; commercial dump license, § 62-101; net profits of corporations subject to city income tax, § 78-34; unincorporated businesses, professions, sole proprietorships, partnerships subject to city income tax, § 78-35; city income tax imposed on part of business conducted within city, § 78-38; certain businesses regulated by zoning chapter, § 94-376 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations, shall have the meaning given in this section. 
    Business means any and all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this city, or elsewhere within its jurisdiction (including, without limitation, home occupations as permitted under chapter 94 of the City Code). A business shall not be deemed to include a church or other noncommercial enterprise serving primarily a charitable or benevolent purpose. 
    City license officer and license officer mean the city clerk of the city. 
    Insignia means any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker, or any other kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with any license. 
    License and licensee shall include respectively the words "permit" and "permittee" or the holder for any use or period of time of a similar privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this article or other law or ordinance. 
    Person means individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations and any kind of personal representative in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. For purposes of this chapter the word "person" does not include any individual under the age of 18 years. 
    Premises means all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 10-580, § 1, 4-26-10; Ord. No. 11-604, § 1, 2-1-12) 
Sec. 22-2. - License required. 
    Effective July 1, 2001, and at all times thereafter, no person shall commence or engage in a business within the city without first obtaining a license pursuant to this article and without maintaining such license in current effect during any business operation or activity. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-3. - License not transferable. 
    No license may be transferred by the licensee to any other person. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-4. - License not required for delivery only. 
    No license shall be required of any person for any mere delivery in the city of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from such person at his regular place of business outside the city where no intent by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-5. - Separate license required for branch establishments. 
    A license shall be obtained, in the manner prescribed in this article, for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate business; provided, however, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-6 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-580, § 2, adopted April 26, 2010, repealed § 22-6, which pertained to special permits issued to nonprofit enterprises and derived from Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2001. 
Sec. 22-7. - Duties of city license officer. 
    The city license officer shall collect all license fees, if any, shall issue licenses in the name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions of this chapter, and shall: 
(a)  Make rules. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary in the operation and enforcement of this article; 
(b)  Require affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to the administration of this article; 
(c)  Obtain endorsement. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interested city officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the application with all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing; 
(d)  Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any application for a license as prescribed in this article; 
(e)  Examine records. Examine the books and records of any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this article; 
(f)  Give notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his application and, upon his refusal of any license or permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-8. - Qualifications of applicants for licenses. 
    The general standards set out in this section relative to the qualifications of every applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the city license officer. 
(a)  Compliance with zoning regulations. The applicant shall present a certificate of zoning compliance furnished by the city inspector after inspection of the premises, if necessary, to the effect that the proposed use of any premises is not a violation of city zoning regulations provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to a business in lawful operation as of June 1, 2001 or to a business applying for renewal of a valid license. 
(b)  Compliance with laws and ordinances. The applicant's business shall not be illegal or violate any federal, state, county, or city statute, law, rule, regulation, or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-9. - Procedure for issuance of license. 
(a)  Formal application required. Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city shall submit an application for such license to the city license officer. The application shall be: 
(1)  A written statement upon forms approved by the city and provided by the city license officer. Such form shall include an affidavit to be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public of this state and shall require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance with section 22-8 and of any other information which the city license officer shall find to be reasonably necessary for the fair administration of this chapter. 
(2)  Accompanied by the payment of any fees required for such license. 
(b)  Initial license. In order to obtain a license pursuant to this article as required by section 22-2, an applicant shall submit an application to the city. 
(c)  Issuance of receipts. Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time the application for the license is made, the city license officer shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance and such receipt shall not be construed as the approval of the city license officer for the issuance of a license, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Renewal license procedure. An applicant for renewal of a license shall submit an application for such license to the city license officer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) above. Licenses issued July 1, 2009, shall remain in effect until December 31, 2010. Thereafter, annual licenses shall be issued for the period of January 1 until December 31 (calendar year) and applicants for renewal of a license must submit applications by the preceding December 1. If an applicant fails to file its application for renewal on or before December 1, the city license officer shall not be required to approve or disapprove the license before the expiration of the current license. 
(e)  Nonapproval of license. The license officer shall, upon disapproving any application submitted under the provisions of this article, refund all fees paid in advance to the applicant, provided the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. In no case where an applicant is indebted in any manner to the city shall he be entitled to a credit or a rebate. 
(f)  Compliance with chapter pending legal action. When the issuance of a license is denied and an action is instituted by the applicant to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the business for which the license was refused unless a license be issued to him pursuant to a judgment ordering the same. 
(g)  Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city license officer in the denial of an application for a license as provided in this article, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license as provided in subsection 22-14(c), shall have the right of appeal to the city commission. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the city commission, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city commission shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in subsection 22-14(c). The decision and order of the city commission on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 09-568, § 3-9-09) 
Sec. 22-10. - Fees. 
    Fees, if any, for applications for a business license pursuant to this article shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-11. - Duties of licensee. 
(a)  General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this chapter shall: 
(1)  Permit all reasonable inspection of his business and examination of his books by public authorities so authorized by law; 
(2)  Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws, regulations, and ordinances applicable to such licensed business, including obtaining and maintaining any other licenses required by the City Code. 
(3)  Avoid all forbidden, improper, or unnecessary practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after expiration of his license and during the period his license is revoked or suspended. 
(b)  Display of license and insignia. Every licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article upon his person at all times when engaged in the activity for which the license was granted. Where such licensed activity for which the license was issued occurs in a place or establishment, the license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the city. 
(2)  Not allow any license, special permit, or insignia to remain posted, displayed, or used after the period for which it was issued has expired, or when it has been suspended or revoked, or for any other reason has become ineffective. The licensee shall promptly return such inoperative license, special permit, or insignia to the city license officer. 
(3)  Not loan, sell, give, or assign, to any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage, or remove, or to have in his possession, except as authorized by the city license officer or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued to such licensee. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-12. - Agents responsible for compliance of nonresident licensees. 
    The agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this city shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the businesses they represent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-13. - Term, expiration date of licenses. 
    Except as provided for in subsection 22-9(d), all business licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be annual licenses and shall be valid from the date of issuance to the following December 31 (unless earlier revoked). Licenses or permits issued pursuant to other articles of the City Code shall expire as provided by such ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 09-568, § 4, 3-9-09) 
Sec. 22-14. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspections. The following persons are authorized to conduct inspections in the manner prescribed in this section: 
(1)  City license officer. The city license officer shall make all investigations reasonably necessary for enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Officials having duties. The city license officer shall have the authority to order the inspection of licensees, their businesses and premises, by all city officials having duties to perform with reference to such licensees or businesses. 
(3)  Police officers. All police officers may inspect and examine businesses licensed pursuant to this article to enforce compliance with this article. 
(b)  Authority of inspectors. All persons authorized by this section to inspect licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without search warrant, during business hours and at other reasonable times, the following premises: 
(1)  Those for which a license is required; 
(2)  Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of inspection, are operating under a license; 
(3)  Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended. 
(c)  Revocation of license. When a person is in violation of this article or any other law or ordinance, the city license officer shall issue to the affected person an order to comply. Such order, and all other notices issued in compliance with this article, shall be in writing, shall be personally served, and shall apprise the person affected of his specific violations. In the absence of the person affected or his agent or employee, a copy of such order shall be affixed to some structure on the premises and shall be deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the person affected, which action shall constitute proper service. 
(1)  Period for compliance. The order shall require compliance within a reasonable time following personal service on the affected person as specified in the order. 
(2)  Hearing. Upon written application by the person affected before the expiration of the period for compliance, the city license officer shall order a hearing. Notice of such a hearing shall be given to the affected person in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(3)  Modifying authority of city license officer. Upon written application or on his own motion, the city license officer shall have the authority, in a proper case, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date, and to change, modify or rescind any recommendation or order. 
(4)  Final order. Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply with the provisional order or with any order made after hearing, the city license officer shall then declare and make the provisional order final. 
a.  Authority of city license officer. The city license officer shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to this article upon making or declaring a provisional order final. 
b.  Effect of revocation or suspension. Upon revocation or suspension of a license, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and he shall immediately cease all business at all places under such license. 
(5)  Summary action. When the conduct of any licensee, agent, or employee is so inimical to the public health, safety, and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and thus give rise to an emergency, the city license officer shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the close of premises or to suspend or revoke the license. Unless waived in writing, within five days after he has acted summarily, the license officer shall conduct a special hearing for such action in respect to the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice of such hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner as provided in section 22-14(c) above. 
(6)  Right to appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city license officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the city commission by filing a written appeal as provided in section 22-9(g) within five business days after receipt of notice of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Sec. 22-15. - Civil infractions. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to licensed civil fines as follows: 
First repeat offense Not less than $250.00 Second and subsequent repeat offense Not less than $500.00  
(b)  In addition to the remedies and penalties otherwise provided in this article, the city may seek temporary and permanent equitable relief to abate and enjoin violations of this article and shall have all other remedies provided by law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 00-468, § 1, 1-22-01) 
Secs. 22-16-22-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MASSAGE PARLORS AND MASSAGISTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Massage establishments regulated by zoning ordinance, § 94-378. 

Sec. 22-25. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to license and regulate massage parlors and massagists in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare. Specifically, it is also the purpose and intent of this chapter to: 
(1)  Discourage prostitution and other illicit sexual massage or activity; 
(2)  Inhibit the spread of sexually transmitted disease; 
(3)  Provide standards for the education and training of massagists; 
(4)  Provide standards for the cleanliness, sanitation and safe operation of massage parlors; 
(5)  Promote public confidence in legitimate massage, massagists and massage parlors; and 
(6)  Limit the massage techniques to be offered to the public for valuable consideration to those dealing with preventive health care, health maintenance and rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 95-463, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official shall mean the building official of the city. 
    Chief of police shall mean the chief of the Walker Police Department. 
    City clerk shall mean the city clerk of the city. 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the city, or his or her designee. 
    City ordinances shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
    Fire chief shall mean the fire chief of the city. 
    Massage means a method of treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
    Massage parlor means any Turkish bath parlor, steam bath, whirlpool, sauna bath, magnetic healing institute, or any room, place, establishment, institution, or premises, other than a regularly licensed hospital or dispensary, in which massage is regularly practiced on the human body, with or without the use of nonpowered mechanical devices or bathing devices. "Massage parlor" shall also include a school having a course of study and training in the practice of massage. 
    Massagist means an individual, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
    Person means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, other form of business organization or group, or any other entity. 
    Recognized school shall mean any school or educational institution which: 1) teaches the theory, method, profession, or work of massage; 2) requires 500 hours before the student receives a diploma or certificate of graduation for having completed the course; and 3) is either licensed to teach massage and to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in which it is located, or is approved by the American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA). 
    Zoning ordinance shall mean the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-120; Ord. No. 95-463, § 2, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 00-464, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-27. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall practice, engage in, carry on or operate the business of a massage parlor within the city without first having applied for and obtained the license required by this article, and complying with all regulations and requirements as contained in this article. No person shall practice massage for compensation without obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as a massagist as required by this article and complying with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10-121) 
Sec. 22-28. - Responsibility of massage parlor licensee; massagist license. 
    It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or licensee under this article in charge of or in control of a massage parlor to ensure that each person employed or engaged in such business as a massagist shall have first obtained a valid massagist license pursuant to this article. Any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor who employs or allows a person to perform, operate or practice as a massagist who is not in possession of a valid massagist license shall be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10-122) 
Sec. 22-29. - License application, massage parlor. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage parlor shall file an application with the city clerk and a nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city commission. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence. 
(3)  A description of service to be provided. 
(4)  The location and mailing address of the massage parlor. 
(5)  The names and current addresses of all present or prospective employees (including but not limited to managers, supervisors, and massagists) in the massage parlor. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and current addresses of: 
a.  Each of the officers and directors of such corporation; 
b.  Each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the corporation; and 
c.  The individuals responsible, in whole or in part, for the management and operation of the massage parlor. 
(7)  If the applicant is a partnership or other business entity, the names and current addresses of: 
a.  Each of the partners, including limited partners, or each of the principals in the business; and 
b.  The individuals responsible for the management and operation of the massage parlor. 
(8)  If the applicant is an individual or a group of individuals, the following shall be required with respect to each individual applicant: 
a.  Height, weight, sex, color of eyes, and hair; 
b.  Business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the application; 
c.  All criminal convictions other than minor traffic violations and the reasons therefor; and 
d.  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other business entity, the following shall be required with respect to each individual responsible, in whole or in part, for the management and operation of the massage parlor: 
a.  Height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair; 
b.  Business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the application; 
c.  All criminal convictions other than minor traffic violations and the reasons therefor; and 
d.  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(10)  One portrait photograph of at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of the fingerprints of the applicant for the purpose of obtaining criminal history information, both of which shall be taken by the city police department and the results of a criminal history records investigation of the applicant completed within thirty (30) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application which shall include all criminal history information on file at the state police central records division pertaining to the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant shall submit the required photograph, fingerprints and results of a criminal history records investigation of the individual(s) responsible for the management and operation of the massage parlor. 
(11)  A certificate from a licensed medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant and all present and prospective employees (including but not limited to managers, supervisors, massagists, and any individual responsible, in whole or in part, for the management and operation of the massage parlor) have, within 30 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease, including but not limited to sexually transmitted diseases. Such certificate shall specifically name each individual examined by the medical or osteopathic doctor. 
(12)  The history of the applicant in the operation of a massage parlor or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such applicant, in previously operating in the city or in another jurisdiction, has had a massage parlor license revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension. 
(13)  Such other identification and information bearing on the application as the city may reasonably require. 
(14)  The name and address of the recognized school attended, dates attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate or other proof of graduation from the recognized school showing that the applicant has completed not less than 500 hours of instruction. However, if the applicant will not personally engage in the practice of massage, the application need not contain this item. 
(Code 1976, § 10-123; Ord. No. 95-463, § 3, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 00-464, § 2, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 22-30. - Massage parlor license, application review procedures; issuance or denial. 
(a)  Any applicant for a massage parlor license shall present to the city clerk the application containing all the information, materials and documentation described in section 22-29. Applications which are not completely filled out, not correctly filled out, or not accompanied by the appropriate information, materials, documentation and application fee shall be rejected as incomplete by the city manager and shall be returned to the applicant. All complete applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall review the application to determine whether the applicant, any individual in the management of the corporation, partnership, or other business entity operating the massage parlor, or any employee or massagist of the massage parlor has been convicted of any criminal offenses other than minor traffic offenses, has violated any provision of this article, or has had a massage license, massagist license or similar license revoked by the city or by another governmental body and the reasons therefor. 
(2)  The fire chief shall review the application to determine if the premises and the proposed massage parlor comply with all fire codes. 
(3)  The building inspector shall review the application to determine if the premises and the proposed massage parlor comply with this article, the zoning chapter of this Code, other provisions of this Code and all applicable electrical, mechanical, building and plumbing codes. 
(4)  The city manager or his designee, after receiving the reports of the chief of police, the fire chief, and the building inspector, shall grant or deny a license to the massage parlor. The determination of the city manager shall be made within 15 days after receipt of the application by the city clerk. If approved, the city clerk shall issue the massage parlor license upon payment of a license fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission. 
(5)  The city manager may deny the issuance of a massage parlor license for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Failure of the applicant, the premises, or the massage parlor to comply with this article, the zoning chapter, applicable fire, mechanical, electrical, and building codes, or any other provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Prior criminal convictions, other than minor traffic offenses, of the applicant, any individual in the management of any corporation, partnership, or other business entity operating the massage parlor, or of any employee or massagist of the massage parlor, or prior revocation of a massage parlor license or similar license by the city or another governmental body, when such criminal conviction or license revocation bears on the ability of the massage parlor to operate in an honest, healthful and lawful manner. 
c.  Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the license. 
d.  Where it appears that the massage parlor will be harmful or detrimental to the operation of any adjoining or nearby business, harmful or disruptive to the functioning of any public or private school, harmful to the quiet enjoyment of any residence, church, school, or other adjoining or nearby structure, or result in an extraordinary demand for police, fire, or other municipal services. 
e.  Violations of this article by the applicant, any individual in the management of the corporation, partnership, or other business entity operating the massage parlor, any manager or supervisor of the massage parlor, or any employee or massagist of the massage parlor. 
(b)  If a massage parlor license is denied, the city manager shall make written findings of fact in support of the denial based on the standards described in this section and shall notify the applicant of the denial. The applicant may appeal such denial to the city commission by filing a written request for an appeal with the city manager within five business days following receipt of notification of the denial. In the event of an appeal, the city commission shall hold a public hearing on such denial and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the city manager. The city commission shall in its determination make findings of fact supporting its decision and such reasons shall be based upon the standards described in this section. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 10-124; Ord. No. 95-463, § 4, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 22-31. - Massagist license-Application. 
    Each applicant for a massagist license shall submit to the city clerk a separate application and a nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city commission. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The full name and address of the massage parlor where massage will be performed by the applicant. 
(3)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence. 
(4)  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, sex, eye color and hair color. 
(6)  One portrait at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of fingerprints for the purpose of obtaining criminal history information, both of which shall be taken by the police department, and the results of a criminal history records investigation of the applicant completed within 30 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application which shall include all criminal history information on file at the state police central records division pertaining to the applicant. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(8)  A certificate from a medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately prior to the date of the filling of the application, been examined and found free of any contagious or communicable disease, including, but not limited to, sexually transmitted diseases. 
(9)  All criminal convictions of the applicant other than minor traffic offenses. 
(10)  The history of the applicant in the occupation of a massagist, including, but not limited to, whether or not such applicant has had a massagist license or similar license revoked or suspended by the city or another governmental body. 
(11)  Such other identification and information as the city may reasonably require. 
(12)  The name and address of the recognized school attended, dates attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate or other proof of graduation from the recognized school showing that the applicant has completed not less than 500 hours of instruction. 
(Code 1976, § 10-125; Ord. No. 95-463, § 5, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 00-464, § 3, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 22-32. - Same-Procedures for review of application and issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  An applicant for a massage license shall present to the city clerk the complete application containing all the information, materials and documentation described in section 22-31. Applications which are not completely filled out, not correctly filled out or not accompanied by the appropriate information, materials, documentation and application fee shall be returned to the applicant. All complete applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedure. The chief of police shall review an application for a massagist license to determine if the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense other than minor traffic offenses and if the applicant has had a massagist license or similar license revoked by the city or another governmental body and the reasons therefor. The application shall then be reviewed by the city manager who shall deny or approve the massagist license. The determination of the city manager shall be made within 15 days after receipt of the application by the city clerk. If approved, the massagist license shall be issued by the city clerk after payment of a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission. The city manager may deny the issuance of a massagist license for the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any provisions of this article. 
(2)  Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for a massagist license. 
(3)  Prior criminal convictions other than minor traffic offenses or prior revocation of a massagist license or similar license by the city or another governmental body when such conviction or revocation bears on the ability of the applicant to engage in the business of a massagist in an honest, healthful and lawful manner. 
(4)  Failure to comply with this article. 
(5)  Failure of the massage parlor where massage will be performed by the applicant to have in effect a valid massage parlor license issued by the city. 
(b)  If the massagist license is denied, the city manager shall make written findings of fact in support of the denial based on the standards described in this section and shall notify the applicant of the denial. The applicant may appeal such denial to the city commission by filing a written request for an appeal with the city manager within five business days following receipt of notification of denial. In the event of an appeal, the city commission shall hold a public hearing on such denial and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the city manager. The city commission shall in its determination make written findings of fact supporting its decision and such reasons shall be based upon the standards described in this section. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 10-126; Ord. No. 95-463, § 6, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 22-33. - Annual licenses. 
    Massage parlor licenses and massagist licenses shall be annual licenses and shall be valid only from the date of issuance to the following December 31 (unless earlier revoked). If a licensee wishes to obtain a license for an ensuing year, such licensee shall file its application in accordance with section 22-29 or section 22-31, as the case may be, at least 15 days before expiration of the current license. If the applicant fails to comply with this section, the city manager shall not be required to grant or deny the license before expiration of the current license. 
(Code 1976, § 10-127) 
Sec. 22-34. - Inspection of licensed premises. 
    The premises of each massage parlor may be inspected during business hours and at other reasonable times for compliance with this article by police officers or the building official or other city inspectors upon showing of proper credentials by such person. The refusal to permit such an inspection shall be a sufficient reason for revocation of a massage parlor license. 
(Code 1976, § 10-127.1; Ord. No. 95-463, § 7, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 00-464, § 4, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 22-35. - Semiannual medical certificate. 
    All persons described in section 22-29(11) shall, not less than five months and not more than six months following the issuance of a massage parlor license, file with the city clerk a statement from a licensed medical doctor or osteopath certifying or recertifying that such person has been examined within the 30 days immediately prior thereto and has been found to be free from all communicable or contagious diseases, including but not limited to sexually transmitted diseases. Failure to comply with this section shall be a violation of this article and shall constitute grounds for revocation of a massage parlor license and/or a massagist license. 
(Code 1976, § 10-128) 
Sec. 22-36. - Age requirement for licensees. 
    No person shall be issued a massage parlor license or massagist license unless such person is at least 18 years of age. 
(Code 1976, § 10-129) 
Sec. 22-37. - Display of licenses; employee register. 
(a)  Every person, association, firm or corporation to whom or for which a license for a massage parlor has been granted shall: 
(1)  Display the license in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the massage parlor; and 
(2)  Maintain at the massage parlor a register, including the names and employment dates of all persons employed as massagists currently and within the last 12 months. 
(b)  The massage parlor shall make its license and its employee register available to the city police department or to the building official during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 95-463, § 8, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 22-38. - Change or expansion of location. 
    A license for a massage parlor shall not be transferable to a new location. A massage parlor shall not change its location or expand its floor area without first obtaining a license for such new location or expanded floor area in accordance with the procedures in sections 22-29 and 22-30. 
(Code 1976, § 10-131) 
Sec. 22-39. - Communicable diseases. 
    All individuals engaged or involved in the business of a massage parlor or a massagist, including but not limited to individuals responsible for the management and operation of the massage parlor, massagists, and other employees, shall be free of all contagious diseases or communicable disease, including but not limited to sexually transmitted diseases. 
(Code 1976, § 10-132) 
Sec. 22-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-496, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2003, repealed § 22-40, which pertained to massages of opposite sex prohibited and derived from Code 1976, § 10-132.1. 
Sec. 22-41. - Prohibited sexual activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for a massage parlor, massagist or employee of a massage parlor, or any other person associated with a massage parlor, to offer or to engage in any of the following acts on the premises of a massage parlor: 
(1)  Adamitism: The practice of going naked; the state of being unclothed. 
(2)  Anilingus: Erotic stimulation achieved by contact between the mouth or tongue and the anus. 
(3)  Cunnilingus: Stimulation of the vulva or clitoris with the lips or tongue. 
(4)  Coprophilia: Use of feces for sexual excitement. 
(5)  Fellatio: Practice of obtaining sexual gratification by oral stimulation of the penis. 
(6)  Flagellation: An act or instance of obtaining sexual gratification by beating, flogging or scourging another or being the recipient of such action. 
(7)  Frontage: Masturbation by rubbing against another person. 
(8)  Masturbation: Erotic practice involving the genital organs commonly resulting in orgasm and achieved by manual or other bodily contact exclusive of sexual intercourse or by instrumental manipulation. 
(9)  Sexual intercourse: Carnal copulation of male and female implying actual intercourse of the organs of the latter. 
(10)  Sodomy: Penetration of the male organ into the anus of another person. 
(11)  Urolagnia: Sexual excitement associated with urine or urination. 
(Code 1976, § 10-133) 
Sec. 22-42. - Sanitary standards. 
    Each massage parlor and massagist shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No patron shall be serviced who is infected with any fungus or other skin infection; nor shall any service be performed on a patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions. 
(2)  All massagists shall wash their hands in hot water with soap before giving any service or treatment to each separate patron. 
(3)  All towels, tissues, sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly for each patron and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after use. 
(4)  Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon each patron. 
(5)  In any establishment in which massage services are rendered to members of the same sex at any one time, such persons of the same sex may be placed in a single, separate room, or the operators of the massage parlor may elect to place such persons of the same sex in separate enclosed rooms or booths having adequate ventilation to an area outside such room or booth while massage services are being performed. 
(6)  No massage or massage service may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or area within a massage parlor which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(7)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin, shall be provided by every massage parlor; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing, a separate massage room, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and for female patrons. 
(8)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(Code 1976, § 10-134; Ord. No. 95-463, § 9, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 22-43. - Wearing apparel. 
    Nontransparent uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massagists while attending patrons. Such uniforms or garments shall be of washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. 
(Code 1976, § 10-135; Ord. No. 95-463, § 10, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 22-43.1. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No persons shall sell, give or provide or cause to be sold, given or provided, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage parlor, unless licensed to do so by the state liquor control commission. 
(Ord. No. 95-463, § 11, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 22-44. - Patronage of massage business by minors. 
    No massage parlor and no massagist shall massage or treat any person under the age of 17 except when such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or under written order by a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. 
(Code 1976, § 10-136) 
Sec. 22-45. - Name of business. 
    No massage parlor licensed pursuant to this article shall operate under any name or conduct its business under any designation not specified in the license. 
(Code 1976, § 10-137) 
Sec. 22-46. - Advertising. 
    No massage parlor or massagist granted a license under the provisions of this article shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. 
(Code 1976, § 10-138) 
Sec. 22-47. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Any massage parlor license granted pursuant to this article may be revoked by the city manager for any of the reasons for denial of such license in section 22-30 and for refusal to permit an inspection authorized by section 22-34. Any massagist license may be revoked by the city manager for any of the reasons for denial of such license in section 22-32. The city manager shall make written findings of fact in support of any license revocation. 
(b)  A person shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any license revocation by the city manager, provided that a written request therefor is filed with the city manager within five business days after receipt of notice of such revocation. If such written request is filed with the city manager, the commission shall hold a public hearing on such revocation and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the city manager. In addition, if such written request is filed with the city manager, the license revocation shall be stayed until the determination of the city commission. The city commission shall, in its determination, make written findings of fact supporting its decision based on the same reasons required to be applied by the city manager. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 10-139) 
Sec. 22-48. - Sale or transfer; license void. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage parlor, the license therefor shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage parlor in accordance with section 22-29 and section 22-30. 
(Code 1976, § 10-140) 
Sec. 22-49. - Application of regulations to existing businesses. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, all provisions of this article shall apply to all massage parlors currently operating within the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Any massage parlor or massagist operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall file an application for a license in accordance with section 22-29 or section 22-31, as the case may be, on or before January 31, 1986. Failure to file such application shall constitute a violation of this article. No massage parlor or massagist operating within the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall continue to operate after February 15, 1986, without having first obtained the license required by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10-141) 
Sec. 22-50. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractics, osteopaths, psychiatrists, psychologists, physical therapists, physical therapist assistants, clinical social workers, and family counselors who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state, or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an association or establishment duly licensed in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties. 
(3)  A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(4)  Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their duties. 
(5)  Any duly licensed establishment in which the persons described in this section practice their respective professions. 
(6)  Persons who administer massages as an accessory service provided within a licensed barbershop or cosmetology establishment as defined in Public Act No. 299 of 1980, as amended, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Such persons currently hold a certificate of professional membership in, and are currently members in good standing of, the American Massage Therapy Association; 
(b)  Evidence of the certificate and membership in good standing required by subsection 5(a) [6(a)] above is maintained on file with the city clerk; 
(c)  The gross floor area for areas where massages are performed within the licensed barbershop or cosmetology establishment shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 10-142; Ord. No. 95-463, § 12, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 03-499, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-51. - Nuisance per se; penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any building, facility, fixture or other property used as a massage parlor in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. 
(b)  Any person violating, or neglecting or refusing to comply with, any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment within the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 10-143; Ord. No. 95-463, § 13, 6-13-95) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Sec. 22-52. - Additional remedies. 
    In addition to the remedies and penalties otherwise provided in this article, the city may seek temporary and permanent equitable relief to abate and enjoin violations of this article and shall have all other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 10-144) 
Sec. 22-53. - Conflict with other provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between any provisions of this article and any other provisions of the Code, the more stringent provision shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 10-145) 
Secs. 22-54-22-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,SOLICITORS, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, adopted Aug. 24, 2015, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 22-76-22-87, pertained to transient merchants, and derived from Code 1976, §§ 10-70-10-79.2; and Ord. No. 94-439, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1994. 

Sec. 22-75. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote and safeguard the public health, safety, general welfare and peace of the people of the City of Walker, and to protect the people of the city from endangerment associated with those who would take the opportunity to canvass streets with intentions to violate laws or ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-76. - Definitions. 
    The words solicitor, solicit, solicitation, and soliciting as used in this article shall mean any person (which includes any individual, firm, entity, corporation, association, partnership, limited liability company, or organization or its agents) traveling either by foot, vehicle, or by other means, from place to place, from house to house, from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, products, merchandise or personal property of any nature; or attempting to collect funds, pledges, or donations for political, charitable, noncommercial or religious causes; or to take or attempt to take orders for services to be furnished or performed, whether or not such person has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such person is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; or any similar action or activities including those persons who call themselves transient merchants, canvassers, hucksters, peddlers, or similar terms. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-77. - License required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall solicit or act as a solicitor within the city without first obtaining a license from the city. No license shall be granted by the city without prior approval by the clerk or such other city official as is designated by the clerk. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-78. - License application. 
(a)  Any person required to obtain a license under the provisions of this article shall file an application on forms provided by the clerk and shall pay an application fee as provided by this section. Such application shall be fully completed and filed with the clerk at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of commencement of the solicitation. 
(b)  A completed application shall contain the following information, as applicable to the activities under consideration: 
(1)  The applicant's name, permanent home address, place of business, and local address of business. 
(2)  Each individual solicitor must supply a copy of their driver's license or other form of government-issued photo personal identification. 
(3)  A description of the nature of the business, the goods or property to be sold, services to be offered, and the length of time for which the right to do business is sought. 
(4)  If the applicant is employed by another person, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the nature of the employment relationship. 
(5)  The place where the goods or property involved are manufactured or produced, where the goods or property are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method and timing of delivery. 
(6)  A background check from the state they reside, as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance or state statute, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed, if any. 
(7)  The applicant's federal taxpayer identification number. 
(8)  The applicant's state employer identification number. 
(9)  Any additional information required by the chief of police to determine whether the applicant, if licensed, will serve the public in a fair, honest, safe and competent manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article, other provisions of the City Code and all other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(c)  The application form shall include a sworn, notarized affidavit to be signed by the applicant that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge and ability, all information provided on or in connection with the application is true and complete and all information requested in connection with the application has been provided. The affidavit shall also state that the applicant has read, understands, and agrees with the provisions of the license, and agrees to be bound by all of its terms. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission. 
(e)  If the requirements of this article are met, the clerk will prepare and issue a solicitor's license to each person soliciting under the application. The license must remain in the possession of the solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city and shall be presented by that person to any resident requesting identification prior to any attempt to sell a product or service to that resident. 
(f)  A license application under this article will be denied if any of the following apply: 
(1)  A requirement of this article will not be met. 
(2)  The safety of the residents of the city will not be protected. 
(3)  Either the applicant or the applicant's employer or organization has been convicted of either a felony or a misdemeanor involving solicitation, theft, or fraud. 
(4)  Either the applicant or the applicant's organization is delinquent in any taxes or other indebtedness to the city. 
(5)  Either the applicant or the applicant's organization has engaged in, aided, abetted, counseled, procured, commanded, permitted or assisted in the commission of a violation of any other law, ordinance, rule or regulation, or has otherwise engaged in undesirable or unlawful business practices likely to cheat, mislead or defraud the public, which violations or practices bear on the applicant's honesty, trustworthiness, business reputation, or moral character, or on the applicant's ability or propensity to engage in the business of being a solicitor in a fair, honest, safe and lawful manner. 
(6)  The applicant has made a false statement or has misrepresented a material fact in the license application. 
(g)  All licenses issued in accordance with this article are subject to the following conditions, which shall be set forth on the license application form: 
(1)  The applicant shall agree to permit a reasonable inspection of the licensed activities by any properly identified public authority. 
(2)  The applicant shall agree to ascertain and at all times comply with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the licensed activities during the term of the license and shall agree to a temporary suspension of the license without notice or hearing in the event of a violation of the same. 
(3)  The applicant shall agree not to engage in the activities for which the license was issued at any time after the license has expired without having been renewed or reissued, at any time when the license is suspended or revoked, or during any pending legal action to appeal the denial, suspension or revocation of a license. 
(4)  The applicant shall agree to avoid all unfair trade practices as prohibited under state law. 
(5)  Any other condition determined by the clerk or chief of police to be reasonably necessary to ensure that the licensee will serve the public in a fair, honest, safe and lawful manner. 
(h)  The following persons and organizations are exempt from the licensing requirements under this article when engaging in solicitation of the type identified below and when not engaged in fundraising. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (h), all solicitation that is exempt under this section must comply with the general regulations and prohibitions of section 22-83. 
(1)  Solicitation for religious, charitable or nonprofit institutions. Any person who is soliciting for a school, state or federally registered or recognized charity, a nonprofit corporation or entity, or a church or religious society is not required to obtain a license or pay a license fee pursuant to this article. The person responsible for any group identified in this subsection must still register with the city and provide the clerk with a name, address and a copy of their driver's license or other government-issued photo personal identification before such exempt solicitation can occur within the city. The applicant shall provide evidence (e.g., 501(c)(3) status, etc.) to the city that the organization for which the solicitation is taking place is a school, recognizable charitable, nonprofit or religious organization. 
(2)  Political speech or canvassing. Solicitations exclusively intended to canvass or petition for a public office, political candidate, public policy or initiative being promoted for purposes of a public referendum, initiative, millage, election, or purpose does not require any registration, license or the payment of a license fee. 
(3)  Any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this article by virtue of state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-79. - License fees. 
    Prior to the issuance of a license under this article, a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission shall be paid to the clerk. The application fee required by this section shall be in addition to the license fee required by section 22-78(d). 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-80. - License approval or denial; issuance. 
(a)  Licenses shall be approved or denied by the clerk, following receipt of a recommendation from the chief of police within 14 days following receipt of the completed application and payment of the application fee. For purposes of this section, denial of a license shall include refusal to issue an original license or refusal to renew, extend or reissue an existing license. 
(b)  If a license is denied, the clerk shall make written findings of fact in support of the denial based on the standards in this article. The applicant may appeal a denial to the city commission by filing a written appeal with the clerk within five business days following receipt of notice of denial. Upon the filing of an appeal as provided for in this article, the city commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing and may reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the clerk. The city commission shall, in its determination, make written findings of fact supporting its decision based on the standards in this article. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-81. - Indebtedness to the city. 
    A license under this article shall not be granted to any person owing any taxes or other indebtedness to the city, or who contemplates using any personal property on which personal property taxes are owing, in the operation of the business. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-82. - Extension of initial term of license. 
    The initial term of a license may be extended for an additional term by payment of the applicable license fee, provided that there has been full compliance with all provisions of this article, and provided that no license shall be valid for a period in excess of one year. The effective term of a license, including any extensions granted, shall be expressly stated on the license. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-83. - General regulations and prohibitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly permitted by this article, another city ordinance, or otherwise mandated by law: 
(1)  Where a license is required by this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation without having first obtained a license issued by the city. The license must be in the possession of the solicitor at all times while solicitor is engaged in the act of soliciting and displayed upon the request of any person. 
(2)  Where a license is required by this article, while conducting any act of solicitation the solicitor shall clearly display license and photo identification that correctly identifies who the solicitor is and for whom the solicitor is working. 
(3)  No persons shall store or park a vehicle at the curb for the purpose of solicitation from a vehicle, nor shall any person establish a stand, booth or other place of business on any public street curb, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public place. This subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit parking for the purpose of making deliveries or for the purpose of consummating a business transaction with persons waiting at the curb, provided that the solicitor leaves the curb immediately after the deliveries or transactions are completed. 
(4)  No person shall operate or maintain any stand, structure, building or vehicle on or near to any public right-of-way for the service of customers or for solicitation in such a manner that requires customers to stand, occupy, or congregate within the public roadway. 
(5)  No person shall conduct any solicitation so as to obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or driveway except as may be necessary and reasonable to consummate a permitted transaction or at any time after having been requested to desist by any public officer because of congested or dangerous traffic conditions or for the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(6)  No person shall engage in any solicitation on property against the wish or desire of the property owner or the tenant or occupant of the property. No person shall unlawfully trespass on the property of another while soliciting. 
(7)  No person engaged in any solicitation shall enter upon private premises without an appointment where a sign is displayed stating "No peddlers," "No solicitors," "No sales," "No trespassing," or words of similar meaning. 
(8)  No person engaged in solicitation shall, while in a stationary position in any public place, shout, cry out his goods or merchandise, nor blow any horn, ring any bell, broadcast or play any sound, or use any other similar device to attract the attention of the public. 
(9)  No persons shall engage in solicitation in the city except between the following hours: 
a.  April 1 to September 30: 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
b.  October 1 to March 31: 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(10)  No person engaged in any solicitation shall enter upon property or call upon any occupant of the property by any means of entry or contact other than approaching the front entry door of the premises. No person engaged in any solicitation shall enter into an attached or detached garage or a rear yard, unless invited by the occupant of the premises. 
(11)  No person shall block or impede the passage of the person being solicited. 
(12)  No person who is soliciting shall follow the person being solicited after that person has objected to the solicitation or asked the solicitor to depart. 
(13)  No person shall use any threatening or assaultive behavior or language when engaging in solicitation. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-84. - Display and use of licenses. 
(a)  A licensee shall carry any license issued under this article upon his person at all times when engaged in the activity for which the license was granted. If the activity for which the license was issued occurs within a structure, building or other place, the license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place at the structure, building or place. A licensee shall produce his license for examination when requested to do so by any properly identified public authority or by any person with whom the licensee is dealing in connection with licensed activities. 
(b)  A licensee shall not allow any license to remain posted, displayed or used after the license term has expired, if a duplicate license has been issued, if the license has been suspended or revoked, or if the license for any other reason has become ineffective. 
(c)  A licensee shall not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his possession, the license issued to the licensee. 
(d)  No person shall display an expired license, a license for which a duplicate has been issued, a license which has been suspended or revoked, or a license which was approved and issued for another person. 
(e)  No person shall write upon, alter, amend, modify, change or damage a license, except as required by this article or as authorized by the clerk. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-85. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license granted under this article may be suspended or revoked by the clerk for any of the reasons for denial of a license as provided by subsection 22-78(f) or for any violation of section 22-83. The clerk shall make written findings of fact in support of the suspension or revocation of a license. 
(b)  If a license under this article is suspended or revoked, the licensee may appeal the suspension or revocation to the city commission by filing a written request for an appeal with the clerk within five business days following receipt of notice of the suspension or revocation. If appealed as provided by this section, the city commission shall hold a public hearing on the suspension or revocation and may reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the clerk. The city commission shall in its determination make written findings of fact supporting its decision based on the standards in this article. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Sec. 22-86. - [Reserved.] 
Sec. 22-87. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00, imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment, plus the costs of prosecution. 
(b)  Each day on which any violation of this article occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense subject to separate penalties. 
(c)  In addition to the above, the city shall have such other remedies as are accorded for a violation of this article pursuant to law and equity. 
( Ord. No. 15-625, § 1, 8-24-15 ) 
Secs. 22-88-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TATTOO PARLORS AND BODY-PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Body-piercing  means the perforation of human tissue, other than an ear, for a nonmedical purpose and other than perforation of human tissue by a licensed medical practitioner. 
    Body-piercing establishment means an establishment where body-piercing is performed, whether or not it is in exchange for compensation or any other form of consideration. 
    Building official shall mean the building official of the city, or his or her designee. 
    Chief of police shall mean the chief of the city police department, or his or her designee. 
    City clerk shall mean the city clerk of the city, or his or her designee. 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the city, or his or her designee. 
    City ordinances shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
    City sanitarian means the person designated as city sanitarian by the city manager. 
    Fire chief shall mean the fire chief of the city, or his or her designee. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns or operates a body-piercing establishment or a tattoo parlor, or both, and any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing or body-piercing on the person of another. 
    Tattoo parlor means any place where persons are tattooed for consideration, other than by a licensed medical practitioner, or any place where tattooing is conducted whether or not it is in exchange for compensation. 
    Tattoo, tattooed, tattooing means any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance, by the aid of needles or other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin, resulting in either the coloration of the skin, or the production of scars or scarring. 
    Zoning ordinance shall mean the zoning ordinance of the city as set forth in chapter 94 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-102. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall practice, engage in, carry on, or operate a tattoo parlor or a body-piercing establishment within the city without first having applied for and obtained the license required by this article, and complying with all regulations and requirements as contained in this article. No person shall engage in tattooing or body-piercing except in a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment having a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-103. - License application. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment shall file an application with the city clerk and a nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city commission. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence. 
(3)  A description of service to be provided. 
(4)  The location and mailing address of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment. 
(5)  The names and current addresses of all present or prospective employees. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and current addresses of: 
a.  Each of the officers and directors of such corporation; 
b.  Each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the corporation; and 
c.  The individuals responsible, in whole or in part, for the operation of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment. 
(7)  If the applicant is a partnership or other business entity, the names and current addresses of: 
a.  Each of the partners, including limited partners, each of the members, or each of the principals in the operation, and 
b.  The individuals responsible for the management and operation of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment. 
(8)  If the applicant is an individual or a group of individuals, the following shall be required with respect to each individual applicant: 
a.  Business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the application; 
b.  All criminal convictions other than minor traffic violations and the reasons therefor; and 
c.  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other business entity, the following shall be required with respect to each individual responsible, in whole or in part, for the management and operation of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment: 
a.  Business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the application; 
b.  All criminal convictions other than minor traffic violations and the reasons therefor; and 
c.  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavit) that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(10)  A complete set of the fingerprints of the applicant for the purpose of obtaining criminal history information, both of which shall be taken by the city police department and the results of a criminal history records investigation of the applicant completed within 30 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application which shall include all criminal history information on file at the state police central records division pertaining to the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant shall submit the required fingerprints and results of a criminal history records investigation of the individual(s) responsible for the management and operation of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment. 
(11)  A certificate from a licensed medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant and all present and prospective employees or other persons performing tattooing or body-piercing (including but not limited to managers, supervisors, and any individual responsible, in whole or in part, for the management and operation of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment have, within 30 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease (including, but not limited to, sexually transmitted diseases). Such certificate shall specifically name each individual examined by the medical or osteopathic doctor. 
(12)  The history of the applicant in the operation of a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such applicant, in previously operating in the city or in another jurisdiction, has had a license revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension. 
(13)  Such other identification and information bearing on the application as the city may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-104. - License; application review procedures; issuance or denial. 
(a)  Any applicant for a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment license shall present to the city clerk the application containing all the information, materials and documentation described in section 22-103. Applications which are not completely filled out, not correctly filled out, or not accompanied by the appropriate information, materials, documentation and application fee shall be rejected as incomplete by the city manager and shall be returned to the applicant. All complete applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall review the application to determine whether the applicant, any individual in the management of the corporation, partnership, or other business entity operating the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment, or any employee thereof, has been convicted of any criminal offenses other than minor traffic offenses, has violated any provision of this article, or has had a tattoo parlor body-piercing establishment or similar license revoked by the city or by another governmental body and the reasons therefor. 
(2)  The fire chief shall review the application and conduct an inspection, if necessary, to determine if the premises and the proposed tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment comply with all fire codes. 
(3)  The building official shall review the application and conduct an inspection, if necessary, to determine if the premises and the proposed tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment comply with this article, the zoning ordinance, other provisions of this Code and all applicable electrical, mechanical, building and plumbing codes. 
(4)  The city sanitarian shall review the application and conduct an inspection, if necessary, to determine if the premises and the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment complies with terms of this article relating to physical facilities, equipment, and layout for operation of such establishment. 
(5)  The city manager, after receiving the reports of the chief of police, the fire chief, the building official, and the city sanitarian, shall grant or deny a license to the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment. The determination of the city manager shall be made within 15 days after receipt of a complete application by the city clerk. If approved, the city clerk shall issue the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment license upon payment of a license fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission. 
(6)  The city manager may deny the issuance of a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment license for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Failure of the applicant, the premises, or the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment to comply with this article, the zoning ordinance, applicable fire, mechanical, electrical, and building codes, or any other provision of the City Code. 
b.  Prior criminal convictions, other than minor traffic offenses, of the applicant, any individual in the management of any corporation, partnership, or other business entity operating the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment, or of any employee thereof, or prior revocation of a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment license or similar license by the city or another governmental body, when such criminal conviction or license revocation bears on the ability of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment to operate in an honest, healthful, and lawful manner. 
c.  Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the license. 
d.  Violations of this article by the applicant, any individual in the management of the corporation, partnership, or other business entity operating the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment, or any manager, supervisor or employee. 
(b)  If a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment license is denied, the city manager shall make written findings of fact in support of the denial based on the standards described in this section and shall notify the applicant of the denial. The applicant may appeal such denial to the city commission by filing a written request for an appeal with the city manager within five business days following receipt of notification of the denial. In the event of an appeal, the city commission shall hold a public hearing on such denial and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the city manager. The city commission shall in its determination make findings of fact supporting its decision and such reasons shall be based upon the standards described in this section. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-105. - Annual licenses. 
    Licenses for tattoo parlors and body-piercing establishments shall be annual licenses and shall be valid only from the date of issuance to the following December 31 (unless earlier revoked). If a licensee wishes to obtain a license for an ensuing year, such licensee shall file a complete application in accordance with section 22-103 at least 20 days before expiration of the current license. If the applicant fails to comply with this section, the city manager shall not be required to grant or deny the license before expiration of the current license. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-106. - Inspection of licensed premises. 
    The premises of each tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment may be inspected by city police personnel, the fire chief, the building official, or the city sanitarian during business hours and at other reasonable times for compliance with this article. The refusal to permit such an inspection shall be a sufficient reason for revocation of the license pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-107. - Age requirement. 
    No person shall be issued a license for a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment, and no person shall perform tattooing or body-piercing, unless such person is at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-108. - Display of licenses. 
    Every person, association, firm or corporation to whom or for which a license for a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment has been granted shall display the license in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-109. - Change or expansion of location. 
    A license for a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment shall not be transferable to a new location. A tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment shall not change its location or expand its floor area without first obtaining a license for such new location or expanded floor area in accordance with the procedures in section 22-103. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-110. - Communicable diseases. 
    All individuals engaged or involved in tattooing or body-piercing including, but not limited to, individuals responsible for the management and operation of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment and other employees, shall be free of all contagious diseases or communicable diseases (including, but not limited to, sexually transmitted diseases). Before any individual engages in tattooing or body-piercing in a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment, the operator shall file a health certificate as described in section 22-103(11) for such individual with the city clerk (unless such certificate was previously filed with the operator's application for its current license). 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-111. - License fee. 
    The annual license fee for engaging in the business of operating a tattoo parlor or a body-piercing establishment within the city shall be established by resolution of the city commission. The licensee shall be required to file an application and meet the requirements of this article in order to be eligible for renewal of a license. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-112. - Tattoo parlor; health and sanitation requirements. 
    Each tattoo parlor or a body-piercing establishment shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  An operator shall not perform tattooing or body-piercing on a minor unless the individual obtains the prior written informed consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian. The minor's parent or legal guardian shall execute the written, informed consent under this subsection in the presence of the individual performing the tattooing or body-piercing on the minor. 
(2)  An operator shall not perform tattooing or body-piercing on an individual if that individual is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance. 
(3)  The room in which tattooing or body-piercing is done shall have an area of not less than 100 square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall have an impervious, smooth and washable surface. A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be accessible to the public at all times when the establishment is open for business. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary towels. All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily cleanable material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a smooth washable finish, and shall be separated from the view of waiting customers or observers by a panel at least six feet high or by a door. The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair. 
(4)  The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with soap and water before tattooing or body-piercing. The hands shall be dried with individual, single-use towels. 
(5)  While performing procedures, an operator shall wear disposable medical gloves. The gloves shall be discarded after each customer or patron. If, while performing a procedure, a glove is pierced, torn, or otherwise contaminated, the glove shall be immediately discarded and hands washed thoroughly before a new glove is applied. Any item dropped on the floor or otherwise contaminated shall be immediately discarded and a new one used. 
(6)  No tattooing or body-piercing shall be done on any skin surface that has rash, pimples, boils or infections, or manifests any evidence of unhealthy conditions. 
(7)  No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering any blemish, birthmark, scar or tattoo. 
(8)  Safety razors with a new, single-service blade for each customer or patron may be used and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized before use on each customer or patron. 
(9)  The area to be tattooed or body-pierced shall first be thoroughly washed for a period of two minutes with warm water to which has been added an antiseptic liquid soap. A sterile single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the area. After shaving and before tattooing or body-piercing is begun, a solution of 70 percent alcohol shall be applied to the area with a single-use sponge used and applied with a sterile instrument. 
(10)  Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes, or its equivalent as approved by the city sanitarian, shall be used on the area to be tattooed or body-pierced; and it shall be applied with sterile gauze. The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptics to check the flow of blood is prohibited. 
(11)  Inquiry shall be made and anyone giving a history of recent jaundice or hepatitis may not be tattooed or body-pierced within one year of their being cured of such illness. 
(12)  Single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron, and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after completing work on a patron. Any dye in which the needles were dipped shall not be used on another person. Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue, which shall be used only on one person and then immediately discarded. 
(13)  After completing work on any person, the tattooed or body-pierced area shall be washed with sterile gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap solution approved by the city sanitarian, or a 70 percent alcohol solution. The tattooed or body-pierced area shall be allowed to dry and petroleum jelly from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied, using sterile gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the tattooed or body-pierced area with adhesive tape. 
(14)  All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. 
(15)  A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing all needles and similar instruments before use on any customer, person or patron. (Alternate sterilizing procedures may only be used when specifically approved in writing by the city sanitarian.) Sterilization of equipment will be accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least 30 minutes at a minimum pressure of 15 pounds per square inch, temperature of 240 degrees Fahrenheit or 116 degrees Celsius. 
(16)  The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily placed during tattooing or body-piercing so that they will not be contaminated. 
(17)  All pigments, dyes, colors, etc., used in tattooing shall be sterile and free from bacteria, virus particles and noxious agents and substances; and the pigments, dyes and colors used from stock solutions for each customer or patron shall be placed in a single-service receptacle, and such receptacle and remaining solution shall be discarded after use on each customer or patron. 
(18)  All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the tattooing or body-piercing of a person shall be sterile. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-113. - Records. 
(a)  Permanent records for each patron or customer shall be maintained by the licensee or operator of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment. Before the tattooing or body-piercing operation begins, the patron or customer shall be required personally to enter, on a record form provided by such establishments, the date, his name, address, age, record of and recent history of jaundice or hepatitis, serial number if a member of the Armed Forces, the minor's consent form if required by section 22-112(1), and his or her signature. Such records shall be maintained in the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment and shall be available for examination by the city sanitarian and city police personnel. Records shall be retained by the operator or licensee for a period of not less than two years. In the event of a change of ownership or closing of the business, all such records shall be made available to the city sanitarian. 
(b)  The operator of the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment shall also maintain a register of all persons who have performed tattooing or body-piercing within the last 12 months. The register shall include the names, addresses, and dates of employment or performance of tattooing or body-piercing by such persons. The register shall be maintained at the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment and shall be available for examination by the city sanitarian and city police personnel. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-114. - Infections. 
    No person, customer or patron having any skin infection or other disease of the skin or any communicable disease shall be tattooed or body-pierced. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or body-piercing which become known to the operator shall promptly be reported to the city sanitarian by the person owning or operating the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment, and the infected customer or patron shall be referred to a physician. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-115. - Compliance. 
    All operators shall comply with all other provisions of the City Code and shall comply with all other applicable statutes, laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-116. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Any license granted pursuant to this article may be revoked by the city manager for any of the reasons for denial of such license in section 22-104(a)(6) and for refusal to permit an inspection authorized by section 22-106. Prior to any license revocation, the city manager shall give notice thereof and an opportunity for the licensee to be heard. The city manager shall make written findings of fact in support of any license revocation. 
(b)  A person shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any license revocation by the city manager, provided that a written request therefor is filed with the city manager within five business days after receipt of notice of such revocation. If such written request is filed with the city manager, the commission shall hold a public hearing on such revocation and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the city manager. In addition, if such written request is filed with the city manager, the license revocation shall be stayed until the determination of the city commission. The city commission shall, in its determination, make written findings of fact supporting its decision based on the same reasons required to be applied by the city manager. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-117. - Sale or transfer; license void. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to operate the tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-118. - Application of regulations to existing businesses. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, all provisions of this article shall apply to all tattoo parlors or body-piercing establishments operating within the city on the effective date of this article. Any tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment operating on the effective date of this article shall file a complete application for a license in accordance with this article, on or before February 14, 2001. Failure to file such application shall constitute a violation of this article. No tattoo parlor or body-piercing operating within the city on the effective date of this article shall continue to operate after March 1, 2001, without having first obtained the license required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-119. - Violations; civil infractions; remedies. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, a person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day that a violation occurs or continues shall be a separate infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased civil fines as follows: 
First repeat offense Not less than $250.00 Second and subsequent repeat offense Not less than $500.00  
(b)  A person who practices, engages in, carries on, or operates a tattoo parlor or a body-piercing establishment without having obtained a license in violation of section 22-102 and a person who engages in tattooing or body-piercing in a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment not having a license issued pursuant to this article in violation of section 22-102, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 93 days, or a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine. Each day that a violation occurs or continues shall be a separate offense. 
(c)  Any building, facility, fixture or other property used as a tattoo parlor or body-piercing establishment in violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance per se. 
(d)  In addition to the remedies and sanctions otherwise provided in this article, the city may seek temporary and permanent equitable relief to abate and enjoin violations of this article and shall have all other remedies provided by law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-120. - Conflict with other provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between any provisions of this article and any other provisions of the City Code, the more stringent provisions shall control. 
(Ord. No. 00-469, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-121-22-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 22-150. - Findings. 
    Based on the findings of the reports and decisions referenced in subsection 94-376(b) of the City Code, the city commission incorporates herein the legislative findings of subsection 94-376(b) regarding the adverse secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses. In addition, based on these reports and decisions, the city commission specifically finds that: 
(a)  Adult-oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are often uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. 
(b)  Crime statistics show that crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where adult-oriented businesses are located. 
(c)  Sexual acts occur at adult-oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live shows. 
(d)  Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities which create unhealthy conditions. 
(e)  Persons often frequent certain adult theatres and other adult-oriented businesses, for the purposes of engaging in sex within the premises of such adult-oriented businesses. 
(f)  Communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in adult-oriented businesses. 
(g)  The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact. 
(h)  According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(i)  Sanitary conditions in some adult-oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(j)  These findings raise substantial governmental concerns and indicate that it is necessary to promulgate reasonable and uniform regulations for adult-oriented businesses to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 05-530, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 22-151. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated; 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, restaurant, or other establishment which regularly features or displays: 
(1)  Live performances predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any specified sexual activity; or 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or other visual media predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
    Adult merchandise store means an establishment that emphasizes merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. An establishment emphasizes merchandise that is predominantly distinguished by its "emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area" if any one or more of the following applies to the establishment: 
(1)  Twenty-five percent or more of the establishment's retail display space (excluding bathrooms, office areas, fitting rooms, eating areas, storage areas, closets, and other nonpublic areas) is used for the sale of merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
(2)  Twenty-five percent or more of the establishment's visible inventory is comprised of merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
(3)  Twenty-five percent or more of the establishment's gross revenues are generated by the sale or rental of merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
(4)  The establishment is operated consistently with its being an adult-oriented business (e.g., advertising is directed to an "adults only" market; the establishment self-imposes, or imposes consistent with state or federal law, prohibitions on minors being present in the establishment, etc.). 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with close-circuit television (as distinguished from commercial cable services), transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent, or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room, for a period of time that is less than ten hours, if the rental of such rooms accounts for more than ten percent of the establishment's gross revenues. 
    Adult-oriented business means a business or commercial establishment engaging in one or more of the following enterprises: (1) adult cabaret; (2) adult merchandise store; (3) adult motel; (4) adult theater; (5) escort agency; (6) nude model studio; or (7) sexual encounter center. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which regularly features live performances predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any specified sexual activity or which regularly or primarily shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. This definition includes, without limitation, establishments which offer individual viewing booths. 
    Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration and regardless of who pays that consideration, agrees to act or offers to act as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or entity which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. An escort agency is deemed to be operated in the location where (1) a request for an escort is received, or (2) the escort and the person requesting the escort are together. 
    Material means anything tangible, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner, including, but not limited to, anything printed or written, any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, picture, drawing, pictorial representation, motion picture, photograph, video tape, video disk, film, transparency, slide, audiotape, audio disk, computer tape, holographic images, or any other medium used to electronically produce or reproduce images, or any mechanical, chemical, or electronic reproduction. Material includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and other latent representational objects whether or not processing or other acts are required to make the content of the material apparent. This definition is intended to include material which is the product of any technology, whether that technology is available on the effective date of the ordinance that added this definition or becomes available after that date. 
    Merchandise means material and novelties. 
    Novelty means any instrument, device, or paraphernalia which depicts or describes any specific anatomical area or any specific sexual act, or which is designed for use, or commonly used, in connection with specific sexual activities, excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who displays any specified anatomical area is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by any other person who pays money or any form of consideration, but does not include the following: 
(1)  An educational institution funded, chartered, or recognized by the state; or 
(2)  Any modeling session for a local, nonprofit organization, that is not open to the public or to any persons other than members of the organization, that is for the purpose of instruction in the artistic depiction in two-dimensional or three-dimensional media of the human form, during which no specified sexual activities occur and during which the model remains in a fixed pose. 
    Sexual encounter center means an establishment, except that which is part of the practice of and under the supervision and control of a physician, psychologist, or psychiatrist licensed to practice in Michigan, that offers: 
(1)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons exposes or displays any specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  The matching and/or exchanging of persons for any specified sexual activities. 
    Specified anatomical area means any [one] or more of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast at or below the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; or 
(2)  A sex act, actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of activities set forth in (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(Ord. No. 05-530, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 22-152. - General requirements for adult-oriented businesses. 
    All adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the following: 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years shall enter or be on the premises of an adult-oriented business at any time the adult-oriented business is open, nor shall any owner, partner, performer, contractor, or employee of an adult-oriented business sell or provide goods, merchandise, or services to persons under the age of 18. 
(b)  The following shall not be visible or audible to a person outside the building in which an adult-oriented business is operated, whether through a window or doorway or otherwise: 
(1)  Any depiction or description in any material of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  Any novelty; or 
(3)  Any person engaging in any specified sexual activity or exposing any specified anatomical area. 
(c)  No adult-oriented business shall allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the business. No person shall consume or possess alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult-oriented business. 
(d)  No adult-oriented business shall admit to its premises any person who is then under the influence of intoxicating beverages or of drugs, nor shall it knowingly permit the possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, narcotics or hallucinogenic drugs on its premises. 
(e)  No person or establishment shall operate an adult-oriented business: 
(1)  Between the hours of midnight and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday; or 
(2)  On any Sunday or legal holiday. 
(f)  No adult-oriented business shall engage in business unless each of the following are satisfied: 
(1)  At least two employees, excluding entertainers, are on the premises of the business at all times that the business is open; and 
(2)  The business is equipped with operational security cameras which shall be used at all times that the business is open. 
(g)  Any booth, room, or cubicle located in any adult-oriented business, or used by patrons for the viewing of merchandise or any other entertainment, must comply with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  It must be unobstructed by any door, lock, or other entrance and exit control device; 
(2)  One side must be totally open to a public, lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times from the adjoining aisle of any occupant. 
(3)  It must be illuminated such that a person of normal visual acuity looking into the booth, room, or cubicle from the entrance adjoining the public lighted aisle can clearly determine the number of people within; and 
(4)  There shall be no holes or openings in any side or rear wall not relating to utility, ventilation, or temperature-control services or otherwise required by any governmental code or authority. 
(h)  No sign or advertising for an adult-oriented business may include any photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or other pictorial representations of any specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity. No sign or advertising for an adult-oriented business shall contain any flashing or intermittent illumination (including electronic reader boards). 
(i)  All adult-oriented businesses shall be open to inspection by the city's building inspectors, zoning administrator or his designee, and any law enforcement officer, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article at any time that the establishment is occupied or open for business. 
(j)  Each escort agency shall maintain permanent records on the premises showing the name, address, and telephone number of every person for whom an escort is provided, the fee paid, the name of the escort or escorts so provided, and the location where the escort and the person requesting the escort initially meet. These records shall be made available, upon demand and without prior notice, to any city official or law enforcement officer inspecting the premises pursuant to this article. 
(k)  Comply with all federal and state statutes and all provisions of the City Code including, without limitation, article XIII of chapter 94 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-530, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 22-153. - Additional requirements for adult-oriented businesses offering live entertainment. 
(a)  In addition to other requirements of this article, any adult-oriented business offering live entertainment shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  A dressing room for performers with direct access between the dressing area and the performance area or stage shall be provided such that the performer may enter the performance area or stage without entering the area from which patrons will view the performance; 
(2)  The access, the performance area, and stage and dressing room shall be handicapped-accessible to the extent required by the Americans With Disabilities Act and the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act; 
(3)  All performances shall occur on a stage elevated at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the nearest employee or patron; 
(4)  The dressing area for performers shall be separate and not freely accessible from areas of the business accessible to patrons, and that the dressing area contain hot and cold running water and toilet facilities; and 
(5)  Public nudity shall be prohibited in accordance with section 50-42 of the City Code. 
(b)  There shall be no physical contact between any performer and any patron within an adult-oriented business during or for at least 15 minutes following such performances. "Physical contact" includes, but is not limited to, any contact in which any part of the body or clothing of one person touches any part of the body or clothing of the other person or if a person causes anything under that person's direct control to touch any part of the body or clothing of another person. 
(Ord. No. 05-530, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 22-154. - Registration. 
    In addition to obtaining a business license pursuant to article I of chapter 22 of the City Code, each adult-oriented business shall register its existence and location with the city clerk and zoning administrator prior to commencing business or, in the case of a business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this article, within 30 days after such effective date. The registration shall provide the following information: 
(a)  The name, residence address, business address, and telephone number of the applicant and manager. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or similar business entity, the name and residence address of each of the officers, directors, managers, and each of the owners, partners, or shareholders owning ten percent interest or more, either directly or beneficially, shall also be provided. 
(b)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the building where the business will be conducted and the name, address, and telephone number of the building manager (if different from owner). 
(c)  The location, mailing address, and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
    The registration of an adult-oriented business pursuant to this section shall not be transferable to a new location. Each adult-oriented business shall separately register each location within the city regardless of whether the same person or entity owns more than one adult-oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 05-530, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 22-155. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person within an adult-oriented business shall display to the view of any other person any specified anatomical area. 
(b)  No person shall engage in any specified sexual activity on the premises of an adult-oriented business. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit activity that is otherwise prohibited by the City Code (including, but not limited to, "public nudity" which is prohibited by section 50-42 of the City Code) or by applicable state or federal law. In the event of any conflict between this article and other provisions of the City Code or other applicable law, or in the event of any conflict among the provisions of this article, the more stringent provision shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 05-530, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 22-156. - Violations. 
    The following shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court: 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article; or 
(b)  Permitting, allowing, encouraging, or promoting any violation of any provision of this article, including any owner, manager employee, patron, customer, officer, partner or other person; or 
(c)  Aiding, assisting, or abetting the violation of any provision of this article. 
    A violation of any provision of this article shall also be a nuisance per se and the city shall be entitled to seek and obtain temporary and permanent equitable relief, enjoin violations of this article, and seek all other remedies as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-530, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Secs. 22-157-22-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SECONDHAND GOODS 

Sec. 22-170. - Secondhand dealer defined; application of article. 
(a)  As used in this article, "secondhand dealer" means any person, including any corporation or other entity, whose principal business is that of dealing in, buying, selling, storing or exchanging secondhand goods, articles or merchandise of any kind, including lead pipe, tools, lighting fixtures, plumbing fixtures, radios, watches, jewelry, precious stones, scrap metals, musical instruments, electrical motors, electrical appliances, firearms, automotive parts and accessories, bicycles, micrometers, clothing or any similar article of personal property or other valuable thing. For purposes of this article, "principal" means more than 50 percent of the annual revenues of the business are generated from the sales of secondhand goods, articles or merchandise. This definition does not include: 
(1)  Householders selling articles owned and possessed by themselves or executors or administrators of any such householders; 
(2)  New articles, wares or merchandise from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sale to customers; 
(3)  Used car dealers; 
(4)  Secondhand or used tires when such tires are removed from the vehicle to which such tires are attached in the presence of the person receiving them; 
(5)  Nonprofit organizations reselling donated goods; 
(6)  Used book stores; 
(7)  Antique dealers; 
(8)  Clothing consignment stores; 
(9)  Businesses regulated by Act No. 429 of the Public Acts of 2009 and required to adhere to the standards set forth in that act, also known as the "Nonferrous Metal Regulatory Act." 
(b)  This article does not apply to persons whose principal business is that of dealing in new goods, articles and merchandise and who do not buy secondhand goods, articles and merchandise outright, but occasionally accept in trade or repossess household appliances, watches, jewelry, precious stones and musical instruments. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 10-592, § 1, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 11-599, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 22-171. - License required. 
    No person shall operate as a secondhand dealer without first obtaining a license to do so from the city, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 22-172. - License application, fee, term and transfer; bond. 
(a)  A person desiring to operate as a secondhand dealer shall make a truthful application to the city on forms prepared by the city. The city shall grant an annual license under this article upon: approval of the city's chief law enforcement official or his/her designee; payment of a license fee as set by resolution of the city commission; and filing of a bond in the penal sum of $3,000.00, payable to the city. Such bond must be signed by two or more sureties or by a surety company qualified to do business in this state, approved by the city clerk, and conditioned on the faithful observance by the licensee of all provisions of this article. Businesses dealing exclusively in precious metals and gems and registered under Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of 1981 are exempt from the filing of a bond as described herein. 
(b)  Licensee shall designate the particular place where he/she shall carry on his/her business, and no licensee shall carry on business in any place not so designated. 
(c)  Such license shall not be transferable. 
(d)  Such license may be revoked for cause. 
(e)  A licensee's location shall be subject to local zoning requirements. 
(f)  A license shall not be issued to and a licensee shall not employ a person who has been convicted of a crime involving an element of theft, dishonesty, or the possession or sale of stolen property. 
(g)  All licenses shall be issued for a term of one year and may be renewed upon the licensee's completion of such renewal applications developed by the city and payment of a renewal fee as established by the resolution of the city from time to time and subject to the city clerk's determination that the licensee is otherwise in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(h)  A licensee shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations and, to the extent of a conflict between such laws or regulations and this article, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 11-599, § 2, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 22-173. - State pawnbroker license required for certain practices. 
    No person shall advertise or represent themselves as a pawnbroker or accepting items at pawn unless so licensed by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 22-174. - Posting name of licensee; records. 
    A licensee under this article shall post conspicuously in his place of business a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon, in letters at least six inches high. A licensee shall keep a permanent record, open to inspection by a member of the police department, sheriff's department, state police or other authorized person, in which shall be written in the English language, at the time of purchase or exchange of any article, a complete and accurate description thereof. Such description shall include an electronic photograph of the article; the article's trade name and serial number, if any; the name, residence and a copy of the federal or state-issued identification/operator's license of the person from whom the article was purchased or received; and the day and hour when such purchase or exchange was made and such other matters required by law. Each entry in such record shall be numbered consecutively. A member of the police department, sheriff's department, state police or other authorized person is entitled to inspect the premises and records of a licensee during all normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 22-175. - Holding period; tagging articles. 
(a)  Any article purchased or exchanged under a license issued pursuant to this article shall be retained by the purchaser thereof for at least 15 days before disposing of the article, in an accessible place on the premises where such articles are purchased and received. A tag shall be attached to the article in some visible and convenient place, with a number written thereupon to correspond with the entry number in the record required in Section 22-174, until the article is sold or otherwise disposed of. Such purchaser shall promptly prepare a legible and correct copy on forms approved by the city's chief law enforcement official or his/her designee written in the English language, from such record, containing a description of each article purchased or received during the preceding day, the hour and day when the purchase was made and the description of the person from whom it was purchased. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the Licensee. 
(b)  Businesses registered pursuant to Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of 1981 are required to retain items regulated by that act for a period of at least nine days before disposing of or altering the item. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 11-599, § 3, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 22-176. - Hours of operation; purchases from certain persons prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall purchase or receive, by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise, an article under a license issued pursuant to this article from any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or as otherwise prohibited by law. Further, no person shall purchase or receive such an article from any person who is at the time intoxicated or visibly under the influence of alcohol or narcotics, from any person known by the dealer to be a thief or an associate of thieves or a prior recipient of stolen property, from any person the licensee or employee has reason to suspect of being such or from any minor under the age of eighteen years without written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor. 
(b)  No person shall purchase or receive, by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise, any article or item that the person knows to be stolen, reasonably should have been known to be stolen, or suspects as having been stolen except as specifically authorized by law enforcement authorities. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 22-177. - Thumbprints and identification of customers. 
(a)  Whenever a licensee or employee of licensee under this article purchases or receives any article or valuable thing as described in section 22-170, the licensee shall first take, on a form approved by the police department, in addition to the requirements of section 22-175, a legible print of the thumb of the right hand of the person from whom such article was received. If such person has no right thumb, the licensee shall take the legible print of the thumb of the left hand or a finger, which shall be so identified in writing by the licensee. 
(b)  The seller must provide the secondhand dealer with personal identification at the time of the transaction, in the form of a valid operator's license or a federal or state identification card which includes a photograph that positively matches the seller. The licensee shall obtain and maintain a copy of the identification. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 22-178. - Computerized reporting of transactions. 
(a)  Within 48 hours, at his/her own expense, every licensee under this article shall promptly complete and transmit, by electronic means, to the city's chief law enforcement official or his/her designee's computerized system(s), the data identifying all transactions in which the licensee received used goods by pawn, trade, or purchase. A transaction reported by electronic transmission under this subsection shall not be reported on paper forms unless the city's chief law enforcement official or his/her designee so requests. 
(b)  Each transaction report and record shall include the description of the article, serial number, make, model number, size, color, purchase/loan price, ticket number, dealer name and location, employee conducting transaction, place of storage/stock location, and customer information including operator's license number or other federal or state identification number, customer's name (last, first, middle), customer address, customer date of birth, physical description (height, weight, hair color, race, gender), appropriate fingerprint and any other information required by the local law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 11-599, § 4, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 22-179. - License revocation. 
    If a licensee under this article or any of his or her agents, servants or employees is found criminally guilty of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance/chapter and/or any applicable state law, the chief of police may request that the city clerk revoke the license of the violator and the city clerk may, after providing notice to the licensee, revoke the license. The violator, following such revocation, shall not be permitted to carry on such business in the city for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 22-180. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of the city clerk in the revocation of a license as a secondhand dealer, may appeal to the city commission or its designee by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address. The appeal shall contain a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city commission shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. The decision and order of the city commission on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 22-181. - Penalty 
    Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 90 days, a fine, not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 09-576, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Secs. 22-182-22-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-200. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    IHRA means the Industrial Hemp Research Act, 2014 PA 547, MCL 286.841 et seq. 
    Marihuana establishment means that term as defined in the MRTMA. 
    Marihuana facility means that term as defined in the MMFLA. 
    MMFLA means the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, as amended. 
    MMMA means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, 2008 IL 1, as amended. 
    MRTMA means the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 18-644 , § 1, 11-12-18) 
Sec. 22-201. - Marihuana establishments and facilities prohibited. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 6 of the MRTMA, marihuana establishments are prohibited within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Marihuana facilities are prohibited within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-644 , § 1, 11-12-18) 
Sec. 22-202. - Rights unaffected by article. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in section 22-201, this article shall not affect the rights or privileges of any individual or other person preserved under the MRTMA. 
(b)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of a marihuana facility outside of the city to engage in activities within the city that it is permitted to engage in under the MMFLA within a municipality that has not authorized marihuana facilities to operate within its boundaries. 
(c)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers under the MMMA or the MMFLA. 
(d)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of any individual or other person under the IHRA. 
(e)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of any individual or other person under any other federal or state law, rule or regulation related to the medical use of marihuana. 
(Ord. No. 18-644 , § 1, 11-12-18) 
Chapter 23 - CABLE TV RATE REGULATION 
  

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, [the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.] All other words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC rules. 
    Act means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.923. 
    Basic cable service means "basic service" as defined in the FCC rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC rules. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC rules means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act. 
    Increase in rates means an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. 
(Ord. No. 93-424, § 1, 9-15-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 23-2. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: (1) adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and (2) prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. This chapter shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-3. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-4. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this chapter, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the city clerk. The city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)  In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to subsection (a) above, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the city manager in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city manager may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of providing that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC rules including, without limitation, 47 USC § 543 and 47 CFR §§ 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-5. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If this chapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 23-4(a), or any request for information pursuant to section 23-4(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determined that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, (1) where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or (2) the cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)  Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weight the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of an appeal. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR § 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-6. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 23-4(a) above, the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: (1) the filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying; and (2) interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published. The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city council, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-7. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under section 23-4(a) above unless the city council (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The city council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-8. - Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 23-7 and 47 CFR § 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rages for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city and additional information required or requested pursuant to section 23-4 of this chapter. In addition, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. the city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: (1) the date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held; (2) interested parties may appeal in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and (3) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-9. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the city manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the city council which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the city council pursuant to section 23-10. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less than 20 days before the city council acts under section 23-10. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-10. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC rules. If the city council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 23-7 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 23-7 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-11. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR § 76.942. Before the city council orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven days' written notice to the cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-12. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the city council pursuant to section 23-10 or section 23-11 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall public a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: (1) summarize the written decision; and (2) state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-13. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 23-4, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-14. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this chapter shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-15. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the city council may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city council, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-16. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC rules, and this chapter shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-17. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's consent agreement with the city) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's consent agreement. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Sec. 23-18. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the provisions of any prior ordinance or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with a cable operator, then the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Chapter 24 - MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROVIDERS 

Sec. 24-1. - Consent agreement required. 
    All multichannel video providers shall obtain a consent agreement from the city prior to providing service to any resident, business or person within the city, and shall have a consent agreement in full force in effect at all times while such service is being provided. 
(Ord. No. 98-524, § 1, 7-13-98) 
Sec. 24-2. - Multichannel video provider defined. 
    Multichannel video provider means a person or entity who meets one or more of the following tests: 
(1)  The provider is a cable operator, as such term is defined in the Federal Cable Act, being Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following, or is otherwise required to obtain a "franchise," as such term is defined in such Act. 
(2)  The provider is an operator of an open video system, as such term is defined in Title VI of the Federal Communications Act of 1934 and implementing regulations. 
(3)  Any person or entity who provides multichannel video service to a resident, business or person within the city, where such service is transmitted in whole or in part via wires or lines that are in or cross any public rights of way within the city. The preceding sentence shall apply whether the provider owns, leases or otherwise obtains the right to use such wires or lines, including wires or lines of a telecommunications provider used pursuant to tariff or otherwise for such purpose. Multichannel video service means multiple channels of video programming where the individual video channels are generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station or by a direct to home satellite service. 
(4)  A person or entity providing multichannel video service who is otherwise required to obtain a franchise or consent agreement under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 98-524, § 1, 7-13-98) 
Sec. 24-3. - Authorized city official. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-524, § 1, 7-13-98) 
Sec. 24-4. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less that $1,000.00 and not more than $5,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as follows: 
First repeat offense Not less than $2,000 and not more than $10,000 Second and subsequent repeat offense Not less than $5,000 and not more than $20,000.  
(Ord. No. 98-524, § 1, 7-13-98) 
Chapter 26 - COURT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The basic ordinance from which this chapter is derived is Ordinance No. 8-99, adopted July 1, 1968. The preamble of such ordinance reads as follows: 
"WHEREAS, the City of Walker presently has a Justice of the Peace Court; and 
"WHEREAS, the office of Justice of the Peace will be abolished as of January 1, 1969; and 
"WHEREAS, Act 154 of the Public Acts of 1968 of the State of Michigan contemplates the replacement of the Justice of the Peace Court with a District Court; and 
"WHEREAS, under the provisions of said Act 154, the Cities of Walker, Grandville, Kentwood and Wyoming constitute the Sixty-Second Judicial District of the District Court thereby established, which District is a District of the Third Class; and 
"WHEREAS, pursuant to said Act 154, the District Court shall not function and District Judges shall not be elected in said Sixty-Second Judicial District due to the action taken by the City of Wyoming whereby it elected to retain its Municipal Court System and to not participate in the District Court System established by said Act 154; and 
"WHEREAS, action must be taken by the Walker City Commission in order to maintain a court system to serve the needs of residents of the City of Walker, and to provide for the public health, safety and welfare, and the City Commission finds and determines that the establishment of a Municipal Court for the City of Walker pursuant to Act 5 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, of the State of Michigan is the most feasible way of so doing." 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 

Sec. 26-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Walker Municipal Court Ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to create, establish and provide for a municipal court in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 12-2) 
Sec. 26-3. - State law adopted and court established. 
(a)  The provisions of the state uniform municipal court act, as amended, being Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL 730.501 et seq., MSA 27.3937(1) et seq.), are hereby adopted by reference, and pursuant thereto and in accordance with the laws of the state, a municipal court for the city is hereby created and established. 
(b)  Copies of the uniform municipal court act adopted by this section shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection and public use during regular business hours of the clerk's office. 
(Code 1976, § 12-3) 
Sec. 26-4. - When operation commences. 
    The municipal court shall commence to function and operate as a municipal court in accordance with the uniform municipal court act, as amended, being Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL 730.501 et seq., MSA 27.3937(1) et seq.), on January 1, 1969. 
(Code 1976, § 12-4) 
Sec. 26-5. - Qualifications, election, jurisdiction, powers and duties of judge. 
(a)  The qualifications, time and manner of election, jurisdiction, powers and duties of the judge of the municipal court, and the practice and procedure in such municipal court shall be governed by the uniform municipal court act, as amended, being Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL 730.501 et seq., MSA 27.3937(1) et seq.), except as may be otherwise provided by applicable laws of the state. 
(b)  The first municipal court judge shall be appointed by the city commission in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. He shall be appointed for a term commencing on January 1, 1969, and ending on the Monday following the regular municipal election in April 1971. Thereafter, he shall be elected for a term of four years in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and applicable laws of the state. 
(Code 1976, § 12-5) 
Sec. 26-6. - Judge's salary. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall be paid a salary in lieu of fees. Such salary shall be as established by the city commission. The judge's salary shall not be decreased during his term of office. 
(Code 1976, § 12-6) 
Sec. 26-7. - Judge's bonds. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, the municipal judge shall give bonds to the city in the amount of $5,000.00 and to the county in the amount of $1,000.00, with sufficient sureties to be approved by the city commission, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of municipal judge and for payment to the city and to the county of all monies collected or received by such judge which, by the provisions of the general laws of the state, he shall be required to pay into the treasury of the city or county. The cost of such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 12-7) 
Sec. 26-8. - Clerk. 
    The municipal court clerk, if any, shall be appointed by the city commission, and his salary and other conditions of employment shall be as provided by the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 12-8) 
Sec. 26-9. - Business hours. 
    Business hours of the municipal court shall be established by the judge of the court, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9) 
Sec. 26-10. - Costs and fees. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 297 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 600.223 et seq., MSA 27A.223 et seq.), all costs and fees for the municipal court in both civil and criminal matters shall be governed by and shall be allowed in accordance with statutes and supreme court rules applicable to the district courts of the state, except where such provisions conflict with the provisions of statutes or supreme court rules specifically applicable to municipal courts in the state. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10) 
Sec. 26-11. - Jury trials. 
(a)  The provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1929 (MCL 730.251 et seq., MSA 27.3911 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference. Complete copies of such act, as amended, shall be available at the office of the clerk of the municipal court for inspection by and distribution to the public during regular business hours of the court. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1929 (MCL 730.251 et seq., MSA 27.3911 et seq.), terms for the trial of jury cases in the municipal court are hereby established. Each such term shall be two months in duration. Such terms shall commence on the first Monday of January, March, May, July, September, and November, respectively, except when such Monday falls on a holiday, in which case the respective term will begin on the succeeding day. Jury cases may be set for trial by the clerk of the municipal court in accordance with rules established by the municipal judge upon one or more certain days of each month or as soon thereafter as such trial can be reached. 
(c)  Jurors for the trial of jury cases in the municipal court shall be selected in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1929 (MCL 730.251 et seq., MSA 27.3911 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 12-11) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; selling of alcoholic liquor at retail on city or state primary or general election days prohibited, § 6-8(c). 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Primary election. 
    Notwithstanding section 11.5 of the Charter, and pursuant to the authority of MCL 168.644b, MSA 6.1644(2) and MCL 168.644-l, MSA 6.1644(12), a nonpartisan city primary election shall be held on the Tuesday following the second Monday in September in every odd-numbered year beginning in 1991. In accordance with MCL 168.644f, MSA 6.1644(6), nominating petitions for elected city officers shall be filed by 4:00 p.m. on the 12th Tuesday prior to the date of the primary election. 
(Code 1976, § 51/2-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - General election. 
    Notwithstanding section 11.3 of the Charter, and pursuant to the authority of MCL 168.644a, MSA 6.1644(1) and MCL 168.644-l, MSA 6.1644(12), a nonpartisan city general election to be known as the "odd-year general election" shall be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year beginning in 1991. 
(Code 1976, § 51/2-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Terms of elected officials. 
    City officials elected at the odd-year general election as provided in section 30-2 shall take office, pursuant to MCL 168.644h, MSA 6.1644(8), and section 2.2 of the Charter, at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday following the date of the election at which he was elected. Except as provided in section 30-4, the length of the terms of office for each elected city office shall be governed by the Charter. 
(Code 1976, § 51/2-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Extension of existing terms. 
    Pursuant to MCL 168.644g, MSA 6.1644(7): 
(1)  The mayor, the clerk, and the three commissioners from each ward whose terms were scheduled to expire in April 1991, shall continue in office until a successor takes office following the November 1991, odd-year general election in accordance with sections 30-2 and 30-3; 
(2)  The treasurer and the three commissioners from each ward whose terms were scheduled to expire in April 1993 shall continue in office until a successor takes office following the November 1993, odd-year general election in accordance with sections 30-2 and 30-3. 
(Code 1976, § 51/2-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Rescission of prior resolution. 
    This chapter shall rescind a resolution of the city commission dated January 12, 1971, by which the city opted not to hold elections in the fall of odd-numbered years as provided in MCL 168.644a et seq., MSA 6.1644 et seq. 
(Code 1976, § 51/2-5) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Floods, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 62; sewage disposal, § 86-61 et seq.; performance standards for sound, vibration, odor, gases, glare and heat, light, electromagnetic radiation, smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, drifted and blown material and radioactive materials, § 94-436 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Dangerous structures declared to be public nuisance, § 18-1; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; abandoned refrigerators and other airtight containers, § 50-4; solid waste, ch. 62; duty of operator of commercial dump to prevent public nuisance, § 62-89; unlawful presence of inoperable motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicle declared to be public nuisance, § 82-96; hazardous private sewage disposal systems, § 86-181 et seq.; noxious trees, shrubs, plants and weeds, § 90-3. 

Sec. 34-26. - Generally. 
(a)  Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with or obstructs or renders dangerous any street or highway; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Notice regarding abating nuisances, or any other act, shall be as provided in sections 13.7 and 13.8 of the Charter. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5) 
Secs. 34-27-34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIR POLLUTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air contaminant means dust, fumes, gases, mists, odors, smoke, vapor or any combination thereof. 
    Air pollution means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of air contaminants in quantities, of characteristics and under conditions and circumstances and of a duration which are injurious to human life or property or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life and property, and which are unreasonably detrimental to plant and animal life in this city, and excludes all aspects of employer-employee relationships as to health and safety hazards. 
    Appeal board or board means the air pollution appeal board created by this article. 
    Bridgewall means any wall at the rear of the grate or stoker that acts as a deflector or radiant heat reflector for the furnace gases and as a stop to the fuel bed or a rear wall to the ash pit. 
    Certificate of operation means a certificate issued by the director authorizing the use of any process, fuel-burning, refuse-burning or control equipment for the period indicated after it has been found that it can be operated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
    Chimney means any conduit, duct, vent, exhaust structure or opening of any kind whatsoever capable of and used for the emission of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, gases, fly ash or industrial dust. 
    Clean wood means natural wood that has not been painted, varnished, or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with preservatives; and does not contain glues as in plywood or other composite wood products. 
    Combustion equipment means any furnace, incinerator, refuse-burning equipment, boiler apparatus, fuel-burning equipment, device, mechanism, stack or structure used in the process of burning fuel or combustible material. 
    Director means that person appointed by the city commission to serve as director under this article, or the director's duly authorized representative. 
    Fire chief means the fire chief of the City of Walker or his or her designees. 
    Fly ash means any gas or airborne particles larger than one micron (approximately .00004 inch) and consisting essentially of fused ash or unburned combustible material. 
    Fuel means any liquid, gaseous or solid substance used for combustion. 
    Fuel-burning equipment means any equipment, device or contrivance used for combustion of fuel. 
    Incinerator means a device specifically designed for the destruction, by burning, of garbage or other combustible refuse or waste material. 
    Industrial dust means any gas or airborne particles larger than one micron emanating from a manufacturing process or material storage or handling. 
    Open burning means a fire from which the products of combustion are emitted directly into the open air without passing through a stack or chimney. 
    Outer air means all space outside of buildings, stacks or exterior ducts. 
    Particulate matter means the material, except uncombined water, that exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions. 
    Process equipment means any equipment, device or contrivance for changing any materials whatever or for storage or handling of any materials, and all appurtenances thereto, including ducts, stacks and the like, the use of which may cause any discharge of an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere, but not including that equipment specifically defined as "fuel-burning equipment" or "refuse-burning equipment" in this section. 
    Process weight means the total weight of all materials introduced into a source operation, including solid fuels, but excluding liquids and gases used solely as fuels, and excluding air introduced for purposes of combustion. 
    Process weight rate means a rate established as follows: 
(1)  For continuous or long-run steady-state source operations, the total process weight for the entire period of continuous operation or for a typical portion thereof, divided by the number of hours of such period or portion thereof; 
(2)  For cyclical or batch source operations, the total process weight for a period that covers a complete operation or an integral number of cycles, divided by the hours of actual process operation during such a period; 
(3)  When the nature of any process or operation or the design of any equipment is such as to permit more than one interpretation of this definition, the interpretation that results in the minimum value for allowable emission applies. 
    Refuse-burning equipment means any equipment, device or contrivance used for the destruction of garbage, rubbish or other wastes by burning, and all appurtenances thereto. 
    Repair means any work which requires heating or power equipment to be wholly or partially dismantled and which results in the restoration of the heating or power equipment to its original state. 
    Salvage operation means any operation conducted, in whole or in part, for the salvaging or reclaiming of any product or material. 
    Smoke means the visible finely divided material that escapes from a substance during combustion, except such other materials as are covered by this section. 
    Smoke chart means the Ringelmann smoke chart for the purpose of providing the standard of comparison for grading the density of smoke, as such Ringelmann smoke chart is published and used by the federal bureau of mines. 
    Smoke indicator means any device, electrically or mechanically operated, fixed or movable, consisting of photoelectric devices, mirrors or a series of mirrors which will allow firefighters or other persons operating boilers or other fuel burning equipment to determine the density and color of smoke or the ingredients of smoke, noxious fumes, acids, oxides, industrial dust or other air contaminants being expelled into the atmosphere. 
    Source operation means the last operation preceding the emission of an air contaminant, which operation results in the separation of the air contaminant from the process material or in the conversion of the process materials into air contaminants, as in the case of combustion fuel, and is not an air pollution abatement operation. 
    Source sample means a sample of the emission from an air contamination source, collected for analysis from within a stack or an effluent stream. 
    Standard conditions means a gas temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit and a gas pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1; Ord. No. 06-549, § 1, 11-27-06) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-52. - Article to be liberally construed. 
    It is the legislative intent of the city, in adopting this article, that all provisions and sections of this article be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2) 
Sec. 34-53. - Article not applicable to motor vehicles. 
    Nothing in this article shall apply to motor vehicles. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3) 
Sec. 34-54. - Creation of noxious or offensive odors. 
    No person shall permit matter to putrefy or decay, or be burned so as to cause, nor shall he in any other manner cause or occasion noxious or offensive odors, fumes or gases in any place within the city in such manner as to imperil the health or safety of any person or so as to disturb unnecessarily and without reasonable cause the comfort of any person within the city. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 10-7) 
Sec. 34-55. - Open burning-Prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  General provisions. No person shall cause or permit open burning to occur upon any premises owned or occupied by him or under his control, except open burning described in subsection (b) below for which a permit is not required and open burning described in subsection (c) below for which a permit is required. 
(b)  Permit not required. The following categories of open burning shall not require a permit: 
(1)  Burning of charcoal, natural gas, propane gas, or clean wood for the sole purpose of cooking food within a portable grill or other similar device that is designed exclusively for cooking and that has a metal lid, cover, or similar mechanism capable of completely enclosing and confining the fire. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b) except subsections (3), (8), (9) and (10). 
(2)  The use of salamanders in connection with building and construction operations, when done in accordance with accepted safety standards. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b) except subsections (3) through (11). 
(3)  Roofers, tinners, plumbers or other mechanics using open fire in the regular course of their trade, when done in accordance with accepted safety standards. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b) except subsections (3) through (11). 
(4)  The use of outdoor fireplaces (as hereinafter defined), which are purchased by homeowners for use outside of a dwelling or residence, provided such outdoor fireplaces are used for preparation of food or for recreation, are used on noncombustible surfaces including, but not limited to, brick, flagstone, or concrete, and are kept away from any flammable liquids and other combustible materials. Outdoor fireplaces shall be used only for the burning of clean wood or other solid fuel and shall not be used for the burning of waste materials or other materials including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, trash, grass clippings, leaves, and paper. Owners, operators and users of outdoor fireplaces shall use such fireplaces in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for safe use. An "outdoor fireplace" as used in this article is defined as a portable, commercially-produced device that is designed, manufactured, and purchased for the sole purpose of burning wood or solid fuel similar to an indoor fireplace. An outdoor fireplace does not include a barrel of any kind, or any other device, material or object, which is not designed, manufactured, or purchased exclusively for the burning of wood or solid fuel similar to an indoor fireplace. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b) except subsections (3), (8), (9) and (10). 
(5)  The use of fire rings as defined herein by homeowners for use outside of a dwelling or residence subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The fire ring is used only for preparation of food or for recreation. 
b.  The fire ring is used only for the burning of clean wood or other solid fuel and is not used for the burning of any waste materials or other materials including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, trash, grass clippings, leaves, and paper. 
c.  The fire ring shall not be closer than 25 feet to any building or overhead wires and not closer than ten feet to adjoining lot lines. 
d.  The fire ring is used in compliance with subsection 34-56(b), except subsections (3), (8), (9), and (10). 
e.  The fire ring does not exceed four feet in diameter and has a noncombustible barrier at least six inches in width surrounding the fire ring. 
For purposes of this subsection, a "fire ring" means a defined area on the surface of the ground designed for open burning and fully surrounded by a noncombustible barrier consisting of stone, brick, concrete, or similar noncombustible material. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b) except subsections (3), (8), (9) and (10). 
(6)  Open burning or fires set or attended by firefighting personnel for training in firefighting techniques, fire containment, and the use of firefighting equipment. Such open burning shall be authorized by the city fire department and shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth by the city fire department and applicable fire prevention codes and standards. Open burning under this subsection shall not be required to comply with subsection 34-56(b). 
(7)  Open burning or frees set for purposes of training in the use of fire extinguishers by the city fire department, or an established fire protection company with the prior approval of the city fire department. Such open burning shall be conducted in accordance with applicable fire prevention codes and standards. Open burning under this subsection shall not be required to comply with subsection 34-56. 
If the fire chief determines that any open burning or certain types of open burning for which a permit is not required under this subsection is unsafe due to dry weather, wind conditions or other unfavorable conditions, or the impact on air quality or the health of nearby residents, or the open burning causes a foul odor or smoke emissions reasonably offensive to the occupants of nearby property, or the open burning creates a visibility hazard on street, roads, or railways, the fire chief may order the open burning to be extinguished or may impose reasonable conditions on the open burning. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no open burning shall be conducted in violation of the fire chief's order. 
(c)  Permit required. 
(1)  All open burning permitted under this subsection shall require a permit by the fire chief and prior written or oral approval of the fire chief for a specific date as provided herein. A written permit issued by the fire chief shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. A written permit issued pursuant to this section shall not relieve the permittee from complying with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. In addition, no open burning shall be permitted without the prior oral or written approval of the fire chief for a specific date. The fire chief's approval may be withheld or withdrawn if the open burning would be unsafe due to the particular circumstances of a request, including, but not limited to, dry weather, wind conditions, or other unfavorable conditions, or the impact on air quality or the health of nearby residents, or the open burning causes a foul odor or causes smoke emissions reasonably offensive to occupants of nearby property, or the open burning creates a visibility hazard on streets, roads, or railways. The fire chief may impose reasonable conditions on the prior approval, including, but not limited to, limitations on the size, duration, time of day, location, and manner of burning. The requirement of prior approval of the fire chief for a specific date as provided by this section shall be in addition to the requirement of a written permit. All open burning permitted under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b) except as expressly provided otherwise in this article. 
(2)  The following categories of open burning shall require a permit and prior approval of the fire chief under subsection (1) above: 
a.  Agricultural property. Except as permitted under subsection (b), no person shall cause or permit open burning upon any premises actively used for primarily agricultural purposes owned or occupied by him or under his control, except the following: 
(i)  Open burning for agricultural purposes conducted between October 15 and May 15. Notwithstanding section 11522 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended (MCL 324.11522), the open burning of grass clippings and leaves is permitted by this subsection. All agricultural open burning shall comply with all applicable state laws, rules, and regulations and the issuance of a permit and prior approval of the fire chief under this article shall not relieve the permittee from the obligation to so comply. Between November 16 and April 14, the open burning permitted under this subsection is permitted on any day except Sunday as provided in subsection (b)(9). Between April 15 and May 15 and between October 15 and November 15, the open burning permitted under this subsection shall not be conducted on Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, and Sunday, as provided in subsection 34-56(b)(9). Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b). 
(ii)  Open burning of logs, brush, charcoal, and similar materials that are used in preparing food or for recreation. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b). 
(iii)  Open burning for a special event for which a permit is issued pursuant to subsection (c)(2)c. 
b.  Residential property. Except as provided under subsection (b), no person shall cause or permit open burning upon any premises that is owned or occupied by him or under his control, if the property is used for residential purposes, except the following: 
(i)  Until May 15, 2007, and notwithstanding section 11522 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended (MCL 324.11522), open burning of grass clippings and leaves conducted between April 15 and May 15 or between October 15 and November 15. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b). Commencing on May 16, 2007, and at all times thereafter, open burning of grass clippings and leaves are prohibited on property used for residential purposes. 
(ii)  Open burning for a special event for which a permit is issued pursuant to subsection (c)(2)c. 
c.  Special events. Open burning may be permitted for special events on developed or vacant property under the following additional conditions and subject to the following requirements: 
(i)  For purposes of this section, the term "special event" means an event of limited duration sponsored by, under the direction of, and participated in by the members of a nonprofit organization, association, or group, such as scouting groups, church groups, civic booster groups, and educational groups, where the event is recreational and organized in connection with, or to celebrate, recognize, or memorialize a day, event, or occurrence of special significance to the organization, association, or group. 
(ii)  Open burning in connection with a special event shall comply with all applicable requirements of this section, and the requirements of subsection 34-56(b), except subsections (8), (9), and (10). 
(iii)  Open burning in connection with a special event shall be confined to a discrete area and shall be in the form of a campfire or bonfire. 
(iv)  Open burning in connection with a special event shall be for symbolic, celebratory, and recreational purposes to provide a focal point for the special event, or for purposes of food preparation, and shall not be for the purpose of disposing of refuse, garbage, or other waste materials of any kind. The open burning shall burn only clean wood. 
(v)  Fire-extinguishing equipment shall be readily available at the site of any open burning in connection with a special event. 
(vi)  Open burning in connection with a special event shall be completely extinguished without smoldering at the conclusion of the event. 
(vii)  As provided by subsection (c)(1), the fire chief may impose reasonable conditions on the required prior approval and may withhold or withdraw approval of a request for burning in connection with a special event if the open burning would be unsafe under the circumstances. 
d.  Prescribed bums [burns]. Fires set for forest, prairie, and wildlife habitat management are allowed only if conducted in accordance with part 515 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.51501 et seq.). Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b), except subsections (3), (5), (8), (9), and (11). 
e.  Beekeeping. Open burning of beekeeping equipment and products, including frames, hive bodies, hive covers, combs, wax, and honey is permitted if necessary to prevent disease. Open burning under this subsection shall comply with subsection 34-56(b), except subsections (3), (5), (8), (9), and (11). 
(d)  [Prohibited burning.] Notwithstanding any other provision of this section and section 34-56, the following is prohibited: 
(1)  Open burning of trees, logs, brush, and stumps cleared for the purposes of land development. 
(2)  Open burning of buildings or structures for purposes of demolishing such buildings or structures except as permitted for fire training pursuant to subsection (b)(6). 
(3)  Open burning of demolition waste or debris and any other materials from the demolition of buildings or structures. 
(4)  Open burning on premises that are used or zoned for commercial, office, or industrial purposes, except as permitted by subsections (b)(2) or (b)(3). 
(5)  Open burning on vacant property, except premises actively used for primarily agricultural purposes as permitted in this article and except special events as permitted in subsection (c)(2)c. 
(Code 1976, § 3-7; Ord. No. 95-459, § 1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 97-496, § 1, 7-28-97; Ord. No. 99-535, § 1, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 03-503, § 3, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 06-549, § 3, 11-27-06) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 34-56. - Same-Permitted areas, time. 
(a)  All open burning for which a permit is required under subsection 34-55(c) shall comply with subsection (b) below, except as otherwise provided in this article. Open burning for which a permit is not required under subsection 34-55(b) shall be required to comply with subsection (b) below to the extent required under subsection 34-55(b). 
(b)  Subject to subsection (a) and this article, the following regulations shall apply to open burning: 
(1)  Open burning shall be supervised and kept under control by an adult who shall be present at the site of the fire at all times and until the fire is completely extinguished without smoldering. 
(2)  Fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available at the site of any residential open burning. 
(3)  Open burning shall not be permitted less than 50 feet from any building or overhead wires. 
(4)  Open burning shall not be permitted upon any public street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk. 
(5)  Open burning shall not be permitted in ditches or drainage courses other than the burning of natural vegetation growing therein. 
(6)  No open burning of any garbage, rubbish, or other solid waste shall be permitted, provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the open burning of grass clippings and leaves to the extent that it is permitted pursuant to section 34-55. 
(7)  No open burning shall be permitted in trash barrels, or other containers for burning, except outdoor fireplaces and fire rings, pursuant to subsections 34-55(b)(4) or (b)(5). 
(8)  No open burning for which a permit is required under this article shall be permitted on property used for residential purposes on Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, or Sunday. 
(9)  Open burning for which a permit is required under this article on property primarily used for agricultural purposes may be conducted in compliance with section 34-55 and this section on any day except Sunday during the period between November 16 and April 14. No open burning for which a permit is required under this article shall be permitted on property primarily used for agricultural purposes on Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, or Sunday during the period between April 15 and May 15 and between October 15 and November 15. 
(10)  No open burning shall be permitted between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise. All open burning during daylight hours shall be completely extinguished without smoldering not later than one hour after sunset. 
(11)  Materials to be burned must be dry and readily combustible so that any emission of air contaminants complies with sections 34-58 through 34-60. 
(Code 1976, § 3-7.1; Ord. No. 97-496, §§ 2, 3, 7-28-97; Ord. No. 97-506, § 1, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 99-535, § 2, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 03-503, § 1, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 06-549, § 3, 11-27-06) 
Sec. 34-57. - Same-General regulations. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of sections 34-54 through 34-56 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by subsection 1-11(c)(2) of this Code, except that as used in this section "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within any 15-day period; and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
(c)  The fire chief or his designees are hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations under sections 3454 through 34-56 as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 3-7.2; Ord. No. 95-459, § 2, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 97-496, §§ 4, 5, 7-28-97; Ord. No. 03-503, § 2, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 06-549, § 4, 11-27-06) 
Sec. 34-57.1. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  Responsible party; reimbursement of city. When the city fire department responds to a call for assistance involving an open burning that was conducted in (1) violation of subsections 34-55(d)(1), (d)(2), or (d)(3); or (2) the open burning spread from the original location of combustion due to the failure to comply with subsections 34-56(b)(1) or (b)(2) and such burning created a condition potentially or actually hazardous to persons or property ("unauthorized burning"), the person responsible for such open burning ("responsible party") shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to reimburse the city, its agents, contractors and employees for all costs of the city incurred in connection with the response to the incident and any mitigation of the situation. For purposes of this section, the costs incurred by the city for any response, mitigation, removal, cleanup, and/or restoration activities shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (i) per-hour charges for fire department vehicles as established by resolution of the city commission; (ii) the costs of personnel, supplies, and equipment of the city fire department (and any other department of the city) utilized in connection with the incident; and (iii) billing and collection costs, including attorneys' fees. 
(b)  Billing and collection. Following a response to an unauthorized burning, the fire chief shall prepare and transmit an invoice to the responsible party (or parties) for payment. The invoice shall demand full payment within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the bill. Any additional expenses that become known to the fire chief following transmittal of the bill to a responsible party shall be billed in the same manner on a subsequent bill. For any amounts due that remain unpaid after 30 days, the city shall impose a late charge of one percent per month, or fraction thereof. Failure to pay the invoice within 30 days of the date of mailing shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(c)  Enforcement. If any responsible party fails to reimburse the city for the costs described in subsection (a), above, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction, and may take any other lawful action, to collect such costs. In addition, if a responsible party who fails to reimburse the city for the costs described in subsection (a), above, is an owner or taxpayer of the property on which the unauthorized burning occurred, the city may add such costs to the tax roll as to such property and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against such property. The recovery of costs imposed under this section does not limit or modify the liability of any responsible party under local ordinance, or state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 95-474, § 1, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 06-549, § 5, 11-27-06) 
Sec. 34-57.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-549, § 6, adopted Nov. 27, 2006, repealed § 34-57.2, which pertained to open burning response recovery costs and derived from Ord. No. 99-535, § 3, adopted April 12, 1999. 
Sec. 34-58. - Maximum density of air contaminants. 
    No person shall cause or permit to be discharged into the atmosphere from any single source of emission an air contaminant of a density equal to or darker than no. 2 of the smoke chart except: 
(1)  Smoke of a density equal to but not darker than no. 2 of the smoke chart may be emitted for not more than three minutes in any 30-minute period. 
(2)  Smoke of a density equal to but not darker than no. 3 of the smoke chart may be emitted for not more than three minutes in any 60-minute period, but such emission shall not be permitted on more than three occasions during any 24-hour period. 
(Code 1976, § 3-8) 
Sec. 34-59. - Devices for grading darkness of smoke. 
    Darkness of visible emissions of smoke shall be graded by using the Ringelmann smoke chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines in Information Circular 7718, or by means of devices which result in measurements of equal or better accuracy. 
(Code 1976, § 3-9) 
Sec. 34-60. - Point of measuring density of smoke plume. 
    The density of a smoke plume shall be measured at the point of its emission, except that, when the point of emission cannot be readily observed, it may be measured at an observable point on the plume nearest the point of emission. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10) 
_____
Sec. 34-61. - Maximum allowable emission of particulate matter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the emission of particulate matter from any source in excess of the emission schedule listed in the following tables: 
Table 1. 
Particulate Matter Emission Schedule 
Source Maximum allowable emission at 
operating conditions (a) 
(lbs. particulate per 1,000 lbs. gas) (1) Fuel-burning equipment: a. Pulverized coal (includes cyclone) furnaces ..... See Figure 1 for maximum emission values.* *Note: It is required that a maximum allowable emission listing be applied for to the air pollution control commission for all pulverized coal (and cyclone) furnaces having capacity ratings in excess of 1,000,000 pounds of steam per hour. Capacity rating
 in 1,000 lbs.
steam per hourb. Other modes of firing ..... 0-100 ..... 0.65 101-300 ..... 0.65-0.45 (b) over 300* *Note: It is required that a maximum allowable emission listing be applied for to the air pollution control commission for all furnaces in this group having capacity ratings in excess of 300,000 pounds of steam per hour. Rating in lbs.
waste per hour (2) Incinerators: (c) a. Residential apartments ..... 0-200 ..... 0.65 201 and over ..... 0.30 b. Commercial and industrial ..... 0-400 ..... 0.65 401 and over ..... 0.30 c. Municipal ..... all ..... 0.30 (3) Steel manufacturing: a. Open hearth furnaces (d) ..... 0.15 b. Basic oxygen furnaces (d) ..... 0.15 c. Electric furnaces (d) ..... 0.15 d. Sintering plants ..... 0.20 e. Blast furnaces ..... 0.15 f. Heating and reheating furnaces ..... 0.30 Total plant melt
rate in tons/hour (4) Ferrous cupolas: (e) a. Production ..... 0-10 ..... 0.40 11-20 ..... 0.25 21 and over ..... 0.15 b. Jobbing ..... 0.40 (5) Lime kilns: a. Rotary ..... 0.20 b. Other ..... 0.20 (6) Asphalt (paving) batch plants: a. Stationary ..... 0.30 Plant capacity 
(tons per hour) b. Portable in remote locations (f) ..... 0-100 ..... 0.60 101-150 ..... 0.50 151-200 ..... 0.45 200 and over ..... 0.35 (7) Cement manufacture (up to 15,000 barrels per day kiln capacity):* *Note: It is required that a maximum allowable emission listing be applied for to the air pollution control commission for all kiln installations which will result in a total plant kiln capacity in excess of 15,000 barrels of cement per day. a. Kiln, wet or dry process ..... 0.25 b. Clinker coolers ..... 0.30 c. Grinding, crushing and other material handling ..... 0.15 Gas Flow Rate 
(SCFM) (8) Iron ore pelletizing: a. Grate kilns and traveling grates ..... 600,000 ..... 0.10 300,000 ..... 0.15 100,000 or less ..... 0.20 (9) Sources not specifically named: The maximum allowable emission of particulate matter from any source except those specified above (Table 1) shall be determined from Table 2, unless a specific emission level for the process is developed and listed by the commission on its own initiative or by application. All new listed values shall be based upon the control results achievable with the application of the best, technically feasible, practical equipment available.  
Notes: 
(a) Fuel burning and refuse incineration limitations shall be calculated to 50 percent excess air. 
(b) Emission limitations for specific ratings are determined by linear interpolation between the ranges shown. 
(c) These emission limitations do not apply to domestic incinerators (defined as having not over five cubic feet of storage capacity). 
(d) Air cleaning equipment shall be designed for maximum emission of one-tenth pound per 1,000 pounds of gas. 
(e) Differentiation between jobbing and production foundries: 
Cupolas used in a jobbing foundry are the same as those used in a production foundry and will vary in size only according to the quantity of iron melted per hour. However, the cupolas in a jobbing foundry will be run intermittently for just long enough at one time to pour the molds that are ready on the foundry floor, job by job. This might be for a two-to-four-hour period per day for any number of days per week. 
Production foundry cupolas will melt continuously to pour a succession of molds that are constantly being prepared to receive this continuous flow of iron. This could become eight hours, 16 hours, or 24 hours per day for any number of days per week. 
(f) Where no water is available and an emission limit of three-tenths pound per 1,000 pounds of gas cannot otherwise be satisfied, the plant may be located as the center point of a buffer zone one mile in radius having no occupied residences or places of public assembly. 
  
Table 2. 
Allowable Rate of Emission Based 
on Process Weight Rate (a) 
 Process weight rate Rate of 
emission Lbs/hr Tons/hr (Lbs/hr)    100 0.05 0.55    200 0.10 0.88    400 0.20 1.40    600 0.30 1.83    800 0.40 2.22  1,000 0.50 2.58  1,500 0.75 3.38  2,000 1.00 4.10  2,500 1.25 4.76  3,000 1.50 5.38  3,500 1.75 5.95  4,000 2.00 6.52  5,000 2.50 7.58  6,000 3.00 8.56  7,000 3.50 9.49  8,000 4.00 10.4  9,000 4.50 11.2 10,000 5.00 12.0 12,000 6.00 13.6 16,000 8.00 16.5 18,000 9.00 17.9 20,000 10.00 19.2 30,000 15.00 25.2 40,000 20.00 30.5 50,000 25.00 35.4 60,000 30.00 40.0 70,000 35.00 41.3 80,000 40.00 42.5 90,000 45.00 43.6 100,000 50.00 44.6 120,000 60.00 46.3 140,000 70.00 47.8 160,000 80.00 49.0 200,000 100.00 51.2 1,000,000 500.00 69.0 2,000,000 1,000.00 77.6 6,000,000 3,000.00 92.7  
Note: 
(a)  Interpretation of the data in this table for process weight rates up to 60,000 lbs/hr shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 4.10 P 0.67, and interpolation and extrapolation of the data for process weight rates in excess of 60,000 lbs/hr shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 55.0 P 0.11 - 40, where E = rate of emission in lbs/hr and P = process weight in tons/hr. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11) 
_____
Sec. 34-62. - Disposal of collected contaminants. 
    Collected air contaminants shall be removed and disposed of in conformity with this article and at such intervals as are necessary to maintain the equipment at the required operating efficiency. Collection and disposal shall be performed in a manner so as not to introduce contaminants to the outer air. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12) 
Sec. 34-63. - Abnormal conditions or breakdown of equipment; notification of director; program of correction; certificate of operation. 
    Emissions of air contaminants exceeding any of the limits established in this article as a direct result of abnormal conditions in or breakdown of a process, fuel-burning, refuse-burning, or control of related operating equipment beyond the control of the person owning or operating such equipment shall not be deemed to be in violation of this article, provided the director is immediately notified of the abnormal conditions or breakdown of equipment and the owner or operator of such equipment outlines a corrective program by which the emissions from such equipment shall be brought within the permissible limits of this article. Such program shall be approved by the director if the director is satisfied that, upon completion of the corrective program, the emissions from such equipment shall be within the permissible limits of this article and any other applicable laws. If approved, the director shall order the corrections to be completed within a reasonable time limit which shall be specified in the approval. If a certificate of operation is not issued for such equipment within the time limit so specified, the director shall issue an order in writing requiring the owner or operator of such equipment to cease operating such equipment until such time as a certificate of operation has been issued. 
(Code 1976, § 3-13) 
Sec. 34-64. - Diluting or concealing emissions prohibited; exception. 
    Unless prior written approval is obtained from the director, no person shall build, erect, install or use any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance, the sole purpose of which is to dilute or conceal an emission without resulting in a reduction in the total release of air contaminants to the atmosphere. This section does not apply to the control of odors. 
(Code 1976, § 3-14) 
Sec. 34-65. - Appeal board. 
    The air pollution appeal board is hereby created. Such board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by a majority of the city commission. Each appointed member shall serve for a term of three years and until his successor is appointed and qualifies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms in the same manner as original appointments. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4) 
Sec. 34-66. - Appeals from decisions, rulings or orders under article. 
    An aggrieved person may appeal any decision, ruling or order issued by the director under this article to the appeal board. Such appeal shall be filed within ten days after the decision, ruling or order complained of is made. All such applications for appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the sum of $25.00. The board, upon receiving notice of any such appeal, shall fix a time and place for the hearing thereof, which date shall not be less than five nor more than 30 days after the date of filing of the appeal, and shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to all interested parties, and shall mail a copy to the city clerks of the cities of Wyoming, Grandville, East Grand Rapids, Grand Rapids and Kentwood. At the hearing, a party may appear in his own behalf or by agent or attorney. The parties shall be given an opportunity to present oral and written arguments on issues of law and an opportunity to present evidence and argument on issues of fact. The board shall issue its decision in writing to the parties within five days after such hearing, which decision shall either affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the decision, ruling or order issued by the director. 
(Code 1976, § 3-5) 
Sec. 34-67. - Variances from requirements of article. 
(a)  Any person may apply to the appeal board for a variance from the provisions of this article. Applications for variances shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $25.00. Such application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the premises and installation for which the variance is sought, a description of the installation, and the reasons for seeking the variance. 
(b)  The appeal board shall process applications for variances in the same manner as an appeal from an order or decision of the director under section 34-66. 
(c)  The appeal board shall grant a variance from any provision of this article and suspend the enforcement thereof as to any person who shows, in the case of the person and of the activity which the person operates, that compliance by him with this article in the acquisition, installation, operation and maintenance of facilities and equipment required or necessary to accomplish compliance would constitute an undue hardship on the person and would be out of proportion to the benefits to be obtained thereby. Any variance granted shall not be construed so as to relieve the person who shall receive it from any liability imposed by other law for the commission or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(d)  A variance granted pursuant to this section shall be granted for such period of time, not exceeding one year, as is specified by the appeal board at the time of granting it, but any variance may be continued from year to year. Any variance granted by the appeal board may be granted on the condition that the person receiving it shall make reports to the board periodically as to the progress which the person has made toward reaching a compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-6) 
Secs. 34-68-34-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION OR ALTERATION OF AIR CONTAMINANT SOURCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 34-81. - Inspection of work. 
    The director shall have the right and duty to enter upon any premises on which equipment is being constructed, installed, altered or repaired pursuant to an installation permit issued under the provisions of this division, for the purpose of inspecting such work to see that it is being done in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, installation permit and the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-25) 
Sec. 34-82. - Stop work orders. 
    If the director determines that equipment inspected pursuant to section 34-81 is not being constructed, installed, altered or repaired in accordance with the plans and specifications and the installation permit issued therefor, or is otherwise in violation of the provisions of this article, he shall issue an order requiring that all work pursuant to such installation permit cease. Such order shall be in writing and shall be personally served upon the permit holder and any other interested party and shall be posted upon the premises. No further work shall be carried out under such installation permit until the permit holder provides the director with satisfactory assurance that the work shall be corrected so as to conform to the plans and specifications, installation permit and the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-26) 
Sec. 34-83. - Air cleaning device required. 
    An air cleaning device shall be installed on all equipment for which a permit is required by this division. Such device shall be maintained and operated in a satisfactory manner and in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-27) 
Sec. 34-84. - Final inspection and testing of completed installation. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the completion of the construction, installation or alteration of any equipment pursuant to a permit issued under this division, the person to whom the permit was issued shall notify the director that the work is completed and ready for final inspection. Such inspection shall be made promptly after such notification. 
(b)  When the work authorized by a permit is completed, the installation shall be tested in the manner set forth in the plans and specifications filed pursuant to section 34-103, or by another method acceptable to the director, and the results of the test shall be submitted to the director. When the notice provided for in subsection (a) is given to the director, the permit holder shall also notify the director of the time and place of the test provided for in this subsection and the name of the person who will conduct such test. The director shall be permitted to witness such test, and if the stipulated time is inconvenient, he may request a postponement to some other reasonable time. The cost of tests under this subsection shall be paid by the owner of the installation. 
(c)  The director may waive the testing of new installations pursuant to subsection (b), if operating performance of similar installations indicates that testing is not needed. 
(Code 1976, § 3-28) 
Sec. 34-85. - Certificate of operation for completed installation. 
(a)  After the inspection and tests required by section 34-84 have been completed, and if the director determines that the equipment can be operated pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this article, the director shall issue a certificate of operation to the person to whom the installation permit was issued. No person shall operate such equipment or cause such equipment to be operated until such certificate has been issued. 
(b)  The certificate of operation shall be kept posted at all times on or near the installation for which it was issued. 
(c)  No equipment constructed, installed or altered pursuant to a permit issued under this division shall be operated for any other purpose or in any other manner than that for which the installation permit was approved and for which a certificate of operation has been issued, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the director. 
(Code 1976, § 3-29) 
Secs. 34-86-34-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permit 

Sec. 34-101. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), no person shall construct, install, reconstruct or alter any process, fuel-burning, refuse-burning or control equipment, which may be a source of an air contaminant, for use within the city until a permit so to do has been issued by the director. 
(b)  No permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any maintenance, structural change or minor repair which does not change the capacity of process, fuel-burning, refuse-burning or control equipment and which does not involve any change in the quality, nature or quantity of emission of air contaminants therefrom. 
(2)  Equipment utilized for any mode of transportation. 
(3)  Fuel-burning, refuse-burning and cooking equipment utilized in connection with any structure designed and used exclusively as a dwelling for not more than three families. 
(4)  Laboratory equipment used exclusively for chemical or physical analysis or experimentation. 
(5)  Portable brazing, soldering or welding equipment. 
(6)  All gas fuel and no. 1 and no. 2 fuel-oil-burning equipment used for space heating, service water heating and electric power generation. 
(7)  Comfort air conditioning or comfort ventilating systems which are not designed to remove air contaminants generated by or released from specific units or equipment. 
(8)  Cold storage refrigeration equipment. 
(9)  Vacuum pumps in laboratory or pilot plant operations. 
(10)  Water cooling towers and water cooling ponds not used for evaporative cooling or process water, or not used for evaporative cooling of water from barometric condensers. 
(11)  Equipment used for portable steam cleaning. 
(12)  Grain, metal or mineral extrusion presses. 
(13)  Equipment used for hydraulic or hydrostatic testing. 
(14)  Blacksmith forges. 
(15)  Blast cleaning equipment using a suspension of abrasive in water, and any exhaust system or collector serving such equipment exclusively. 
(16)  Bakery ovens where the products are edible and intended for human consumption. 
(17)  Confection cookers where the products are edible and intended for human consumption. 
(18)  Drop hammers or hydraulic presses for forging or metalworking. 
(19)  Containers, reservoirs or tanks used exclusively for: 
a.  Storage of butane, propane or liquefied petroleum gas. 
b.  Storage of lubricating oils. 
(20)  Natural gas-fired or liquefied petroleum gas-fired or electrically heated furnaces for heat treating glass or metals, the use of which does not involve molten materials. 
(21)  Vacuum cleaning systems used exclusively for industrial, commercial or residential housekeeping purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 3-40) 
Sec. 34-102. - Filing of application. 
    An application for a permit required by this division shall be filed in the office of the director on forms provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 3-41) 
Sec. 34-103. - Plans and specifications to accompany application. 
(a)  An application for a permit required by this division shall be accompanied by not less than two sets of plans or specifications, or both, of the process, fuel-burning, refuse-burning or control equipment and structures or buildings used in connection therewith. Such plans and specifications shall include the following information: 
(1)  Expected composition of effluent stream, both before and after the installation of an air cleaning device, including emission rate, concentration, volume and temperature. 
(2)  Expected physical characteristics of particulates. 
(3)  Type of air cleaning device, if any. 
(4)  Location and elevation of the emission point and other factors relating to dispersion and diffusion of the contaminant in the outer air, and the relation of the emission point to nearby structures, window openings and other information necessary to appraise the possible effects of the effluent. 
(5)  If necessary to ascertain compliance, the tests to be made of the completed installation by the applicant, as required by section 34-84. 
(6)  Any other reasonable and pertinent information that may be required by the director. 
(b)  When a person files plans and specifications required by this section as the agent of an owner, the owner shall furnish the agent with a letter of authorization for filing of the plans and specifications, and this letter shall be submitted with the plans and specifications. 
(Code 1976, § 3-42) 
Sec. 34-104. - Amendment of application. 
    Upon written request and submission of adequate supplementary data, the director may amend the original permit application filed under this division. 
(Code 1976, § 3-43) 
Sec. 34-105. - Fee. 
    The fee for a permit required by this division shall be $5.00 for each installation where the value thereof is $1,000.00 or less, and an additional $1.00 for each additional valuation of $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. Such fee shall accompany the permit application. 
(Code 1976, § 3-44) 
Sec. 34-106. - Issuance or denial. 
    The director shall acknowledge the receipt of the application for a permit under this division and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its approval or denial within 30 days. The application and the accompanying plans and specifications shall be approved by the director when they are found to be in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article. Upon such approval and payment of the permit fee, the director shall issue a permit for the construction, installation or alteration of such processing, fuel-burning, refuse-burning or control equipment. When an application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing, by the director, of the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 3-45) 
Secs. 34-107-34-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- General operating restrictions, § 82-68; noise from offroad vehicles, § 82-68(8). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-126. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Walker Noise Control Ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 13-1) 
Sec. 34-127. - Purpose. 
    Excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being of the citizens of the city, as well as to their comfort, quality of life, general welfare and safety. The purpose of this article is to regulate or abate noises which annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of persons within the city, and to establish maximum sound level limits for motor vehicles and transportation noise and other general environmental noise. 
(Code 1976, § 13-2) 
Sec. 34-128. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acoustical terminology. All acoustical terminology used in this article, not defined in this section, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor bodies. 
    Ambient noise level means the all-encompassing background noise associated with a given environment without the sound contribution of the specific source or activity in question, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the sound contribution of the specific source or activity is to be made. 
    Amplified sound system means a radio, phonograph, compact disc player, tape player, television, musical instrument, drum, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound either electronically or mechanically. 
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies. 
    Combination vehicle means any combination of truck, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer or pole trailer used upon the highways or streets in the transportation of passengers or property. 
    Commercial activity means a use or activity permitted by chapter 94 of this Code in the commercial districts. 
    Commercial districts means the zoning districts identified under the zoning chapter of this Code as C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ORP, and C-PUD, including the commercial portions of an MPUD development. 
    Decibel means a unit of sound level on a logarithmic scale measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear. 
    Decibels on the A-weighted network or dB(A) means decibels measured on the A-weighted network of a sound level meter, as specified in American National Standards Institute standard S 1.4-1971. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration, maintenance or operation by any governmental agency or public utility of systems or facilities for the transmission, collection, supply, distribution, disposal or drainage of gas, electricity, steam, water or sewage; communication systems or facilities; transportation systems or facilities; and other similar public systems, facilities or improvements. 
    Exhaust system means the system comprised of a combination of components which provides for enclosed flow of exhaust gas from engine parts to the atmosphere. 
    Fast meter response means the meter ballistics of meter dynamic characteristics as specified by American National Standards Institute standards S 1.4-1971. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a vehicle. 
    Impulse noise means a noise characterized by brief excursions of sound pressure which significantly exceed the ambient environmental sound pressure. The duration of a single impulse is usually less than one second. 
    Industrial activity means a use or activity permitted by chapter 94 of this Code in the industrial districts. 
    Industrial districts means the zoning districts identified under the zoning chapter of this Code as ML, MH, MP, and IPUD. The ML and MP zoning districts are light industrial districts. The MH zoning district is a heavy industrial district. 
    Maximum noise means the noise emitted from a vehicle during that manner of operation which causes the highest dB(A) level possible from that vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power. 
    Muffler means a device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
    Noise means any sound. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the safety or health of humans or animals; 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs the comfort, repose or peace of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property; or 
(4)  Exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels provided by section 34-132 or section 34-133. 
    Noise, plainly audible, means any noise which is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech or comprehensible musical rhythms or beats. 
    Noise sensitive zone means any area within the city which contains noise sensitive activities such as schools, libraries, churches, hospitals and nursing homes designated by resolution of the city commission and conspicuously posted as a quiet zone. 
    Property line means the imaginary line which represents the legal ownership limits of real property and which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or other public right-of-way, the property line shall be the nearest boundary of the public right-of-way. 
    Repetitive impulse noise means a noise having more than five impulses per hour. 
    Residential activity means a use or activity permitted by chapter 94 of this Code in the residential districts. 
    Residential districts means the zoning districts identified under the zoning chapter of this Code as A, A-2, SA, S, AA, ARM, ARM District One, RMT, RPUD-1, RPUD-2, including the residential portions of an MPUD development. 
    Sound level or noise level means A-weighted sound pressure level for airborne sound, obtained by the use of metering characteristics and A-weighting. 
    Total noise means noises radiating from a vehicle, but not including noises emitted from a horn, siren, bell or other similar device of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
    Zoning district means a district established by chapter 94, Zoning, of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 13-3; Ord. No. 94-440, §§ 4-7, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 97-492, § 1, 2-24-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-129. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division apply to all sources of sound, except: 
(1)  Motor vehicles, (as defined in the state motor vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.) in operation on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Railroad equipment in operation on a railroad right-of-way; or 
(3)  Aircraft in flight or in operation at an airport. 
(Code 1976, § 13-4) 
Sec. 34-130. - General prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating, permit, continue or permit the continuance of any noise disturbance, or to otherwise create noise prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13-5) 
Sec. 34-131. - Specific prohibitions. 
    The following noises or noise-producing activities are prohibited: 
(1)  Amplified sound systems. 
a.  No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of an amplified sound system which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound: 
1.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone; 
2.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, in such a manner as to be plainly audible across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone; 
3.  For the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
b.  No person operating or in control of a parked or moving vehicle (including all motor vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds, and bicycles) shall operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of an amplified sound system which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible from the vehicle as follows: 
1.  At a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle located on a public road, public right-of-way, private road, or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for parking of motor vehicles, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
2.  At a distance of 25 feet from a vehicle located on a public road, public right-of-way, private road, or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for parking of motor vehicles, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  Loudspeakers, public address systems and similar devices. 
a.  No person shall use or operate for any noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device used to amplify sounds between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day in such a manner as to be plainly audible across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone. 
b.  No person shall use or operate for any commercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device used to amplify sounds: 
1.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone; or 
2.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(3)  Construction noise. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, no person shall use a piledriver, shovel, hammer, derrick, hoist, tractor, roller, or any other construction apparatus or equipment within 600 feet of a residence or within a noise sensitive zone, except for work on essential services. 
(4)  Loading and unloading. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, no person shall load, unload, open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential property line or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(5)  Stationary signaling devices. Except as provided by section 34-134(3), no person shall sound or permit the sounding of any stationary bell, chime, carillon, siren, whistle, or similar device: 
a.  In such a manner so as to create a noise disturbance across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone; or 
b.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, in such a manner as to be plainly audible across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(6)  Power tools or equipment. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, no person shall operate or permit to be operated power tools or equipment, including any power saw, sander, drill, grinder, garden equipment or similar devices, in such a manner as to be plainly audible across a residential property line or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(7)  Yelling, shouting, hooting or whistling. No person shall yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or otherwise create a noise or racket on public streets or from private property: 
a.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone; or 
b.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, in such a manner as to be plainly audible across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(8)  Animals or birds. No person shall keep any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall: 
a.  Create a noise disturbance across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone; or 
b.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, be plainly audible across a property line or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(9)  Stationary motor vehicles. No person shall operate or allow to be operated any motor of a motor vehicle which weighs in excess of five tons (10,000 pounds) for a consecutive period of longer than two minutes while the vehicle is in a stationary location on private property located within 150 feet of a residence. The provisions of this section shall not apply: 
a.  When the vehicle or motor is being used in the course of normal productive work; 
b.  When the vehicle or motor is being used in connection with work on an essential service; 
c.  To buses operated for the transportation of passengers while the bus is standing in established turnarounds, terminals or storage yards; or 
d.  To any vehicle standing within a completely enclosed structure. 
(Code 1976, § 13-6; Ord. No. 97-492, § 2, 2-24-97) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; motor vehicle noise, § 34-156 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
Sec. 34-132. - Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use. 
    No person shall create, assist in creating, permit, continue or permit the continuance of, on private property, any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in Table 1 when measured at or within the property line of the receiving land use. Where property is used for both residential and commercial purposes, the residential sound level limits shall be used only for measurements made on the portion of the property used solely for residential purposes. Any sound in excess of the limits in Table 1 shall be deemed prima facie to be a noise disturbance. 
Table 1. Maximum Sound Levels 
By Receiving Land Use 
Receiving 
land use 
district 
category Time 
interval A-weighted 
sound level 
limit 
(dB(A)) Residential 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 60 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 66 Commercial 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 66 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 71 Industrial 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 71 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 71 Noise sensitive areas 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 60 
66  
For any source of sound which emits a pure tone or impulsive sound, the maximum sound level limits set forth in Table 1 shall be reduced by five dB(A). 
(Code 1976, § 13-7) 
Sec. 34-133. - Additional noise disturbances. 
    Any one or a combination of the following noises or sources of sound shall also constitute an unlawful noise disturbance: 
(1)  A noise which exceeds the ambient noise level by ten dB(A), measured at the point of complaint within the receiving land use. 
(2)  Any stationary source of sound which admits a pure tone, cyclically varying sound, or repetitive impulsive sound, if the sound exceeds the ambient noise level by five dB(A). 
(3)  Any source of sound which admits an impulse (the duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay), including metal to metal impact or exploding impacts, and which exceeds the peak level set forth below measured at the point of complaint within the receiving land use: 
a.  Residence districts between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.: 90 dB(A). 
b.  All other districts and at all other times: 100 dB(A). 
(4)  Any source of sound which admits infrasound (below 16 hertz) or ultrasound (above 20 KHz) frequencies which exceeds 100 dB(A) when measured at the point of complaint within the receiving land use. 
(Code 1976, § 13-8) 
Sec. 34-134. - Exceptions. 
    The following noises or noise-producing activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Noise associated with athletic, musical or cultural activities or events (including practices and rehearsals) conducted by or under the auspices of public or private schools, colleges or universities. 
(2)  Noise associated with outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, concerts, parades, fairs, festivals, and sporting or entertainment events, provided that all necessary permits, licenses or approvals have been obtained from all appropriate jurisdictions for the event, and subject to any alternative maximum sound limits imposed by the city. 
(3)  Stationary bells, chimes, or carillons played for religious purposes or in conjunction with religious services, for national celebrations or public holidays, or for other noncommercial purposes, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and for a period not to exceed 90 seconds' duration in any one hour. 
(4)  Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime, including sound made by stationary safety signals and warning devices. 
(5)  Noise resulting from the provision of essential services. 
(6)  Noise resulting from emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster, or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger. 
(7)  Noise sources associated with the construction, repair, remodeling or grading of any real property, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., provided that all necessary permits have been obtained from the city and the permits are currently in effect. 
(8)  Noise sources associated with lawn maintenance equipment when it is functioning within manufacturer's specifications and with all mufflers and noise reduction equipment in use and in proper operating condition, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(9)  Noise created by mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment associated with agricultural operations, provided the operations do not take place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(10)  Noise associated with the operation or use, for any noncommercial purpose, of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, public address system or similar device between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., including the use or operation of mechanical loudspeakers on or from a motor vehicle, only if a permit for the specific activity has been granted by the city commission. The city commission shall cause such a permit to issue under circumstances and subject to conditions as follows: 
a.  The city commission finds that the applicant has a noncommercial message that cannot be effectively communicated to the public by any other means of communication available; 
b.  The applicant will limit the use of the loudspeakers to times, locations and sound levels which will not unreasonably disturb the public peace, as determined by the city commission; and 
c.  The applicant will not use the equipment in residential areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(11)  Noise associated with any activity to the extent that regulation of the activity has been preempted by state or federal law. 
(Code 1976, § 13-9) 
Sec. 34-135. - Noise variances. 
(a)  Noise variance board. There is hereby created a noise variance board, consisting of the members of the board of zoning appeals of the city. Meetings of the noise variance board shall follow the rules of procedure provided by section 94-57, as applicable, provided that the concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Authorization. The noise variance board shall have the authority to grant variances subject to the conditions and under the circumstances provided by this section. These variances, to be known as noise variances, may temporarily or permanently exclude the event, activity or location for which the variance is issued from the application and requirements of this article. 
(c)  Application procedures. 
(1)  The procedures for submitting an application for a noise variance, including the payment of applicable fees, scheduling the application for a public hearing, and providing notice of the public hearing, shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 94-61. 
(2)  The application shall contain information demonstrating that bringing the source of sound for which the variance is sought or the activity involved into compliance with this article would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant, with consideration of the factors set forth in subsection (d). The application shall also set forth any actions already taken by the applicant, if any, to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the application, the building inspector shall cause such investigation to be made concerning the application, including consultation with other city departments, as deemed necessary by the building inspector. The building inspector shall present the results of the investigation, if any, to the noise variance board for its consideration at the public hearing on the application. 
(d)  Review and approval of noise variances. In determining under what conditions and to what extent a variance from the requirements of this article may be granted, the noise variance board shall exercise a wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and persons affected by the noise emitted by the applicant. The following factors shall be considered by the board in determining whether to grant a variance: 
(1)  The balance of the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons in not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons adversely affected and any other adverse effects of the granting of the variance. 
(2)  The number, if any, of previous variances granted to the applicant, or for the same location or activity. 
(3)  The nearness of any residence or any other use which would be adversely affected by noise in excess of the limits prescribed by this article. 
(4)  The sound level of the sound to be generated by the event or activity. 
(5)  Whether the type of noise to be produced by the event is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the variance is requested. 
(6)  The density of population of the area in which the event or activity is to take place. 
(7)  The time of day or night which the activity or event will take place. 
(8)  The nature of the sound to be produced, including but not limited to whether the sound will be steady, intermittent or of a repetitive impulse nature. 
(e)  Content of activity not a factor. The noise variance board shall not consider the communicative content of the activity or event in determining whether to grant or deny a variance. 
(f)  Health hazards; nuisances. A variance shall not be granted by the noise variance board where the effect of the variance will permit the continuance of a health hazard. Further, the grant of a variance shall not be construed so as to relieve the applicant from any liability imposed by other law for the commission or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(g)  Conditions. Variances granted may be subject to reasonable conditions as the noise variance board shall require, including but not limited to, conditions: 
(1)  Limiting the days of the week for which the variance is valid; 
(2)  Limiting the number of days for which the variance is valid; 
(3)  Limiting the hours of the day, or days, for which the variance is valid; or 
(4)  Limiting the maximum sound levels which may be emitted. 
The variance shall not be valid unless all conditions are agreed to by the applicant, or its duly authorized officer or agent, in writing. 
(h)  Contents; display. A variance must be in writing, setting forth the name of the party granted the variance, the location of the property for which it was granted, and any conditions imposed, including but not limited to, the dates and times for which the variance is effective and the maximum sound levels authorized by the variance. A variance must be kept on the site of the event or activity and shall be displayed, upon request, to any law enforcement officer or other authorized city employee. 
(i)  Termination upon noncompliance with terms of the variance or this section. The failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section, or with any condition of the variance, shall cause the variance to terminate and shall subject the applicant, event or activity to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13-10) 
Cross reference- Board of zoning appeals, § 94-56 et seq. 
Sec. 34-136. - Compliance with sound level limits by preexisting commercial or industrial uses. 
    A commercial or industrial use of property in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which does not meet the sound level limits under this article shall be allowed a three-year period, commencing on the effective date of this article, to comply with the sound level limits. During the three-year period, all such preexisting uses shall make all reasonable efforts necessary to comply with the sound level limits and to reduce noise which exceeds the limits. At the end of the three-year period, all preexisting commercial and industrial users shall be in full compliance with the sound level limits and subject to all applicable requirements of this article. This section does not apply to any use of property which is commenced after the effective date of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13-11) 
Sec. 34-137. - Compliance with sound level limits by nonconforming commercial or industrial uses. 
    A commercial or industrial use of property which is a legal nonconforming use as defined by chapter 94, pertaining to zoning, shall be allowed to emit noise in excess of the limitations for the particular district where the nonconforming use is located if that noise does not exceed the maximum permitted sound level limit for the business or industry which would otherwise be applicable under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13-12) 
Cross reference- Nonconforming uses in buildings, § 94-136 et seq. 
Sec. 34-138. - Evaluation of noise level limits. 
    It is the intent of the city to periodically reevaluate the noise level limits and other standards contained in this article, and, if it is determined to be appropriate, to adjust such standards either upward or downward in light of future possible advances in technology or the state of the art. 
(Code 1976, § 13-13) 
Sec. 34-139. - Violation of article; municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this division (article IV, division 1) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine in the amount provided by this section, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(1)  For violations where the source of noise is associated with a residential activity (regardless of the character of the receiving land use), the amount of the civil fine shall be no less than $10.00. Repeat offenses under this subsection shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code, except that the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $20.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $50.00, plus costs. 
(2)  For violations where the source of noise is associated with a commercial or industrial activity (regardless of the character of the receiving land use), the amount of the civil fine shall be no less than $50.00. Repeat offenses under this subsection shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(b)  No provision of this article shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action or legal remedy of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or from other law. 
(c)  If there is any evidence of retaliation by any offender against any complainant or witness, the evidence shall be communicated to the district court. When sentencing any violator, the district court shall first examine the evidence of retaliation, and if acts of retaliation shall be shown, shall consider the acts and sentence the violator accordingly. 
(Code 1976, § 13-14; Ord. No. 94-440, §§ 1, 2, 9-13-94) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Secs. 34-140-34-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Noise from stationary motor vehicles restricted, § 34-131(9); traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 

Sec. 34-156. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division apply only to motor vehicles, as defined in the state motor vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq., in operation on a public right-of-way. For purposes of this article, the term "motor vehicle" does not include special mobile equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 13-20) 
Sec. 34-157. - Horns and other warning devices. 
    A person shall not operate a motor vehicle in a manner or with equipment that does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A motor vehicle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but a horn or other warning device shall not emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with the horn but shall not otherwise use the horn. 
(2)  A vehicle shall not be equipped with nor shall a person use upon a vehicle a siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section. 
(3)  A commercial vehicle may be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. 
(4)  An authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle, air horn or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet, but the siren shall not be used except when the vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. In those cases the driver of the vehicle shall sound the siren when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach of the vehicle. 
(5)  A motor vehicle licensed as a historic vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell which may be used when participating in a parade, exhibition, tour, or similar event. 
(Code 1976, § 13-21) 
Sec. 34-158. - Mufflers and exhaust systems. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. A person shall not remove, destroy or damage any of the baffles contained in the muffler, nor shall a person use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway or street. 
(b)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle unless the engine and power mechanism of the motor vehicle is so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke. 
(c)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is equipped with a properly operating exhaust system which shall include a tailpipe and resonator on a vehicle where the original design included a tailpipe and resonator. 
(Code 1976, § 13-22) 
Sec. 34-159. - Exhaust systems and backfiring devices. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle unless the vehicle is equipped with an exhaust system in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual noise and is equipped to prevent noise in excess of the limits established in section 34-160. 
(b)  No person shall introduce any gasoline, foreign material or obstruction into the muffler or exhaust pipe which causes or is capable of causing exhaust gases to ignite, burn or flash in any manner or form. 
(c)  For purposes of sections 34-159 through 34-161, a motor vehicle does not include special mobile equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 13-23) 
Sec. 34-160. - Vehicle noise limits. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle on a highway or street if the motor vehicle produces total noise exceeding one of the following limits at a distance of 50 feet, except as provided in subsections (a)(2)c. and (a)(3)c.: 
(1)  A motor vehicle with a gross weight or gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 or more or a combination vehicle with gross weight or gross vehicle weight ratings of 8,500 pounds or more: 
a.  Ninety dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Eighty-six dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is not more than 35 miles per hour. 
c.  Eighty-eight dB(A) under stationary run-up test. 
(2)  A motorcycle or a moped: 
a.  Eighty-six dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Eighty-two dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is not more than 35 miles per hour. 
c.  Ninety-five dB(A) under stationary run-up test at 75 inches. 
(3)  A motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles towed by a motor vehicle not covered in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2): 
a.  Eighty-two dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Seventy-six dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is not more than 35 miles per hour. 
c.  Ninety-five dB(A) under stationary run-up test 20 inches from the end of the tailpipe. 
(b)  A dealer shall not sell or offer for sale for use upon a street or highway a new motor vehicle manufactured after April 1, 1978, which produces a maximum noise exceeding the following limits: 
(1)  Eighty-three dB(A) for a motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or more. 
(2)  Eighty-three dB(A) for a motorcycle or a moped. 
(3)  Eighty dB(A) for a motor vehicle not covered in subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2). 
(c)  A person shall not operate a vehicle on a highway or street if the vehicle: 
(1)  Has a defect in the exhaust system which affects sound reduction; 
(2)  Is not equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; or 
(3)  Is equipped with a cutout, bypass, amplifier, or a similar device. 
(d)  A person, either acting for himself or as the agent or employee of another, shall not sell, install or replace a muffler or exhaust part that causes the motor vehicle to which the muffler or exhaust part is attached to exceed the noise limits established by this division. 
(e)  A person shall not modify, repair, replace or remove a part of an exhaust system causing the motor vehicle to which the system is attached to produce noise in excess of the levels established by this division, or operate a motor vehicle so altered on a street or highway. 
(f)  A dealer shall not sell a used or secondhand motor vehicle for use upon a street or highway which is not in compliance with this division. 
(Code 1976, § 13-24) 
Sec. 34-161. - Test procedures. 
    Test instrumentation and procedures used for implementation and enforcement of this division shall substantially conform with applicable standards and recommended practices established by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., and the American National Standards Institute, Inc., for the measurement of motor vehicle sound levels. Rules establishing these test procedures that have been promulgated by the department of state highways and transportation shall also be followed in the implementation and enforcement of this division. If such rules so provide, sound level measurements may be made at other than the distances specified in section 34-160, provided that the decibel limits applied at the other distances are adjusted accordingly. 
(Code 1976, § 13-25) 
Sec. 34-162. - Penalties for violations of division. 
(a)  A person who violates section 34-160(b), (d) or (f) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $100.00. 
(b)  A person who violates section 34-159 or section 34-160(a), (c) or (e) is responsible for a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 and which shall be processed pursuant to the terms of the state vehicle code. 
(c)  A person who, at the time of installation, knowingly installs a muffler or exhaust system which exceeds the decibel limits of this division shall be liable to the person who receives a citation for violation of section 34-160 for the amount of not less than $100.00, plus reasonable attorney fees and court costs. 
(d)  All other violations of this division shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. 
(e)  If it is shown that the noise level of a motor vehicle is in excess of the dB(A) levels established in this division, that evidence shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle was producing excessive noise in violation of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 13-26) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Secs. 34-163-34-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL REDISTRIBUTION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 42; planning, ch. 58; design standards and improvements for subdivisions, § 74-86 et seq.; malicious destruction of soil, § 90-2; zoning, ch. 94. 

Sec. 34-181. - Application of and compliance with article. 
    Without the present intention of commencing construction of a permanent structure in the immediate future, and prior to the time a building permit has been obtained for such construction, it shall be unlawful for any person to redistribute existing soil or place or deposit fill dirt upon any land within the city, and for any owner or occupant of land within the city to permit the redistribution of existing soil or placement or deposit of fill dirt upon such land, except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 17-1) 
Sec. 34-182. - Compliance with other ordinances, laws, etc. 
    Compliance with the provisions of this article does not relieve any person or real estate from the necessity to comply with the applicable provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the city or statute or regulation of the state. 
(Code 1976, § 17-2) 
Sec. 34-183. - Land upon which violations of article exist constitutes public nuisance. 
    Any land upon which soil has been redistributed or deposited in violation of the terms of this article is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 17-3) 
Sec. 34-184. - Variances from article. 
    Any person having a legal interest in the land concerned may apply to the zoning board of appeals of the city for a variance from the provisions of this article. The procedure to be followed concerning such application shall be the same procedure used concerning an application for a variance from the zoning chapter. The board of appeals shall grant such variance, if it finds from reasonable evidence that authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair the intent and purposes of this article or the public interest. In authorizing such variance, the board of appeals may attach such reasonable conditions thereto as are necessary for the furtherance of the intent and spirit of this article and the protection of the public interest. 
(Code 1976, § 17-4) 
Sec. 34-185. - Restrictions on raising grade level. 
(a)  No fill dirt shall be placed or deposited upon land and no existing soil shall be redistributed in such a manner as to raise the level of the land to an elevation above the grade, as established by the county road commission, of the street upon which the land abuts. If such grade has not been established by the county road commission and the property abuts upon a street which has been certified by the city, then the level of the street at its centerline shall be substituted for such established grade. If the land is situated at the intersection of two or more streets, that street upon which the greater portion of the parcel adjoins shall be considered as the street upon which the parcel abuts. If the land constitutes an existing platted lot and a building exists on each of the adjacent side lots, the grade level of such platted lot shall not be raised more than one foot above the average grade level of the adjoining side lots, and if a building exists on each of the adjoining side lots and the adjoining rear lot, then the grade level of such lot shall not be raised more than one foot above the average grade level of such three adjoining lots. 
(b)  If the grade level of the land is above the grade, as established by the county road commission, or above the street level measured at its centerline, if the grade has not been established, of the street upon which the parcel abuts, no soil shall be redistributed in such a manner nor shall any fill dirt be placed or deposited upon such land in such a manner as to raise its existing grade level; provided, however, that if such land constitutes a platted lot and a building exists upon each of the two adjoining side lots, then the grade level of such lot may be raised but only to the extent necessary to conform the grade of such lot to the existing grades at the respective common borders of such adjoining side lots. 
(Code 1976, § 17-5) 
Sec. 34-186. - Leveling and seeding requirements. 
    Any soil redistributed and any fill dirt placed or deposited upon land must be leveled at least weekly, and if the area is being used as a landfill the material deposited must be covered according to state regulations at least weekly. Within 15 days after the level of the property has been established as the final grade or within 30 days after a final inspection has been conducted the land must be seeded. In the event of hardship, an owner or occupant may secure an extension of time from the building official or form the zoning board of appeals, the length of such extension to be determined by the condition of the land involved, the amount of fill dirt or soil redistribution necessary, and the detriment to surrounding property resulting from the fact that the land is not leveled or seeded within the period specified. 
(Code 1976, § 17-6; Ord. No. 08-556, § 1, 5-12-08) 
Sec. 34-187. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-609, § 7, adopted Aug. 8, 2012, repealed § 34-187, which pertained to obstruction of highways, ditches, drains, etc., prohibited and derived from Code 1976, § 17-7. 
Sec. 34-188. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-609, § 8, adopted Aug. 8, 2012, repealed § 34-188, which pertained to proper drainage required and derived from Code 1976, § 17-8. 
Sec. 34-189. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article (article V) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(b)  The building official and the building inspector are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) and municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal ordinance violators bureau) for violations of this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-455, § 1, 12-13-94) 
Secs. 34-190-34-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION PREVENTION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, adopted April 8, 2002, amended art. VI in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. VI derived from Ord. No. 94-441, § 2, adopted Sept. 13, 1994; Ord. No. 95-470, §§ 1-8, adopted Oct. 24, 1995; and Ord. No. 99-539, §§ 1-22, adopted Sept. 28, 1999. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 42; flood damage prevention, § 42-26 et seq.; planning, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 74; malicious destruction of soil, § 90-2; zoning, ch. 94. 

Sec. 34-206. - Purpose. 
    This article provides for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation within the city as authorized by part 91, soil erosion and sedimentation control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended ("part 91"), and the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Rules (Michigan Administrative Code, R323.1701 et seq., as amended) promulgated pursuant to part 91. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 34-207. - Rules adopted. 
    The soil erosion and sedimentation control rules are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 34-208. - Effect of article in relation to the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act and the soil erosion and sedimentation control rules. 
    To the extent that any provisions or requirements of this article are more restrictive than, or are in addition to, the provisions or requirements of part 91 or the soil erosion and sedimentation control rules, this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 34-209. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless expressly given a different meaning by this article, the terms defined in part 91 and the soil erosion and sedimentation control rules have the same meanings when used in this article. 
(b)  As used in this article: 
(1)  Act 451 means Public Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended. 
(2)  City means the City of Walker. 
(3)  City engineer means the city engineer for the City of Walker or any person designated by the city engineer to act on his behalf in the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(4)  Earth change means a human-made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. Earth change does not include the practice of plowing and tilling soil for the purpose of crop production. 
(5)  Gardening means activities necessary to the growing of plants for personal use, consumption or enjoyment. 
(6)  Lake means the Great Lakes and all natural and artificial inland lakes or impoundments that have definite banks, a bed, visible evidence of a continued occurrence of water, and a surface area of water that is equal to, or greater than, one acre. "Lake" does not include sediment basins and basins constructed for the sole purpose of stormwater retention, cooling water, or treating polluted water. 
(7)  Part 91 means part 91, soil erosion and sedimentation control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, being MCL 324.9101 et seq. 
(8)  Rules means the rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) pursuant to part 91. 
(9)  Seawall maintenance means an earth change activity landward of the seawall. 
(10)  Sediment means the solid particulate matter, including both mineral and organic matter, that is in suspension in water, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by the actions of wind, water, or gravity and has been deposited elsewhere. 
(11)  Soil erosion means the wearing away of land by the action of wind, water, gravity, or a combination of wind, water, and gravity. 
(12)  Stream means a river, creek, or other surface watercourse which may or may not be serving as a drain as defined in Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq., and which has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of the continued flow or continued occurrence of water, including the connecting waters of the Great Lakes. 
(13)  Violation of this article or violates this article means a violation of part 91, the rules, a permit issued under this article, or this article. 
(14)  Waters of the state means the Great Lakes and their connecting waters, inland lakes, and streams as defined in the rules, and wetlands regulated under part 303 of Act 451. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 1, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-210. - Municipal enforcing agency. 
    The city engineer is hereby designated as the municipal enforcing agency responsible for the administration and enforcement of part 91, the rules, and this article within the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 9, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-211. - Scope. 
    Except as expressly exempted by part 91 or the rules, this article applies to any earth change within the city which: 
(1)  Disturbs one or more acres of land; or 
(2)  Is within 500 feet of the water's edge of a lake or stream, regardless of the amount of land disturbed. 
    As used in all subsequent sections of this article, the term "earth change" is limited in meaning to an earth change which meets the criteria of this section. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 34-212. - Permit and approved plan required; effect of property transfer; fee for transfer of permit. 
(a)  After the effective date of this article [April 22, 2002], no person shall maintain or undertake an earth change on any land within the city except in accordance with an earth change permit and approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan as provided by part 91, the rules, and this article. The owner of property that is subject to a permit under this article is responsible for compliance with the terms of the permit that apply to that property. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), if property subject to a permit under this article is transferred, both of the following are transferred with the property: 
(1)  The permit, including the permit obligations and conditions. 
(2)  Responsibility for any violations of the permit that exist on the date the property is transferred. 
(3)  The obligation to post a deposit pursuant to section 34-214. 
(c)  If property is subject to a permit under this article and a parcel of the property, but not the entire property, is transferred, both of the following are transferred with the parcel: 
(1)  The permit obligations and conditions with respect to that parcel, but not the permit itself. 
(2)  Responsibility for any violations of the permit with respect to that parcel that exist on the date the parcel is transferred. 
In such event, the deposit posted for the permit pursuant to section 34-214 shall remain in full force and effect for that parcel unless the new owner of that parcel posts a deposit satisfactory to and approved by the city pursuant to section 34-214. 
(d)  If property subject to a permit under this article is proposed to be transferred, the transferor shall notify the transferee of the permit in writing on a form developed by the MDEQ and provided by the city. The notice shall inform the transferee of the requirements of section 34-212 and, as applicable, subsections (b) or (c) above. The notice shall include a copy of the permit. The transferor and transferee shall sign the notice, and the transferor shall submit the signed notice to the city before the property is transferred. 
(e)  The city may charge a fee for the transfer of a permit under subsection (b) or (c) above. The fee shall not exceed the administrative costs of transferring the permit. Fees collected under this subsection shall only be used for the enforcement and administration of this article by the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 2, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-213. - Permit application and review procedures and requirements. 
(a)  An application for an earth change permit shall be submitted to the city engineer by the owner of the land upon which the earth change is proposed to be made (or by the owner's designated agent). 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by an application review fee made payable to the city treasurer in the amount provided by the fee schedule adopted by the resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  The application shall also be accompanied by a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which includes the following required data: 
(1)  A vicinity sketch of the site location and the proximity of any proposed earth change to the surface waters of the state (or to drains or storm water inlets leading directly to the surface waters of the state). 
(2)  A boundary line survey or legal description of the site. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the landowner (or authorized agent), and of the developer (if different than the landowner). 
(4)  A plan of the site at a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch (or as otherwise determined adequate by the city engineer), showing existing topography (or slope description) at two-foot intervals. 
(5)  A soil survey map or written description of the soil types of the exposed land area contemplated for the earth change. 
(6)  Details for the proposed earth change including: 
a.  A description of the location of the physical limits of each proposed earth change. 
b.  A description of the location of all existing and proposed on-site drainage and dewatering facilities. 
c.  The timing sequence of each proposed earth change, such as starting and completion dates of the development sequence and time exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective soil erosion and sediment control measures. 
d.  The location and description for installing and removing all proposed temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and their estimated cost. 
e.  A description and the location of all proposed permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and their estimated cost. 
f.  A statement of the quantity of the excavation and fill involved. 
g.  A program proposal for the continued maintenance of all permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control facilities which remain after the project completion, including the designation of the person or organization responsible for the maintenance. Maintenance responsibilities shall become a part of any sales or exchange agreement for the land on which the permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures are located. 
h.  Other information or data as may be required by the city engineer, such as a soil investigation report which shall include, without limitation, data regarding nature, distribution, and supporting ability of existing soils and rock on site. 
(d)  The soil erosion and sedimentation plan shall be reviewed by the city engineer (or by a person trained and experienced in soil erosion and sedimentation control techniques, as designated by the city engineer). 
(e)  All earth changes shall be designed, constructed, implemented and maintained in accordance with the minimum requirements for earth changes as provided by part 91, the rules, and this article, and shall also comply with any structural, vegetative, or managerial practices to effectively prevent or reduce soil erosion and sedimentation as determined necessary by the city engineer. In determining the adequacy and effectiveness of the design, implementation and maintenance of proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures for purposes of this article the city engineer shall consider: 
(1)  Site specific factors ands information of the type required to be included in the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for the property; and 
(2)  The specification and recommendations regarding soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices as provided by the "Guidebook of Best Management Practices for Michigan Watersheds," ("BMP guidebook") published by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). A complete copy of the BMP guidebook shall be kept available for public inspection at the building department at Walker City Hall. 
(f)  The city engineer shall approve, disapprove or require modification of the application for the earth change permit and accompanying plan within 30 calendar days following receipt of a complete application. Notification of approval may be done by first-class mail. Notification of disapproval shall be made by certified mail. If the application is disapproval, the city engineer shall advise the applicant of the reasons for disapproval and conditions required for approval. The requirement of notification by certified mail is not necessary if the application is personally given written approval or disapproval of the application. 
(g)  An earth change permit shall not be issued where: 
(1)  The proposed work would cause uncontrolled soil erosion and sedimentation; or 
(2)  The proposed work would cause hazards to the public safety and welfare; or 
(3)  The work, as proposed by the applicant, will damage any public or private property or interfere with any existing drainage course in such a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property or result in the deposition of debris or sediment on any public way or into any stream or create an unreasonable hazard to persons or property; or 
(4)  The land area for which work is subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any other such hazard to persons or property; or the land area for which the work is proposed lies within the 100-year floodplain of any stream or watercourse (not specifically designated and delineated by the county as an area subject to flood hazard), unless a permit from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) accompanies the application and a hydrologic report prepared by a licensed and professional engineer is submitted to certify that the proposed work will have, in the city engineer's opinion, no detrimental influence on the public welfare for upon the total development of the watershed. 
(h)  No earth change permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid applicable permit and inspection fees to the city treasurer in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission and has posted the required deposit pursuant to section 34-214. The city engineer shall calculate the fee after reviewing the application and plan. 
(i)  Upon a determination by the city engineer that an applicant has met all applicable requirements under this article and other applicable laws and regulations, and that the applicant has paid all applicable fees, the city engineer shall issue a permit for the proposed earth change. The permit shall be kept available on the site of the proposed earth change at all times for inspection by the city. 
(j)  If the earth change for which a permit has been issued has not been commenced within one year from the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall lapse, provided that the city engineer may extend the time for commencement of the earth change if the permittee requires an extension prior to the expiration of the initial period and not material change of circumstances has occurred. 
(k)  An earth change permit issued under this article shall not relieve the permittee from complying with any other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(l)  The failure to comply with any term or condition of an approved permit or to timely complete all work as set forth in an approved plan constitutes a violation of this article. 
(m)  An "authorized public agency" as defined by part 91 is exempt from obtaining an earth change permit but shall notify the city in advance of each proposed earth change. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 3, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-214. - Deposit. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued by the city under this article or transferred under subsection 34-212(b) unless the applicant first posts a deposit with the city treasurer in the form of cash, a certified check, or an irrevocable letter of credit, whichever the applicant selects, subject to the following: 
(1)  The deposit shall be in a form approved and furnished by the city. The deposit shall be in the amount sufficient to assure the installation and completion of such protective or corrective measures as required by the city. 
(2)  As a condition of the deposit, the applicant shall be required to comply with all provisions of this article, the terms and conditions of the permit, and complete all work set forth in the plan within the time specified in the permit (or, if no time limit is so specified, within 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit). 
(b)  If the applicant fails to complete the work as provided by subsection (a)(2), the city is authorized the cause the work to be completed in accordance with the plan covered by the permit and the necessary and reasonable costs and expenses so incurred or expended, including the incidental administrative and legal costs, shall be the obligation of and paid by the applicant. The applicant shall be refunded any portion of the deposit not used for the aforesaid costs and expenses. 
(c)  The city engineer is authorized to grant the permittee an extension of time to complete the work shown in the plan upon the applicant's written request showing good cause for the need of the extension prior to the expiration of the time required for completion of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 4, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-215. - Inspections. 
(a)  The city engineer (or other person that has completed the MDEQ soil erosion and sedimentation control training, as designated by the city engineer) shall inspect all work covered by an earth change permit issued pursuant to this article and is hereby authorized to enter property in the city covered by a permit for the purpose of performing inspection duties under this article. Inspection fees shall be paid as provided according to the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  The city engineer, or any person designated by the city engineer, may enter at all reasonable times in or upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspection and investigating conditions or practices that may be a violation of this article. However, an investigation or inspection under this subsection shall comply with the United States constitution and the state constitution of 1963. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 5, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-216. - Permit required prior to issuance of building permit. 
    A building permit shall not be issued for any property upon which an earth change permit is required until the earth change permit has been issued for the property as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 6, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-216.1. - Logging, mining, land plowing or tilling and permit exemption. 
(a)  A person engaged in the logging industry, the mining industry, or the plowing or tilling of land for the purpose of crop production or the harvesting of crops is not required to obtain a permit under this article. However, all earth changes associated with the activities listed in this section shall conform to the same standards as if they required a permit under this article. The exemption from obtaining a permit under this subsection does not include either of the following: 
(1)  Access roads to and from the site where active mining or logging is taking place. 
(2)  Ancillary activities associated with logging and mining. 
(b)  This article does not apply to metallic mineral mining activity that is regulated under a mining and reclamation plan that contains soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions and that is approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). 
(c)  A person is not required to obtain a permit from the city for earth changes associated with well locations, surface facilities, flow lines, or access roads relating to oil or gas exploration and development activities regulated under part 615 of Act 451, if the application for a permit to drill and operate under part 615 contains a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan that is approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) under part 615. However, those earth changes shall conform to the same standards as required for a permit under this article. This subsection does not apply to a multisource commercial hazardous waste disposal well as defined in section 62506a of Act 451. 
(d)  As used in this section, "mining" does not include the removal of clay, gravel, sand, peat, or topsoil. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 34-216.2. - Earth change activities not requiring permit; violations. 
(a)  A residential property owner who causes the following activities to be conducted on individual residential property owned and occupied by him or her is not required to obtain a permit under this part if the earth change activities do not result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state or a discharge of sediment off site: 
(1)  An earth change of a minor nature that is stabilized within 24 hours of the initial earth disturbance. 
(2)  Gardening, if the natural elevation of the area is not raised. 
(3)  Post holes for fencing, decks, utility posts, mailboxes, or similar applications, if no additional grading or earth change occurs for use of the postholes. 
(4)  Removal of tree stumps, shrub stumps, or roots resulting in an earth change not to exceed 100 square feet. 
(5)  All of the following activities, if soil erosion and sedimentation controls are implemented, the earth change is stabilized within 24 hours of the initial earth disturbance, and soil erosion or sedimentation to adjacent properties or the waters of the state has not or will not reasonably occur: 
(i)  Planting of trees, shrubs, or other similar plants. 
(ii)  Seeding or reseeding of lawns of less than one acre if the seeded area is at least 100 feet from the waters of the state. 
(iii)  Seeding or reseeding of lawns closer than 100 feet from the waters of the state if the area to be seeded or reseeded does not exceed 100 square feet. 
(iv)  The temporary stockpiling of soil, sand, or gravel not greater than a total of ten cubic yards on the property if the stockpiling occurs at least 100 feet from the waters of the state and complies with the city zoning ordinance (chapter 94 of the City Code) and other applicable ordinances. 
(v)  Seawall maintenance that does not exceed 100 square feet. 
(b)  Exemptions provided in this section shall not be construed as exemptions from enforcement procedures under this article if the exempted activities cause or result in a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 7, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-216.3. - Reduction of soil erosion or sedimentation by owner. 
(a)  A person who owns land on which an earth change has been made that may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state shall implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures that will effectively reduce soil erosion and sedimentation from the land on which the earth change has been made. 
(b)  This section is effective whether or not an earth change permit is required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-543, § 8, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 34-217. - Notice of violation; cost recovery. 
(a)  If the city engineer determines that soil erosion and sedimentation of the waters of the state has or is reasonably likely to occur from a parcel of land in violation of this article, the city engineer shall notify the person who owns the land by mail, with return receipt requested, of that determination. The notice shall contain a description of the violation and what must be done to remedy the violation and shall specify a time to comply with this article. 
(b)  Within five days after the notice of violation is mailed, the landowner shall implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this article, as specified by the notice or as otherwise determined adequate by the city engineer to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of the waters of the state. 
(c)  If after five days from the date that a notice of violation is mailed, the condition of the land, in the opinion of the city engineer, may result in or contribute to soil erosion and sedimentation of the waters of the state, and if soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this article are not in place, the city (or its designee) may enter upon the land and construct, implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this article. The city shall not expend more than $10,000.00 for the cost of the work, materials, or labor unless the notice of violation contained written notice that such costs might exceed $10,000.00. Further, if more than $10,000.00 is to be expended under this section, then the work shall not begin until at least ten days after the notice of violation is mailed. 
(d)  All expenses incurred by the city under this section to construct, implement, or maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures to bring the land into conformance with this article shall be reimbursed to the city by the person who owns the land. The costs recovered by the city shall be in addition to any civil fines, damages, expenses or costs payable to the city as a result of a violation. Further, the abatement by the city of a violation of this article and subsequent recovery of costs incurred by the city shall not be a defense to any action by the city against any person for the violation, including without limitation, any action by the city to collect civil fines, damages, expenses or costs as authorized by law. 
(e)  The city shall have a lien for the expenses incurred under this section in bringing the land in to conformance with this article. With respect to single or multifamily residential property, the lien for such expenses shall have priority over all liens and encumbrances filed or recorded after the date of the expenditure. With respect to all other property, the lien for such expenses shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being MCL 211.1-211.157. 
(f)  If the city has notice that a violation of this article has occurred within the boundaries of the city (including, but not limited to, a violation attributable to an earth change by an authorized public agency), the city shall notify the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 34-218. - Enforcement authority. 
    Upon a finding that there has been a violation of any provision, requirement or condition of this article (or of any permit or plan issued or approved under this article), the city engineer may take any enforcement action authorized by part 91, the rules, this article, or by other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. In addition to other remedies provided in this article, the city engineer's enforcement authority includes, without limitation, the ability to issue cease and desist orders and to revoke earth change permits. Failure to comply with a cease and desist order or revocation of an earth change permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 34-219. - Violations, civil fines and damages. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $2,500.00, plus costs and other sanctions. 
(b)  A person who knowingly violates any provision of this article or knowingly makes a false statement in an application for a permit or in a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of not more than $10,000.00 for each day of violation. 
(c)  A person who knowingly violates any provision of this article after receiving a notice of determination under section 34-217 is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of not less than $2,500.00 or more than $25,000.00 for each day of violation. 
(d)  Civil fines collected under subsections (a), (b), and (c) above shall be deposited with the city. 
(e)  A default in the payment of a civil fine or costs ordered under this section or an installation of the fine or costs may be remedied by any means under the Revised Judicature Action of 1961, as amended (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
(f)  Notwithstanding the existence of any other remedy, the city may maintain an action in its own name in a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain or prevent violations of part 91, the rules, or this article. 
(g)  In addition to a fine assessed under this section, a person who violates this article is liable to the state for damages for injury to, or destruction of, or loss of natural resources resulting from the violation. The court may order a person who violates this part to restore the area or areas affected by the violation to their conditions as existing immediately prior to the violation. 
(h)  Each day on which a violation of this article continues constitutes a separate violation and shall be subject to sanctions or penalties as provided in this section as a separate violation. 
(i)  The city engineer and any person designated by the city engineer to act on his behalf in the administration and enforcement of this article are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) and municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the City of Walker Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) for violations of this article as provided by this code. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 06-543, § 10, 2-13-06) 
Secs. 34-220-34-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MINERAL MINING[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2007, amended art. VII in its entirety and enacted similar provisions set out herein. The former art. VII derived from Code 1976, §§ 21-1-21-34, 21-35(a), 21-35(b), 21-36, 21-37; Ord. No. 94-430, § 1, adopted March 8, 1994; Ord. No. 94-438, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1994; Ord. No. 94-457, § 1, adopted Dec. 27, 1994; Ord. No. 95-470, §§ 9, 10, adopted Oct. 24, 1995; Ord. No. 98-508, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1998; Ord. No. 98-521, § 1, adopted May 18, 1998; and Ord. No. 00-461, §§ 1-3, adopted July 24, 2000. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-231. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Walker Mineral Mining Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-232. - Findings; purpose. 
    The mining of sand, gravel and other minerals can be detrimental to persons and property within the city due to the noise, dirt and dust emitted as a result of mining operations. Further, mineral mining can result in permanent changes in the topographical and geological characteristics of the city which may in turn result in steep hillsides, shifting earth, groundwater and surface water impacts, drainage pattern alterations and other potentially hazardous conditions. To protect the health, safety, welfare and property of the residents of the city, this article establishes operational, maintenance, performance and reclamation standards and requirements for mineral mining operations and mineral mining sites, and requires that all mineral mining operations and sites obtain a license as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-233. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means the building official of the city. 
    Cessation of mining means annual mining of less than 1,000 cubic yards of raw natural resource material, not including processed material, for a period of two consecutive years. 
    License means a mineral mining license as required by this article to commence or continue mineral mining operations within the city. 
    Mineral mining or mining means the excavation and removal of peat, gravel, sand, clay, marl or other soils, including overburden, or the transporting of those materials on a mining site, or the reclamation of the site after removal or excavation of materials. However, the following excavation activities are not included within the definition of mineral mining or mining and are exempt from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Excavation approved by a governmental body of competent jurisdiction in conjunction with the installation or maintenance of publicly owned or operated utilities, drainage facilities, roads, or other publicly owned or operated improvements, where the excavation is limited to the site of the publicly utility or improvement. 
(2)  Excavation which by its nature is of limited scope and duration and which is undertaken primarily for the immediate use and development of the land excavated, such as for purposes of building construction, septic tanks, swimming pools, graves and similar limited excavations. However, any excavation which may exceed (or exceeds) 5,000 cubic yards of material to be removed from the site shall not qualify under this exemption and shall fully subject to the standards and requirements for mineral mining operations and sites, including, without limitation, the requirement that a license be obtained, as provided by this article. 
(3)  Excavation in conjunction with farming operations conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices, including agricultural drainage work incidental to farming operations and irrigation or stock watering ponds, if no material is removed from the property. 
(4)  Other excavations if the mineral mining review board determines in its discretion that the proposed excavation is unlikely to unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property and will not expose any person or property to the types of dangers inherent in mineral mining sought to be prevented by this article. The board's determination may be based on a review of the purpose, location, extent or duration of the proposed excavation and other factors which may bear on the potential of any excavation activity to adversely affect the public health, safety, or general welfare of the community. 
(5)  Excavation of certain materials, including but not limited to coal and nonferrous metallic minerals, subject to exclusive State of Michigan regulation. 
    Site means a parcel or unit of land. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-234. - Effect of article in relation to existing laws and ordinances. 
    This article is not intended to repeal or annul or to otherwise affect any existing law or ordinance unless expressly stated in this article. However, to the extent that any restrictions or standards imposed by this article are more stringent and restrictive than existing restrictions or standards, this article shall control. This article shall control as to the restrictions and standards found in article V, chapter 34 of this Code, entitled "Soil Redistribution." 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-235. - Mineral mining review board. 
    A mineral mining review board is hereby created. The board shall consist of five regular members plus two alternate members, as follows: the city engineer, the superintendent of the department of public works, the city planner, two other regular members plus two alternate members, as appointed by the city commission from among other city staff or city officials (except the building official). The terms of the city engineer, the superintendent of the department of public works, and the city planner as members of the board shall correspond to their respective official tenures. The terms of each of the two regular members and each of the two alternate members of the board appointed by the city commission from among city staff or city officials shall be for one year commencing on January 1, with eligibility for reappointment for unlimited successive terms (provided that if any member so appointed thereafter ceases to be employed by the city or ceases to be a city official, as applicable, that member's term shall then immediately end and the position shall be vacant unless another eligible person is appointed by the city commission to serve as an interim member until the following January 1). Meetings of the board shall be open to the public and shall be held as necessary to consider applications for licenses or to take other actions as provided by this article. Every action of the board shall be by a concurring vote of three members. The alternate members may be called to sit as regular members of the board in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. An alternate member called to serve in the place of a regular member shall serve in the case until a final decision is made, and shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the board. The board shall keep a record of its proceedings, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The board may establish rules to govern its procedures, and may call on any other city officials or boards for assistance in the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 11-602, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 34-236. - Actions or decisions of mineral mining review board final; exception. 
    Except as otherwise provided by section 34-239 with regard to actions or decisions of the mineral mining review board to suspend or revoke a license, all decisions of the board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-237. - Violation; notice of violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a mineral mining operation or site regulated by this article, or cause such operation or maintenance to be done, except in full compliance with all of the provisions of this article and the terms or conditions of any license, permit or approval. 
(b)  Upon determining that there has been a violation under this article, the building official shall serve a notice of violation on the licensee directing the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, shall specify the nature of the violation, and shall be mailed to the licensee at the address listed in the license application. The violation shall be abated within the time specified in the notice of violation. The failure of the building official to provide a notice of violation shall in no way excuse a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-238. - Unsafe condition; notice. 
(a)  All mineral mining operations or sites that are operated or maintained in a manner which is dangerous to human health or the public welfare are deemed unsafe. 
(b)  Upon receipt of notice from the building official that a mineral mining operation or site is being operated or maintained in an unsafe manner, operations at the site shall cease immediately. The notice of the unsafe condition shall be in writing, shall specify the nature of the conditions at the site deemed unsafe, and shall specify the circumstances under which the mining operations will be permitted to resume. The notice shall be given to the licensee, the licensee's agent, or other person in charge at the site. A copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the licensee at the address listed in the license application. 
(c)  Any person who shall continue any work at the site after a notice of unsafe condition has been issued, except work that the person has been directed to perform to remove an unsafe condition, shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-239. - Appeal of actions of building official. 
(a)  A licensee that receives a notice of violation or a notice of unsafe condition may appeal the determination of the building official to the mineral mining review board, as provided by this section. 
(b)  The appeal of the building official's determination under this article must be in writing and must be received by the city within five days after the date that the notice was issued. 
(c)  The appeal of the building official's determination under this article must include a written statement as to why the licensee believes that the building official's determination of a violation or unsafe condition is incorrect. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the appeal, the mineral mining review board shall schedule a public hearing to review the building official's determination. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided by subsection 34-264(a). 
(e)  At the public hearing or within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the mineral mining review board shall make its decision to affirm or reverse the determination of the building official from which the appeal was taken. The board shall make written findings of fact in support of its decision. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-240. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article (including, without limitation, the failure to abate a violation for which a notice of violation has been issued or the failure to comply with a notice of unsafe condition) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $1,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by subsection 1-11(c)(2) of this Code, except that as used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or and subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this article (i) committed by a person within any 24-month period and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
(c)  The building official is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) and municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations of this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Sec. 34-241. - Abatement of violations or unsafe conditions. 
    In addition to any other remedy available at law, violations of this article shall be deemed a nuisance per se and the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person, or an agency of a person, to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any unsafe condition or violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-242. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 94-438, § 2, adopted Sept. 13, 1994, repealed former § 34-242, which pertained to appearance tickets. 
Secs. 34-243-34-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 34-261. - Required; issued on annual basis. 
(a)  After September 1, 1991, no person shall conduct mineral mining operations on any site within the city except in accordance with a license issued under this article. All licenses shall be issued on an annual basis and shall be valid only for an effective term running from March 1 (or from the date of issuance if later than March 1) through the last day of February of each license year (unless earlier suspended or revoked). 
(b)  For all mineral mining operations within the city which exist as of September 1, 1991, but which are not authorized as of that date by a valid permit or approval granted by the city under any other city ordinance, a license shall be obtained and the operations shall comply with the requirements of this article no later than March 1, 1992. 
(c)  For all mining operations which exist as of September 1, 1991, which are authorized as of that date by a valid permit or approval granted by the city under another city ordinance, but the permit or approval will not expire until after March 1, 1992, then the mining operations may continue in full compliance with the permit (including all permit terms, conditions of approval, approved plans and maps, and bond requirements) or approval until the date of expiration of the permit or approval without having obtained a license under this article by March 1, 1992. However, no person proceeding under this subsection shall continue mining operations after the date of expiration of the permit or approval except in accordance with a license issued under this article. 
(d)  For all mining operations which exist as of September 1, 1991, which are authorized as of that date by a valid permit or approval granted by the city under another city ordinance, but the permit will expire before March 1, 1992, then the mining operations may nevertheless continue until March 1, 1992, provided that the operator (and the property owner, if different than the operator) agrees in writing, and takes any other necessary actions, to continue to fully comply with all terms, conditions of approval, approved plans and maps, and bond requirements of the prior permit or approval. However, no person proceeding under this subsection shall continue mineral mining operations after March 1, 1992, except in accordance with a license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-262. - Licenses nontransferable. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall be nontransferable, in whole or in part. If the property owner and the operator are not the same person, the license shall be applied for by, and issued jointly to, the property owner and the operator, who shall be jointly responsible for compliance with any terms or conditions associated with the license. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-263. - Application procedures. 
    The license application procedures set forth in this section shall be complied with prior to commencing any new mineral mining or prior to continuing any mineral mining which exists on September 1, 1991. 
(1)  The application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk. 
(2)  Ten copies of the completed application and required attachments shall be filed with the building official at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the mineral mining review board at which the application will first be considered by the board. The building official shall review the application and attachments to determine if the application contains the information and plans required by this article. In reviewing the application, the building official may consult with the city engineer and other city officials, as necessary. If the application is determined to be complete, the building official shall transmit the application to the board, along with any comments the building official or other city officials may have regarding the proposed mining operations. 
(3)  If the application is for an existing mineral mining operation or for renewal of a license previously granted under this article, the building official (with the assistance of the city engineer or any other city officials, as needed) shall physically inspect the site to determine compliance with the standards and requirements, conditions or plans provided by or required under this article as applicable to the site in question. The building official shall report the results of the site compliance inspection to the mineral mining review board. 
(4)  Fees as established by resolution of the city commission shall be paid by the applicant to the city treasurer at the time of filing the application for a license or for renewal of a license. Transmittals shall not be made unless the required fees have been paid in full. The amount of the fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission. No part of any fee paid to the city shall be refundable. 
(5)  The application filed with the building official shall provide the information and shall be accompanied by documents, plans and maps and other attachments, created and sealed by a professional engineer, as follows: 
a.  The name of the owner of the site from which the materials will be mined or upon which the mining operations will take place. 
b.  The name and address of the applicant for the license and the name and address of the applicant's professional engineer. 
c.  The name and address of the person who will be conducting the actual mining operations. 
d.  The location, size and legal description of the site and the area of the site from which the materials will be mined or upon which the mining operations will take place. 
e.  A detailed statement of the types of materials or resources to be mined, stockpiled or processed on the site or hauled away from the site. 
f.  A detailed statement of the proposed method of mining, stockpiling, processing or hauling. 
g.  The offsite route over which materials will be hauled to or from the site, including an identification of the truck routes in the area that will be used. 
h.  A description of the location, width and proposed surface treatment (gravel, paved, etc.) of all onsite roads, including driveway approaches. 
i.  A description of the types of machinery, equipment and facilities to be used at the site, where the machinery, equipment and facilities will be located on the site and the decibel level emitted by the equipment measured at a distance of 50 feet from the equipment. 
j.  The estimated number of years to complete mining and reclamation operations at the site and the number of phases, as applicable. 
k.  Any other information identified by the city as reasonably necessary to appraise the character and nature of the proposed mining operations. 
l.  An overall site plan, sealed by a professional engineer, of operation including a topographic survey map of the site drawn on a scale not less than one inch equals 200 feet showing on a four-foot contour interval existing grades of the land prior to any removal and grades of the proposed excavations subsequent to removal. The plan shall clearly show the area to be mined, including existing areas and roads within 100 feet of all property lines, areas for stockpiling, maintenance areas, berms, fencing, and similar use areas. The plan of operation shall be accompanied by a projected schedule of mining operations, including the following specific dates: 
1.  Commencement and completion of mining operations as provided by the plan of operation; 
2.  Commencement and completion of erosion and drainage control measures to be instituted during mining operations; and 
3.  Commencement and completion of fencing, roads, utilities, or any other structures or improvements to be located on the site as provided by the plan of operation. 
m.  A reclamation plan that has been sealed by a professional engineer. The plan of reclamation shall be submitted in three parts consisting of 1) a general plan of reclamation as an overlay or as a separate drawing; 2) a reclamation contour plat; and 3) a description of reclamation methods and materials proposed for restoration of topsoil and replanting. The general plan of reclamation shall be presented at the same scale as the plan of operation and shall provide the following information: 
1.  The specific areas of land that have been completely reclaimed, if any, and the general areas of reclamation underway. 
2.  The location, type and quantity of land reclamation fill material must be shown on the plans. If compaction of fill for land reclamation purposes has taken place, results of compaction tests shall be provided to the mineral mining review board as part of the applicant's annual mineral mining permit application. Compaction tests must report a minimum 90-percent compaction rate for planned undeveloped areas and a minimum 95-percent compaction rate for planned development areas. Compaction test results shall be reported by a certified density technician. 
3.  The general areas currently used or proposed for use for topsoil overburden storage. 
4.  The general areas proposed for reclamation during the one-year license period. 
5.  The general areas proposed for storage for topsoil and overburden storage. 
6.  The acreage for each item shown on the overlay or separate drawing. 
7.  A reclamation contour plat with contour intervals not to exceed two feet indicating the general grade and slopes to which excavated areas will be reclaimed. 
8.  A description of the methods and materials proposed for restoration of topsoil to the required fertility and the amount of any type of planting that will be undertaken as a part of the reclamation plan. 
9.  The projected schedule of reclamation operations, including the following specific dates: 
i.  Commencement and completion of reclamation plan; 
ii.  Commencement and completion of erosion and drainage control measures to be instituted under the reclamation plan; and 
iii.  Commencement and completion of final grading, topsoil replacement, and replanting or landscaping as provided by the reclamation plan. 
iv.  Commencement and completion of land reclamation filling operations. 
n.  Operation plans and reclamation plans shall be prepared to clearly depict and describe the sequence of mining operations, including existing conditions, mining underway, mining completed, reclamation underway, reclamation completed, mining proposed, reclamation proposed, stockpiles, roadways, and similar land use elements. Operation plans and reclamation plans shall clearly identify and locate one or more permanent benchmarks as necessary to determine compliance of the mining operations or reclamation activities with the contours and elevations shown on the plans. All plans and maps required to be submitted as a part of the application shall be prepared and sealed by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. 
o.  If the application is for an existing mineral mining operation or for renewal of a license previously granted under this article, the application shall include a statement regarding compliance with the minimum standards and requirements of division 3, and with other standards, requirements, conditions or plans which are applicable under this article to the site in question. 
p.  All application materials, including required plans and maps, will be reviewed to determine compliance and consistency with the minimum standards and requirements provided by division 3. Accordingly, applicants are strongly advised to thoroughly review those standards and requirements (as well as other provisions of this article) and to address any questions regarding applicable requirements or procedures to the building official prior to preparing or finalizing their application materials. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-264. - Review and approval of applications. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application from the building official, the mineral mining review board shall schedule a public hearing for consideration of the application. Notice of the public hearing shall be published and sent by mail or personal delivery to the applicant, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 500 feet of the boundary of the property, and to the occupants of all structures within 500 feet. Notice of the public hearing as required by this section shall be given not less than five and not more than 15 days before the date of the public hearing. 
(b)  The mineral mining review board shall make its decision to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application at the public hearing or within a reasonable time following the public hearing or any adjournment of the public hearing. 
(c)  The mineral mining review board's decision shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the application under consideration. The statement shall specify the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed relating to an affirmative decision. 
(d)  All documents, plans and maps and other attachments to the license application which are approved by the mineral mining review board shall be incorporated in the terms of the license issued and shall be binding on the licensee. No mining operations shall be conducted on the site except in strict compliance with the documents, plans, maps and other application materials approved by the board, unless modified in writing by the board. 
(e)  No mining operations, including but not limited to grading, tree removal, soil stripping or other site improvements or changes, shall commence until a license has been granted by the mineral mining review board as provided by this article. In the case of an existing operation, no mining operations shall continue for more than 180 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived without a license, except as otherwise expressly provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-265. - Issuance. 
(a)  If the mineral mining review board finds that the proposed mining operations will comply with the standards, requirements and conditions of this article, the board shall authorize the city clerk to issue a license, subject to any conditions of approval imposed by the board as provided by this article. 
(b)  A license under this article shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year, beginning on the date of issuance. 
(c)  A license issued as provided by this article shall not relieve the licensee from complying with any other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-266. - Renewal. 
(a)  A license may be renewed by the mineral mining review board for successive periods not to exceed one year at a time. 
(b)  To be considered for renewal, the applicant must submit a written request for renewal to the building official for transmittal to the mineral mining review board at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the existing license. Included with the written request shall be the list of items noted in section 34-263. 
(c)  If the mineral mining review board determines that the mining operation meets all applicable standards, requirements and conditions under this article or under prior approved licenses and plans, the board may approve, or approve with conditions, the request for renewal. If the board determines that the mining operation fails to meet any applicable standard, requirement or condition, the board may deny the request for renewal. 
(d)  No materials or minerals shall be extracted after the expiration of a license. However, if an application for renewal of an existing license is timely filed as required by subsection (b) and is thereafter diligently pursued by the applicant, mineral mining operations in compliance with the terms and conditions of the license may continue beyond the expiration of the license until either: 
(1)  The mineral mining review board approves the renewal of the license, in which case the mineral mining operations shall thereafter proceed only as permitted by the terms and conditions of the renewed license; or 
(2)  The mineral mining review board denies the application for renewal, in which case all mineral mining operations shall cease until a new license is issued as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-267. - Conditions of approval. 
(a)  In addition to the specific requirements provided by this article, the mineral mining review board may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance or renewal of a license. Conditions of approval may be imposed by the board as necessary to eliminate or mitigate any potentially adverse impacts of the mineral mining operations on adjacent or nearby property, on public services or facilities, or on the natural environment; to conserve natural resources and energy; to ensure that the mining operations will not create a nuisance or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property; or to otherwise protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. The conditions may include, without limitation, conditions regarding the location, design or operation of a mining site. 
(b)  In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the mineral mining review board may require the applicant to submit a geotechnical report that analyzes mining impacts on the local or regional groundwater aquifer or surface water bodies including wetlands, lakes, ponds, streams and rivers. 
(c)  In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the mineral mining review board may require the applicant to submit a written statement of street sweeping and debris removal methods on public streets and within public rights of way, in accordance with practices approved by the city department of public works. 
(d)  The applicant may be required to apply for and receive the following: i) a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit from the city engineering department in accordance with section 34-216.1, and/or ii) floodway district special approval in accordance with subsection 42-36(c). 
(e)  The conditions imposed by the mineral mining review board shall be in writing and incorporated in the terms of an approved or renewed license. The conditions shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual written consent of the board and the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-268. - Performance guarantees. 
(a)  The mineral mining review board shall require as a condition of approval of any license issued under this article that the applicant provide a performance guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or other type of security acceptable to the board. The performance guarantee shall name the city as the beneficiary in an amount established by the board. The performance guarantee shall be conditioned upon the prompt and complete compliance with all applicable provisions of this article and with the terms and conditions of a license issued by the board. 
(b)  The performance guarantee must be deposited with the city clerk at the time that the license is approved and shall be kept continuously in effect by the applicant at all times during the mineral mining operations on the site and until there has been complete compliance with all applicable requirements and conditions applicable to the mining operations or reclamation of the site. The mineral mining review board shall require the applicant to make whatever arrangements are necessary to ensure that the city will be notified in the event of any lapse in the effectiveness of the performance guarantee. 
(c)  The amount of the required performance guarantee shall be established by the mineral mining review board. In establishing the amount of the performance guarantee, the board shall consider the scale of the operations, the prevailing cost to rehabilitate the property if the operator defaults, court costs, and other reasonable expenses. For each acre restored and reclaimed in compliance with the requirements of this article, the board may allow the amount of the performance guarantee to be reduced on a pro rata basis as determined appropriate by the board. 
(d)  The performance guarantee shall be executed by the operator as the principal or applicant. If the operator and the property owner are different, the mineral mining review board may also require the property owner to execute the performance guarantee or to provide additional security as determined necessary by the board to ensure performance of the terms, conditions and requirements of a license. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-269. - Waivers and modifications. 
    The mineral mining review board may waive or modify any requirement of this article which the board determines not necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and not necessary to meet the intent and purposes of this article, due to the scale, scope or nature of the particular mining operation under consideration. A waiver or modification made under this section shall be in writing with a basis for the same and incorporated in the terms of an approved or renewed license. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-270. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The mineral mining review board may suspend or revoke a license for the failure of a licensee to discontinue any violation under this article; for failure to abate a violation for which a notice of violation has been issued, for the failure to comply with a notice of unsafe condition, or for failure to comply with a term or condition of license approval. The decision to suspend or revoke a license shall be made at a public hearing held by the board. 
(b)  In determining whether to suspend or revoke a license, the mineral mining review board shall consider the type, nature, severity, frequency, duration, preventability, potential and actual effects of a violation on the public health, safety and welfare, and the violator's recalcitrance or efforts to comply. A violator shall bear the burden of demonstrating the presence and degree of any mitigating factors to be considered by the board. However, mitigating factors shall not be considered unless the board determines that the violator has made all good faith efforts to correct and terminate all violations. The fact that suspension or revocation of a license may cause the violator severe financial damage shall not be determinative of whether or not to suspend or revoke a license. The board shall make written findings of fact in support of its decision. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-271. - Hearing. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mineral mining review board under section 34-270 to suspend or revoke a license shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission, provided that a written request for the hearing is filed with the city clerk within five business days after receipt of notice of the suspension or revocation. If the written request for a hearing is filed within the five-day period, the city commission shall hold a public hearing on the suspension or revocation of the license and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the board. In making its determination, the city commission shall consider the factors provided by section 34-270, as well as any other applicable standards or requirements provided by this article. The city commission shall make written findings of fact in support of its decision. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Secs. 34-272-34-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-291. - Applicability. 
    The minimum operational, maintenance, performance and reclamation standards and requirements provided by this division shall apply to all mineral mining sites, new or existing. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-292. - Fencing and signs. 
(a)  All areas of a mining site which exceed a slope of five feet horizontal to one foot vertical shall be fenced with a four-foot-high fence and shall be posted with signs adequate to indicate the danger of trespassing in the area. The mineral mining review board may also require fencing or signs around all or any portion of the perimeter of a mining site or around any water areas, including retention ponds and settling ponds, as necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  The minimum specifications for site fencing shall be as follows: #9 gauge top wire; #12 gauge bottom wire with spacing of six inches by 12 inches. All stays shall be of #14 gauge wire. Support posts shall be spaced no greater than 16 feet apart. 
(c)  All fencing required pursuant to this section shall be maintained in good condition and repair at all times. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-293. - Screening. 
(a)  All areas on the site being actively excavated shall be visually screened to a height of six feet from all adjacent public highways and adjacent parcels which are zoned residential and used for residential purposes. To determine whether the areas of active excavation are visually screened from adjacent public streets, visibility shall be evaluated based on the line of sight as viewed from points which are four feet above the nearest street paving. To determine whether areas of active excavation are visually screened from adjacent residential property, visibility shall be evaluated based on the line of sight as viewed from points which are six feet above the mean ground elevation of the adjacent residential property. 
(b)  The following methods are acceptable for screening of mining areas and may be used singly or in combination as necessary to achieve the required screening result: 
(1)  Construction of a raised earth berm area on the mining site along the boundary lines of the site where the boundary lines abut a public highway or abut privately owned property which is improved and occupied for residential purposes (including property upon which dwellings are built and occupied after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived). The berm shall be of sufficient length and height to screen the mining area. During the planting season following the placement of the berm and as often as may be necessary to ensure the existence of a vegetative ground cover, the applicant shall seed or plant the berm in a manner suitable for the area and soil conditions to provide vegetation to check erosion and to provide a visible ground cover substantially similar to the vegetation cover growing in adjacent fields. The slopes of the berm shall not exceed a slope of two feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
(2)  Planting of coniferous trees along the boundaries of the property with sufficient rows and depth to permit effective screening of the mining area as required by this section. 
(3)  Construction of a fence of any material which is compatible with the character of the surrounding area. The fence shall provide at least an 80 percent solid visual barrier and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(4)  Use of other methods as determined by the board to be appropriate and sufficient to achieve the required screening, including the preservation of existing trees and other vegetation. 
(c)  The mineral mining review board may waive the screening requirements of this section to the extent that the topography of the area or other natural conditions act as a screen which meets the screening requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-294. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The maximum hours of operation of the mining operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Mining operations shall not be permitted at any time on Sundays or legal holidays. The mineral mining review board may place further restrictions on the hours of operation as necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  The days and hours of operation shall be posted at all times on a sign at the entrance of the site at a location approved by the mineral mining review board. The sign shall be six square feet in area and shall display the days and hours of operation with letters that are not less than four inches in height and that are readily visible from the public street. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-294.1. - Temporary exception; hours of operation; loading and transporting. 
(a)  A licensee may request a temporary exception from the hours of operation prescribed by section 34-294 if hours other than those permitted in section 34-294 are necessary to load and transport sand, gravel, or other minerals to be used for a state or federal highway construction or improvement project within 20 miles of the mineral mining site. Any such request shall be filed with the building official and be governed by subsections (b) through (h) below. 
(b)  The licensee shall file an application and any associated review fee for a temporary exception, including, but not limited to, the requested hours of operation for loading and transporting, the state or federal highway project to be supplied with sand, gravel, or other minerals, the location of the highway project, the expected time of completion of the project, the necessity of the requested hours to supply the state or federal highway project, and any measures designed to mitigate the impact of loading and transporting operations during the requested hours. Upon receipt of a completed application form from the building official, the mineral mining review board shall schedule a public hearing for consideration of the application for the temporary exception. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in subsection 34-264(a). 
(c)  The mineral mining review board may grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a temporary exception at the public hearing or within a reasonable time following the public hearing. 
(d)  The application for a temporary exception may be granted or granted with conditions if the mineral mining review board finds as follows: 
(1)  The mineral mining operations comply and will comply with all standards, requirements, and conditions of this article other than section 34-294. 
(2)  The loading and transporting of sand, gravel, or other minerals from stockpiles during hours other than those permitted in section 34-294 is necessary to supply such minerals to a state or federal highway project within 20 miles of the mineral site. 
(3)  The temporary exception will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties and will not materially impair the intent and purposes of this article. 
(e)  If a temporary exception is granted, the mineral mining review board shall establish the permitted hours of loading and transporting operations and the date of expiration of the temporary exception. The mineral mining review board may also impose conditions on the grant of a temporary exception in accordance with section 34-267. 
(f)  The mineral mining review board's decision on the application for temporary exception shall be in writing and shall specify the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed relating to an affirmative decision. A temporary exception granted under this section shall be incorporated in the terms of an approved or renewed license. 
(g)  A temporary exception granted under this section shall not permit and shall not be construed to permit any excavation or other activities on the site during the hours established by the mineral mining review board except loading and transporting sand, gravel, or other minerals to the state or federal highway project. All loading shall be from stockpiles of sand, gravel, or other minerals on the site. 
(h)  A temporary exception under this section shall expire upon the earlier of: 1) the expiration of the annual license, 2) the completion of the state or federal highway project supplied by the mining site, if any, and 3) expiration of the temporary exception as specified by the conditions, if any, of the mineral mining review board. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-295. - Access to public roadways. 
    All mineral mining sites shall have direct access to at least one street with a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet. All driveway approaches providing access to the mineral mining site from a public street must be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 70. 
Sec. 34-296. - On-site roads. 
(a)  All onsite roads located within 400 feet of a residential dwelling shall be maintained by the operator to minimize the dust arising from the use of the roads through the application of chloride, water and/or similar dust retardant materials at sufficient intervals or by providing a paved or bituminous surface. The application of oil to onsite roads is prohibited. 
(b)  To minimize the deposit from trucks of dirt and gravel onto a public street, a paved or bituminous surface shall be provided for all onsite entrance and exit drives for a distance into the site of not less than 300 feet from the public right-of-way. 
(c)  All entrances and exits to the site shall be securely locked during hours when mining operations are not permitted on the site. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 70. 
Sec. 34-297. - Machinery, equipment and facilities. 
(a)  All machinery, equipment and facilities used in connection with the mining operations such as excavating, processing, stockpiling and hauling shall be used, operated and maintained in a manner to eliminate, to the maximum extent practicable, noises, vibrations, dust, or other adverse conditions which interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of surrounding property. Machinery, equipment and facilities which emit noise greater than 80 decibels measured at a distance of 50 feet are deemed to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of surrounding property. 
(b)  Machinery, equipment and facilities other than those specifically applied for and approved in the license shall not be permitted on the site. 
(c)  Buffering and/or screening may be required to minimize the effect of noise, vibrations, dust or other adverse conditions created by the machinery, equipment, or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-298. - Transportation vehicle standards. 
(a)  All vehicles used to transport excavated material shall be loaded in a manner so that the material cannot be unintentionally discharged from the vehicle. Vehicles shall be cleaned of all material not in the load-bed prior to entering the public streets. 
(b)  If mining materials are deposited or spilled off site, it shall be the responsibility of the licensee, without requiring any action or request by the city, to immediately remove the spilled or deposited material. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, Ch. 82. 
Sec. 34-299. - Lighting. 
    All lighting used to illuminate the mining area, access roads, stockpile areas, and other areas used in connection with the mining operations shall be directed away from surrounding property. The board may also require that lighting be shielded if the lighting shines directly toward a residential use or a street. 
Sec. 34-300. - Location of cuts; undercutting regulations. 

Over Excavation Detail for Mining Operations 
(a)  No cut shall be made which creates a pit or depression closer than 50 feet measured from the nearest street right-of-way, nor closer than 30 feet to the nearest property line. However, the board may prescribe more strict requirements regarding the location of cuts as necessary to provide lateral support to surrounding property as required by soil or geographic conditions, or as otherwise necessary to preserve the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(b)  All vegetation shall be maintained within, and no vegetation shall be removed from, the area of a site that is within 50 feet of a street right-of-way line or within 30 feet of any other property line. 
(c)  Undercutting is not allowed below the approved reclamation contour, except as noted in figure 1 and subject to all standards of this article for material and compaction testing. If additional mining material is located beneath the proposed grades of the approved mineral mining site plan, the licensee must amend its approved mining and reclamation plans to reflect this change. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-301. - Drainage and erosion control. 
(a)  All excavations shall be made either to a water-producing depth of at least ten feet below the low-water mark for at least 80 percent of the water area, or shall be graded or backfilled with nonhazardous, nonradioactive, noninflammable, and noncombustible materials, to ensure that: 
(1)  The excavated area shall not collect and permit stagnant water to remain; and 
(2)  The surface of any area which is not permanently submerged is graded or backfilled as necessary to reduce peaks and depressions and to produce a gently rolling surface that will minimize erosion due to rainfall and will be in substantial conformity with adjoining land areas. 
(b)  Surface water shall be directed in a manner so as not to interfere with the adjoining property owners. However, the maintenance of the natural flow of surface water shall not be deemed an interference with adjoining property. 
(c)  Erosion control measures shall be instituted to comply with the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (part 91 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended; MCL 324.9101 et seq., as amended (formerly, Act No. 347 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended)) and article VI, chapter 34 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-302. - Treatment of banks. 
(a)  The banks of all excavations shall be sloped to the water line in a water-producing excavation, and to the pit floor in a dry operation, at a slope to a degree not less than that required to prevent accelerated erosion and to a degree sufficient to maintain vegetation. In no event shall the finished slopes of banks exceed a slope of five feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
(b)  The banks of all excavations shall be reclaimed with vegetation as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-303. - Vegetation reclamation. 
    Vegetation shall be reclaimed by the use of sufficient soil and overburden and by appropriate seeding of grasses or planting of shrubs or trees on all areas of the site except areas which will be submerged under water or within 25 feet of the shoreline of submerged areas. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Cross reference- Vegetation, Ch. 90. 
Sec. 34-304. - Stockpiling and replacement of topsoil. 
    If topsoil exists which is suitable for growing turf or other vegetation at the time the mining operations are scheduled to begin, a sufficient quantity of topsoil shall be stockpiled on the site so that when mining operations are completed the entire site may be recovered with a minimum of four inches of topsoil. The replacement of topsoil shall be made immediately following the termination of the mining operations or a phase of the operations, as applicable. However, if the mining operations continue for more than 30 days, the operator shall replace the stored topsoil over areas which have been stripped of topsoil as the operations progress. The topsoil shall be replaced in a manner suitable for growing turf or other vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-305. - Fill material. 
(a)  If filling of the mined area is necessary during reclamation, only inert material (as defined by the Solid Waste Management Act (part 115 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994), as amended; MCL 324.11501 et seq., as amended (formerly Act No. 641 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended)) shall be used. 
(b)  All fill material brought onto the site must be certified as inert material by the site operator and the applicant's professional engineer and identified by location, type and amount on the applicant's annual mineral mining review board application and site reclamation plans. 
(c)  Compaction of fill for land reclamation purposes must be completed by the site operator. Results of compaction tests shall be provided to the mineral mining review board as part of the applicant's annual mineral mining permit application or as provided in section 34-308. 
(d)  Compaction tests must report a minimum 90-percent compaction rate for planned undeveloped areas and a minimum ninety-five-percent compaction rate for planned development areas. Compaction test results shall be reported by a certified density technician. 
(e)  The planned undeveloped and development areas must match those shown on the reclamation plan. 
(f)  The mineral mining review board shall determine on an annual basis the areas for which compaction tests will be required. This determination will occur during review of the applicant's mineral mining permit approval, renewal, or permanent close-out. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 09-569, § 1, 3-23-09) 
Sec. 34-306. - Termination of operations and reclamation. 
    Upon termination or cessation of mining operations, the licensee shall be responsible to reclaim the site in accordance with reclamation plans approved by the mineral mining review board. If the licensee fails to reclaim the site as required by the approved reclamation plans, the city may come upon the site and reclaim the land in accordance with those plans and may use, without limitation, the proceeds of the performance guarantee posted as required by this article to defray the costs of the reclamation. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-307. - Onsite uses permitted for one year following cessation of mining activities. 
(a)  Storage and stockpiling of previously mined products after cessation of mining activities may be permitted by the mineral mining review board for one annual license granted for that limited purpose. In no event shall any additional materials be allowed to be added to these stockpiles. A license granted for storage or stockpiling of mined products shall not interfere with or excuse site reclamation as otherwise required under this article. 
(b)  Storage and stockpiling of materials previously mined on site may be permitted by the mineral mining review board for a maximum of one year following the cessation of onsite mining operations. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 34-308. - Permanent closeout of all on-site activities. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the activities permitted under section 34-307, all mining operations are required to undergo a final review by the mineral mining review board to close out all onsite activities and active licenses and before any performance guarantee is discharged or released. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The application and public hearing process for the final close out of all onsite activities will follow that for an annual mineral mining permit. 
(d)  The following must be supplied on site plans, sealed by a professional engineer, by the applicant to the mineral mining review board: 
(1)  Sealed, surveyed as-built plans, showing reclaimed contours at two-foot contour intervals. 
(2)  A sealed, engineered soil erosion and permanent soil stabilization plan. 
(3)  A list of, and locations for, vegetative site restoration methods. 
(4)  The location of, and future plans for, all onsite driveways, catch basins, culverts, drains and other appurtenances. 
(5)  The location of, and removal plan for, all onsite signage. 
(6)  The location of, and removal plan for, all onsite buildings, equipment and other related items. 
(7)  The location of, and grading plan for, all future public roads. 
(8)  Compaction tests reporting a minimum 90-percent compaction rate for planned undeveloped areas and a minimum 95-percent compaction rate for planned development areas. Compaction test results shall be reported by a certified density technician. The planned undeveloped and development areas must match those shown on the reclamation plan. 
(9)  Documentation that all on-site oil wells have been cut to the reclamation topography. 
(e)  Prior to the public hearing, the city engineer and DPW director will conduct an on-site inspection to determine compliance with the as-builts and reclamation plans. 
(f)  Compliance with any conditions of approval attached to the close out review is required before any performance guarantee is discharged or released. 
(Ord. No. 07-554, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Secs. 34-309-34-330. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 35 - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 35-1. - Findings; public nuisance. 
    The city commission hereby determines that false alarms place unnecessary and unreasonable demands on the time and resources of the city police department and fire department and that danger to police and fire personnel and citizens is increased by emergency response to false alarms. Accordingly, more than two false alarms during a 365-day period, as defined in this chapter, is deemed excessive and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 1, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 35-2. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning set forth in this section: 
    Alarm business means the business of any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. 
    Alarm system means any device or piece of equipment, or any assembly of equipment and devices, designed or arranged to signal visibly, audibly, electronically, or mechanically (or by any combination of these methods) the presence of a hazard to which the city police or fire departments are expected to respond. 
    Alarm user means any person whether owner, occupant or tenant, upon whose premises an alarm system is maintained or operated within the city except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. However, if an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected to an alarm system at a building, structure or facility, the person using such a system is an alarm user. A person who uses self-contained alarm systems (i.e., a system that signals or alerts other authorized persons who are in the building, structure or facility of a hazard or emergency) is not an alarm user. However, such a person is an alarm user if such a system employs an audible signal emitting sounds, flashing light or beacon, or any combination thereof, designed to signal persons outside the premises, and which is disturbing to the peace and quiet of the surrounding area. 
    Enforcing authority means the city police department or the city fire department which responds or would be expected to respond to the activation of an alarm system within the city. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system which elicits a response by police or fire personnel, or both, where an emergency situation does not in fact exist. By way of example, a false alarm includes, without limitation, the activation of an alarm system due to mechanical failure, malfunction of an alarm system, the improper installation or testing of an alarm system or the negligent operation or maintenance of an alarm system. A false alarm does not include activation of an alarm caused by violent conditions of nature, interruption of electrical or telephone service to the alarm user, visible signs of attempted break-ins, or false activation by a third party outside the control of the alarm user. For purposes of this definition, a "third party outside the control of the alarm user" does not include an employee, agent, licensee, or invitee of the alarm user or an independent contractor working for the alarm user (including the alarm user's alarm business). 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, unincorporated association, or other group of persons. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 2, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 35-3. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No alarm user shall maintain, use, or allow the use of an alarm system which signals repeated false alarms as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall use, install, or direct to be installed, any entry alarm system that emits a sound alarm for a period longer than 15 minutes from the time of the initial sounding of the device. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 3, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 35-4. - False alarms; fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, buildings having more than one occupant who utilize separate entrances for access to their individual units shall have separate alarm systems for each unit. Different businesses within the same building or with the same street address shall be considered separate establishments. If a business has more than one building located at a single street address, then each such building shall be considered a separate establishment for purposes of this section. This section shall not be construed to require the installation of alarm systems, but only to require separate systems for separate units when installed. This subsection shall not apply, however, to fire alarm systems that are not required to be installed by the city's building code. 
(b)  If the enforcing authority records two false alarms at one establishment within a 365-day period, the enforcing authority may notify the alarm user or the alarm user and the alarm business providing service or inspection to the user of the violation and offer an opportunity to meet with the enforcing authority within 15 calendar days of the notice or submit a written report to the enforcing authority within 15 calendar days of the notice. At the meeting or in the written report, if applicable, the alarm user or its agent will be afforded an opportunity to describe the actions taken or to be taken to discover the cause of the false alarms and specify the time within which the necessary work will be completed. Any such notice shall advise that if there is a third (or any subsequent) false alarm at that establishment within the original 365-day period, the alarm user shall be responsible to pay a fee charged in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission and of the alarm user's right to appeal as set forth herein. Failure of the enforcing authority to send or the alarm user to receive a notice of violation does not nullify any provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The alarm user may request that an alarm incident not be considered a false alarm as defined in section 35-2 within 15 calendar days of the notice of violation. Such a request shall be in writing and shall set forth the grounds for request. The enforcing authority shall determine whether the alarm incident at issue shall be considered a false alarm and notify the alarm user in writing of its decision in a timely manner. The alarm user may appeal such determination pursuant to section 35-5. 
(d)  Upon a third or any subsequent false alarm within a 365-day period, the enforcing authority shall send the alarm user a notice of violation and shall bill the alarm user the fee set forth in the city commission resolution establishing the fee schedule. The notice of violation described above that is sent by the enforcing authority after a third false alarm shall also advise that if there are any subsequent false alarms received from the same establishment within the original 365-day period from the first alarm, future responses will result in a service fee billing in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission. The alarm user shall pay the fee for a third or any subsequent false alarm within the 365-day period within 30 days of billing. 
(e)  If the alarm user fails to pay the city's fees within 30 days after billing by the enforcing authority, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction and may take other lawful action to collect the fees. Notice of the billing and the user's failure to pay shall be given to the city clerk. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an alarm user shall not be assessed a fee for a false alarm if measures to correct alarm system malfunctions have been instituted within 72 hours after the false alarm and, within 30 days of the date of false alarm, the alarm user presents to the enforcing authority adequate documentation of repair service having been performed by a licensed alarm business to remedy a malfunction, including a report by such alarm business of the probable cause of the false alarm and the measures instituted to eliminate future false alarms. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an alarm user shall not be assessed a fee for a false alarm within 30 days from the date of complete installation of a new alarm system. In order to qualify for this subsection, the alarm user must provide adequate documentation of the installation date to the enforcing authority. 
(h)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, multiple alarm activations occurring within a 24-hour period will not constitute a second or subsequent event provided the user or representative responds or addresses the initial activation in a timely manner. 
(i)  The schedule of false alarm fees shall be adopted by resolution of the city commission and may be amended from time to time. The fees shall not exceed the city's direct and indirect costs of responding to false alarms, administering the system of recording and classifying false alarms, and collecting and accounting for the false alarm fees. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 4, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 35-5. - Appeals. 
    Appeals of any false alarm determination under this chapter shall be by written notice of appeal, stating the grounds for the appeal, filed with the chief of the enforcing authority within 15 calendar days of the later of: (1) the notice of violation or (2) the enforcing authority's determination (if requested) pursuant to section 35-4(c). Appeals shall be heard by the city commission within 30 days after the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 5, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 35-6. - Penalties. 
    Notwithstanding any service or other fees required to be paid by an alarm user under this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a fine of not less than $100.00, plus costs and other authorized sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 6, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 35-7. - Conflict with other city ordinances. 
    In case of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of the City Code, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 7, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 35-8. - Response to alarms. 
    This chapter does not constitute a guarantee or obligation by the city to respond to or answer an alarm. 
(Ord. No. 01-477, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 17-639 , § 8, 10-23-17) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Firefighting and fire prevention, § 8.10. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; open burning, § 34-55 et seq.; fires at commercial dumps, § 62-86; obstructing fire hydrants with snow, § 70-66. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2001, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 7-1-7-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - False fire alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of fire in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 38-2. - Interfering with fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to open or attempt to open, interfere with or damage any fire hydrant in the city without authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01) 
Secs. 38-3-38-9. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 38-10. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act No. 256 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2011, as amended. 
    All other terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as defined or used in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 12-608, § 1, 6-28-12) 
Sec. 38-11. - Fireworks. 
    A person shall not possess, sell, ignite, use, or discharge any fireworks within the city except as permitted by the Act and this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 12-608, § 2, 6-28-12) 
Sec. 38-12. - Permits required. 
    A permit from the city commission shall be required for the possession, use, or discharge of display fireworks, articles pyrotechnic or special effects (collectively for purposes of this article hereinafter "display fireworks") for public or private display within the city on terms and in a manner consistent with the Act. The storage of fireworks shall be prohibited in the city except in compliance with the Act. All permits shall be subject to compliance with this article and the Act. In the event of any conflict between this article and the Act, the more stringent provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 12-608, § 3, 6-28-12) 
Sec. 38-13. - Permit application; fee; decision of city commission. 
    Application for permits shall be made in writing, on forms provided by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, to the city commission at least 60 days in advance of the date of the display of fireworks (except that applications for indoor fireworks displays shall be made at least 30 days in advance of the display date). If an application for a permit is not timely filed as provided herein, the city commission may consider the application only if the applicant shows good cause for submitting a late application. The city commission may, by resolution, establish a nonrefundable fee schedule for the city's cost of reviewing and acting on the application. If such schedule is established by the city commission, the applicant shall submit the nonrefundable fee with the permit application. The city commission may grant, grant with conditions, or deny the permit in accordance with the Act and this article. Notwithstanding any provision of this article, no applicant has a right to issuance of a permit. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or impair the discretion of the city commission to deny a permit pursuant to the Act or this article. If a permit is granted, the sale, possession, use, or discharge of fireworks for such display shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable, nor shall any such permit be extended beyond the dates set out therein. A permit for a particular display granted by the city under the Act's predecessor shall remain valid subject to its original terms. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 05-528, § 1, 3-28-05; Ord. No. 12-608, § 4, 6-28-12) 
Sec. 38-14. - Liability insurance. 
    Before a permit for display fireworks is granted by the city commission, the applicant shall furnish to the city a liability insurance policy, in a form satisfactory to the city, in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an act or omission on the part of the applicant, or an agent or employee thereof. The city shall be named as an additional insured on the insurance policy. Before a display fireworks permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of insurance for the policy which shall provide for 30 days' prior written notice to the city of cancellation or revocation of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 12-608, § 5, 6-28-12) 
Sec. 38-15. - Minimum display requirements. 
    In addition to compliance with the Fire Code of the city as adopted in section 38-31 of the City Code and all other applicable requirements, the display of fireworks shall at a minimum comply with the following: 
(a)  The display site shall be located at least 200 feet from all buildings. 
(b)  The display site shall be located at least 75 feet from all overhead obstruction (e.g., trees, poles, utility wires). 
(c)  The display site shall be located at least 1,000 feet from all institutional facilities that are occupied at the time of the display (hospitals, nursing homes, schools, educational facilities, and similar institutional facilities). 
(d)  The display site shall be located at least 150 feet from all streets, roads, rights-of-way, railroads, and other means of public travel. 
(e)  Displays shall be handled by an approved competent operator, and the fireworks shall be arranged, located, and discharged and fired in a manner that will not be a hazard to property or endanger any person. 
(f)  Unfired fireworks and trash remaining after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of by the permittee in an approved, safe manner. 
(g)  The fire chief may, in his sole discretion, require the permittee to use crowd control barriers or security personnel approved by the fire chief for safety reasons. 
(h)  The fire chief may determine that it is appropriate to assign city fire apparatus and personnel to be present during the display; in such event, the city commission may require the permittee to pay the costs thereof in advance, as determined by the fire chief, as a condition of obtaining the permit. 
(i)  The city commission or the fire chief may, in their sole discretion, impose additional or more stringent requirements (including, without limitations, greater distance requirements than those identified in this section) to protect the safety of persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 01-480, § 1, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 38-16. - Fireworks regulations. 
(a)  Compliance with applicable ordinances and codes. Unless otherwise provided herein, and without limitation, a retailer or wholesaler of fireworks located within the city must comply with the requirements of chapters 18 and 94 of this Code, and nothing herein shall be construed or interpreted to limit the authority of the city to enforce those of its ordinances violated as a result of the discharge of consumer fireworks at any time, including, without limitation, the provisions of chapter 34, article IV, division 1 of this Code. 
(b)  Consumer fireworks. 
(1)  No person within the city shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on any day other than the following days: on December 31, after 11:00 a.m. and until 1:00 a.m. on January 1; on Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day after 11:00 a.m. and until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days; on June 29 to July 4 after 11:00 a.m. and until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days; on July 5, if July 5 is a Friday or Saturday, after 11:00 a.m. and until 11:45 p.m.; and on the Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day, after 11:00 a.m. and until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(2)  No person shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that person or organization's permission to use those fireworks on those premises. 
(3)  No person shall sell consumer fireworks to a minor. 
(4)  No person shall recklessly endanger the life, health, safety, or well-being of any person or property by the ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks. 
(5)  No person under the age of 18 years shall use, possess, explode or cause to explode any consumer fireworks within the city except while in the presence and under the control of a parent, guardian or other responsible adult. 
(6)  No person shall use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of "alcoholic liquor", a "controlled substance", or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, as those terms are defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Fines and penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates subsection (b) shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine of $1,000.00, of which $500.00 of the fine collected shall be remitted to the local law enforcement agency responsible for enforcing the ordinance. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection 38-16(c)(1), and unless a civil penalty is expressly provided elsewhere, any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 12-608, § 6, 6-28-12; Ord. No. 13-617, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-13 ; Ord. No. 19-647 , § 1, 5-20-19) 
Secs. 38-17-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-624, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2015 , amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 38-31-38-35, pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former Art. II see the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 38-31. - Adoption of fire code. 
(a)  The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices B, C, D, E, F, and G, published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the Walker Fire Prevention Code for providing effective and continuing safeguards against the hazards of fire and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such code shall be in full force and effect in the city as if set out in full in this section, subject to the modifications and amendments set forth in section 38-32. 
(b)  Those provisions and standards contained in the National Fire Protection Association 101 Life Safety Code (2015 Edition) that are adopted by, referenced in, or incorporated into the International Fire Code (2015 Edition), are hereby adopted by reference and shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully restated in this article. 
(c)  The purpose of these codes is to establish minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures, and premises. 
( Ord. No. 15-624, § 1, 2-9-15 ; Ord. No. 18-642 , § 1, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 38-32. - Amendments to the International Fire Code (2015 Edition). 
    The following sections and subsections of the International Fire Code (2015 Edition) ("Fire Code") are hereby amended or deleted, and additional sections or subsections are added as indicated. The section and subsection numbers shall refer to the like numbered sections and subsections of the fire code. 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Walker, hereafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 103.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.2 Appointment. The City's Fire Chief and Fire Inspectors are hereby designated as the "fire code official" under the code. 
(3)  Section 103.3 is hereby deleted. 
(4)  Section 108.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
108.1 Board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the Construction Code Board of Appeals of the City of Walker. All appeals shall be governed by the procedures for appeals to the Construction Code Board of Appeals. 
(5)  Section 109.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
109.3. Notice of violation. Whenever the fire code official observes an apparent violation of this code, the fire code official shall prepare a written notice of violation describing the condition and specifying time limitations for the required repairs or improvements to be made to render the structure or premises safe, secure and in compliance, if any. 
(6)  Section 109.3.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
109.3.3 Violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time prescribed by the fire code official, the fire code official may proceed as follows: 
(a)  He may issue municipal civil infractions (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau); or 
(b)  He may request that legal counsel for the city institute appropriate proceedings at law or equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful use of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order of direction made pursuant thereto. 
(7)  Section 109.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
109.4 Municipal civil infractions. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this code is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of the City Code. 
(8)  Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows: 
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $100.00 and such other relief set out in Section 109.4. 
(9)  Section 507.5.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter reconstructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet (92 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. 
Exceptions: 
1.  For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be 400 feet (122 m). 
2.  For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the distance requirement shall be 400 feet (122 m). 
(10)  Section 901.6.3 is hereby added to read as follows: 
901.6.3 Alarm and supervisory service. When providing testing, repairs or modifications to any suppression system, standpipe or fire alarm system connected to a supervisory service, the provider shall notify the fire department and the supervisory service before initiating the tests, repairs or modifications and upon completion of the tests, repairs, or modifications. 
(11)  Section 5504.3.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
5504.3.1.1 Stationary Containers. Stationary containers shall be separated from exposure hazards in accordance with the provisions applicable to the type of fluid contained and the minimum separation distances indicated in Table 5504.3.1.1. Containers of cryogenic fluids shall not be located within diked areas containing other hazardous materials. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within residential zoning districts in the City. 
(12)  Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within residential zoning districts in the City. 
(13)  Section 5706.2.4.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and II liquids in stationary containers is prohibited within residential zoning districts in the City. 
(14)  Section 5806.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
5806.2 Limitations. The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within residential zoning districts in the City. 
(15)  Section 6104.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within residential zoning districts in the City, the aggregate capacity of any one installation of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7,570 L). Exception: In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be determined by the fire code official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed containers, degree of fire protection to be provided, and capabilities of the fire department. 
( Ord. No. 15-624, § 1, 2-9-15 ; Ord. No. 18-642 , § 2, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 38-33. - Adoption by reference. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference Chapter 32 of the NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2015 Edition, in its entirety, including, without limitation, all amendments, supplements, standards, rules, regulations and appendixes cited therein, as adopted and promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing fire and explosion conditions relative to motion picture and television production studio soundstages and approved production facilities. 
( Ord. No. 15-624, § 1, 2-9-15 ; Ord. No. 18-642 , § 3, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 38-34. - Codes available for public use and inspection. 
    A complete copy of the International Fire Code (2015 Edition) and the NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2015 Edition, are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 15-624, § 1, 2-9-15 ; Ord. No. 18-642 , § 4, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 38-35. - References in NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2015 Edition. 
    Any references in the NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2015 Edition, and amendments and supplements, to "state" and "name of state" shall mean the State of Michigan; references to "municipal charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Walker; reference to "municipality" shall mean the City of Walker; and reference to "local ordinances" shall mean the ordinances of the City of Walker. 
( Ord. No. 15-624, § 1, 2-9-15 ; Ord. No. 18-642 , § 5, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 38-36. - State law; conflicts. 
(a)  In the event of any conflict between the fire codes as adopted and amended in sections 38-31 through 38-35 and the State Construction Code promulgated pursuant to the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act (Act No. 230 of 1972 as amended, MCL 125.1501 et seq.) and enforced by the City pursuant to section 18-26 of the City Code, the State Construction Code shall control as to all matters within the scope of the State Construction Code. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between the fire codes as adopted and amended in section 38-31 through 38-35 and the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act (Act No. 256 of 2011, as amended, MCL 28.451 et seq.), the Fireworks Safety Act shall control as to all matters within the scope of the Fireworks Safety Act except that "display fireworks" as defined in section 38-12 of the City Code shall be governed by sections 38-10 through 38-15 of the City Code and "consumer fireworks" shall be governed by section 38-16 of the City Code. 
( Ord. No. 15-624, § 1, 2-9-15 ) 
Secs. 38-37-38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE STATIONS 

Sec. 38-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved means approved by any recognized testing laboratory. 
    Product dispensing device means the cabinet equipped with product dispensing hoses approved to dispense class I, II or III liquids. 
    Product dispensing hose shall mean the actual hose used by a customer to dispense a class I, II or III liquid into his own vehicle or receptacle. 
    Self-service gasoline station means a gasoline and/or service station equipped with remote control product dispensing devices which permit a customer to dispense a class I, II or III liquid, as such liquids are defined in the codes adopted by section 38-31 of this Code, into his own vehicle or receptacle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-52. - Permitted to operate in compliance with article. 
    Self-service gasoline stations complying with this article shall be permitted to operate within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-15) 
Sec. 38-53. - Permit and license. 
(a)  Prior to the construction, installation or modification necessary to install a self-service gasoline station, and before the installation of any self-service product-dispensing device, application for a license shall be made to the building official. Such application shall contain a plan or layout of the proposed construction, together with the specifications of all equipment to be used; shall indicate distances between pumps, between pump islands and between any dispensing device and the nearest building, property line and public right-of-way; and shall be signed by the owner of the property or by the operator. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $20.00 for each product dispensing hose to be used for self-service operations, which fee shall be in addition to any necessary building permit fee required by the building code. If the building official determines that the proposed self-service gasoline station, as described in the application or as modified, complies with the terms of this article, he shall approve the license for the applicant. 
(b)  Commencing on July 1, 2009, all licenses shall authorize the operation of the self-service gasoline station from the date of issuance or the following January 1, whichever is later, until the following December 31. 
(c)  Not later than June 1, 2009, the owner or operator shall file a license application with the city clerk. That application shall specify any changes in the operation or ownership of the self-service gasoline station from the original and shall be accompanied by a fee of $20.00 for each product dispensing hose. If, after inspection, the building official determines that the operation of the self-service gasoline station complies with this article, the city clerk shall issue a license which expires on the following December 31. Thereafter, annual licenses shall be issued for the period of January 1 until December 31 (calendar year) and applicants for renewal of a license must submit applications by the preceding December 1. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16; Ord. No. 92-414, § 1, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 09-568, § 5, 3-9-09) 
Sec. 38-54. - Required equipment. 
(a)  All self-service gasoline stations shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  Approved self-service remote control dispensing devices installed in a manner that, when a fueling operation is completed, the dispenser is deactivated at either the emergency control position or at the dispenser location and may be reactivated only at the emergency control position. 
(2)  For all dispensers which will be used by persons other than a service station attendant, an approved automatic-closing nozzle. 
(3)  One complete set of approved emergency controls for each required attendant installed at a location not more than 100 feet from any dispenser. No such set of emergency controls shall control more than three pump islands. 
(4)  Approved two-way electronic voice communications between the location of the emergency controls and all self-service dispensing locations. 
(5)  One fire extinguisher of at least ten BC rating for each nine dispensers. 
(6)  For each storage tank, a test hole to check for possible gas leakage. 
(7)  Such other equipment as, in the opinion of the building inspector, shall be necessary to provide the operator an unobstructed view of all dispensing of fuel into all designs and possible locations of vehicles into which fuel is being dispensed. 
(b)  Any heating provided in the booth housing the emergency controls shall be of the type approved for installation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17) 
Sec. 38-55. - Location of self-service dispensers. 
(a)  Self-service dispensers in self-service gasoline stations shall not occupy the same pump islands as attended dispensers. No more than three self-service dispensers shall be placed in any one pump island. 
(b)  Pump islands with self-service dispensers shall be separated from all other attended or self-service dispenser pump islands by a distance of not less than ten feet, and shall be no closer than ten feet from a door, door opening, window or window opening. 
(Code 1976, § 7-18) 
Sec. 38-56. - Attendants. 
(a)  All self-service gasoline stations shall have on duty at all times while the station is open to the public at least the number of attendants specified in this section. The attendant's primary function shall be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of class I, II and III liquids. It is the responsibility of the attendant to prevent the dispensing of a class I liquid into a portable container which does not comply with subrule (d) of rule 105 and section 502 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (Red Can Act) (MCL 750.1 et seq., MSA 28.191 et seq.), to control sources of ignition and to handle accidental spills, fire extinguishers and other emergencies as needed. The attendant shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be trained to operate all the equipment and to perform the functions specified in this article and shall be reasonably capable of performing the functions and assuming the responsibilities set forth in this article. 
(b)  The attendant shall remain at the emergency controls during all times any vehicle is located at a self-service pump and during all times when class I, II or III liquids are being dispensed, unless all dispensers are deactivated and the controls are not accessible to any person other than the attendant. The controls shall be deemed to be accessible to other persons unless enclosed and locked. 
(c)  No attendant shall supervise the dispensing of fuel from more than three pump islands. The number of attendants required shall be: 
(1)  For one to three pump islands, one attendant; 
(2)  For four to six pump islands, two attendants; 
(3)  For seven to nine pump islands, three attendants, etc. 
Each required attendant shall have a separate set of emergency controls. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19) 
Sec. 38-57. - Persons performing dispensing. 
    Each person performing the dispensing of class I, II or III liquids from a self-service product dispensing device shall stay outside of his vehicle in view of the hose nozzle valve at all times during the dispensing operation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-20) 
Sec. 38-58. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code, except that as used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this article (i) committed by a person within any six-month period and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(c)  The building official is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-450, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Secs. 38-59-38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-570, § 3, adopted March 23, 2009, repealed art. IV, which pertained to hazardous materials and derived from Code 1976, §§ 7-25, 7-26; and Ord. No. 96-484, § 1, adopted March 12, 1996. 

Secs. 38-81-38-86. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; soil redistribution, § 34-181 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation prevention, § 34-206 et seq.; planning, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Erosion and sedimentation prevention, § 34-206 et seq. 

Sec. 42-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or structures (including storage tanks), mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within an area of special flood hazard. 
    Equal degree of encroachment means that standard applied in determining the location of encroachment limits so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of floodflows. This is determined by considering the effect of encroachment on the hydraulic efficiency of the floodplain along both sides of a stream for a significant reach. 
    Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood frequency means the average frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected that a specific flood level or discharge may be equalled or exceeded. 
    Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings in a floodprone area. 
    Floodway means the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regulatory flood, being the main floodflow. 
    Obstruction means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse, channel or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property. 
    Reach means a hydraulic engineering term describing longitudinal segments of a stream or river. A reach will generally include the segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are influenced by a manmade or natural obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would typically constitute a reach. 
    Regulatory flood means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the area and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur in a particular stream. The regulatory flood generally has a frequency of approximately 100 years determined from an analysis of floods on a particular stream and other streams in the same general region. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation means the height to which uses regulated by this article are required to be elevated or floodproofed. 
(Code 1976, § 5-131) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-27. - Community flood hazard findings. 
    Periodic inundation of certain portions of the city produce flood hazards which result in loss of life and property, health and safety dangers, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of this community. These flood losses are caused by: 
(1)  The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increased flood flow height and velocity; and 
(2)  The occupancy of floodprone areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other uses inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(Code 1976, § 5-120) 
Sec. 42-28. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, areas of special flood hazard are those identified as such by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Walker," dated December 1, 1981, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps, which documents are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. Such documents are on file with the city clerk at the city offices. 
(b)  When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with this section, the building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize the best available base flood elevation data from a federal, state or other source in order to administer this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-121) 
Sec. 42-29. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to protect the general public and all lands in the city subject to flood losses as described in section 42-27 by minimizing such losses through: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in floodflow heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; and 
(3)  Protecting individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(Code 1976, § 5-122) 
Sec. 42-30. - Scope. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the official zoning map as being located within the boundaries of the floodway and flood-fringe portions of the floodplain. The provisions and restrictions of this article shall be considered to apply in addition to, and where applicable in the stead of, the provisions of zoning districts shown on the official zoning map, sufficient to fulfill the purpose of this article. 
(b)  The floodprone areas of the community are hereby divided into a floodway district and a flood-fringe district, with boundaries as shown on the official zoning map. Uses and regulations otherwise applicable in existing zoning districts shall not be allowed unless also permitted in, and developed in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Within the floodway and flood-fringe districts, this section shall take precedence over any conflicting laws, ordinances or codes. 
(d)  All development within the area of special flood hazard is regulated by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-123) 
Sec. 42-31. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered the minimum necessary and reasonable for regulatory purposes. Larger floods may occur at any time and excessive floodwater heights may be experienced due to manmade and natural causes, such as ice jams and accumulated debris in bridge openings. This article does not imply that areas outside the floodway or flood-fringe districts, or uses permitted within such districts, shall remain free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create a liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from compliance with or reliance upon this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1976, § 5-130) 
Sec. 42-32. - Administration. 
(a)  The building inspector, or such other person as the city commission may designate by resolution, shall be responsible for the administration of this article. 
(b)  A building permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other improvements in the floodway or flood-fringe districts. 
(c)  The applicant for a building permit for property within the floodway or flood-fringe district shall provide a certification of the actual elevation of the property in question and of the lowest habitable floor of any improvements upon such property, including basement. 
(d)  The building inspector shall obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest habitable floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures located in the floodway or flood-fringe district and whether the structure contains a basement. Further, for all new and substantially improved floodproofed structures, the building inspector shall verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, and maintain floodproofing certifications. 
(e)  Applications for building permits for property regulated by this article shall, in addition to the other requirements of this section, be generally reviewed to determine that for all major repairs and new construction: 
(1)  Construction materials and utility equipment are used which are resistant to flood damage; and 
(2)  Construction methods and practices are used to minimize flood damage. 
(f)  The building inspector shall also require that all other state and federal permits have been obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(g)  Any records compiled under this section shall be public records available for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1976, § 5-129) 
Sec. 42-33. - Plans and specifications. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall require, as applicable, the following materials to be submitted along with requests for any special exception use approvals: 
(1)  Plans in triplicate drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel floodway and regulatory flood protection level. 
(2)  Plans (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground at five-foot intervals; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing buildings on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply and sanitary facilities; photographs or maps showing existing land uses and vegetation, upstream and downstream soil types, and other pertinent information which may be required by the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 5-126) 
Cross reference- Board of zoning appeals, § 94-56 et seq. 
Sec. 42-34. - Review considerations. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals, in reviewing an application for a special exception use in either the floodway or flood-fringe district, shall consider the following points before rendering a decision: 
(1)  Any possible danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments on the floodplain. 
(2)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(3)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and insanitary conditions. 
(4)  The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(5)  The importance of the services provided by the development to the community. 
(6)  The requirement of the proposed development for a waterfront location. 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding. 
(8)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(9)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(10)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(11)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
(12)  Such other factors which are, in the opinion of the planning commission, relevant to the purposes of this district. 
(b)  Where, in the opinion of the zoning board of appeals, topographic data, engineering studies, or other studies are needed to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed use and/or the effects of the use on the floodway, the zoning board of appeals may require the applicant to submit such data and/or studies, prepared by competent engineers or other technical people. 
(Code 1976, § 5-127) 
Sec. 42-35. - Special conditions. 
    Upon reviewing all data and materials, and before granting approval, the zoning board of appeals may attach certain conditions, when applicable, to the granting of approval of a special exception use. Such conditions may be, but are not limited to those enumerated, as in the following: 
(1)  Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities. 
(2)  Limitations on periods of use and operation. 
(3)  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, deed restrictions and covenants. 
(4)  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures. 
(5)  Floodproofing measures such as the following shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The zoning board of appeals shall require that the applicant submit a plan certified by a professional engineer registered in the state showing that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. Among the most common floodproofing methods, but not limited to those enumerated, are the following: 
a.  Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement. 
b.  Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters, or similar protective devices. 
c.  Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures. 
d.  Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls. 
e.  Addition of mass or weight to structures to prevent flotation. 
f.  Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures. 
g.  Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters. 
h.  Pumping facilities or other methods for subsurface drainage systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement pressures. 
i.  Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris. 
j.  Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and stormwaters into the buildings or structures. Gravity draining of basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices. 
k.  Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical appliances in a manner which will ensure they are not subject to flooding and to provide protection from inundation by the regulatory flood. 
l.  Locations of any structural storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, or other toxic materials which would be hazardous to public health, safety and welfare in a manner which will ensure that the facilities are situated at elevations above the height associated with the regulatory flood protection elevation or are adequately floodproofed to prevent flotation of storage containers or damage to storage containers which could result in the escape of toxic materials into floodwaters. 
(Code 1976, § 5-128) 
Sec. 42-36. - Floodway district. 
(a)  Area described. The floodway is that part of the floodplain which carries the deeper fast-moving floodwaters and is, for purposes of this district, considered to be the 50-year flood area. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses have a low flood damage potential because of their open space nature and shall be permitted by right in the floodway district to the extent that they are allowed uses in the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, grazing, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting; 
(2)  Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips, and storage yards for equipment or machinery easily moved or not subject to flood damage; 
(3)  Recreational uses such as parks, swimming areas, golf courses, driving ranges, picnic grounds, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, and hunting, fishing and hiking areas; 
(4)  Utility facilities such as dams, power plants, transmission lines, pipelines, and water monitoring devices; 
(5)  Navigational and drainage aids such as channels, channel markers, buoys, and other such devices; 
(6)  Other water-related uses such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, and river crossings of transmission lines, subject to approval by the water resources commission of the state department of natural resources; 
(7)  Residential support uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
(c)  Special exception uses. The following uses shall be allowed in the floodway district only with the special approval of the zoning board of appeals to the extent that they are allowed uses in the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  Ancillary uses or structures to any of the permitted uses outlined in subsection (b); 
(2)  Transient amusement enterprises such as circuses, carnivals and fairs; 
(3)  Extraction uses such as sand, gravel, plaster, and other mining operations; 
(4)  Kennels and stables; 
(5)  Drive-in theaters and racetracks; 
(6)  Railroads, streets and other rights-of-way; 
(7)  Storage yards for heavy equipment, materials or machinery; 
(8)  Campgrounds; 
(9)  Roadside stands, billboards and signs; 
(10)  Publicly owned community centers. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are not allowed in the floodway district under any circumstances: 
(1)  No structure intended to be a permanent or temporary residence shall be erected or moved into the floodway district, nor shall any existing residence be enlarged more than 25 percent of its size after the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(2)  No landfill, dump or junkyard shall be allowed; 
(3)  The storage or processing of materials which in time of flooding become buoyant, flammable, explosive or otherwise injurious to public health is expressly prohibited; 
(4)  Onsite sewage disposal systems are prohibited. 
(e)  Standards applying to special uses. The following standards are applicable to those uses outlined in subsection (c) in order to ensure proper construction and assist the zoning board of appeals in evaluating the appropriateness of each use: 
(1)  No structure, fill, excavation or storage shall be permitted which, acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses, significantly and unduly affects the capacity of the floodway and, thereby, increases the height of the floodwaters. Consideration of the effects of a proposed use shall be based on a reasonable assumption that there will be an equal degree of encroachment extending for a significant reach on both sides of the stream. 
(2)  Filling in the floodway may be permitted only after full compliance has been achieved, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, with all applicable federal, state and local acts, regulations, codes and ordinances. Such fill shall be protected from erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, bulkheading or other approved means. 
(3)  Structures shall be constructed and arranged on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters. 
a.  Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of the floodflow. 
b.  Wherever possible, structures shall be placed approximately on the same floodflow lines as those of adjoining structures. 
(4)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and to prevent damage to other structures or obstruction of bridge openings or narrow portions of any waterway. 
(5)  Service facilities such as electrical or heating equipment shall be constructed at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation which is defined as being two feet above the water surface profile associated with the 100-year flood frequency level, or these facilities shall be adequately floodproofed. 
(6)  Material and equipment may be stored if not subject to major flood damage and must be firmly anchored to prevent flotation or easily removable within the time following the flood warning and preceding the actual flood. 
(7)  Any excavation, fill, extraction, grading or scraping shall require the approval and consent of the water resources commission of the state department of natural resources. 
(8)  All new construction and substantial improvements of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
(9)  New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant sanitary facilities and utilities, shall: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. 
(Code 1976, § 5-124) 
Sec. 42-37. - Flood-fringe district. 
(a)  Area described. The flood-fringe district is that portion of the floodplain which carries the shallow slow-moving floodwaters and is, for purposes of this article, considered to be the 100-year flood area. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted by right in the flood-fringe district to the extent that they are allowed uses in the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  All permitted uses in the floodway district. 
(2)  Any structures so constructed that the basement and first floors are above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(c)  Special exception uses. 
(1)  All new residential and nonresidential construction or substantial improvements thereto shall meet the requirements of section 42-36(e)(8) and (9). 
(2)  Uses permitted in section 42-36(c) and other similar uses which will not be subject to substantial flood damage and which will not cause flood losses on other lands or other hazards to the general public. 
(3)  The uses permitted by right in subsection (b) of this section may, under special circumstances, be permitted to utilize other means of providing protection than those mentioned above. In other words, where existing streets, utilities, etc., are such that complying with the above restrictions becomes impractical, other techniques may be authorized by the zoning board of appeals as long as they remain reasonably safe and adjacent lands are not made more susceptible to damage. 
(d)  Anchoring requirements. All new construction and substantial improvements in the flood-fringe district shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and to prevent damage to other structures or obstruction of bridge openings or narrow portions of any waterway. 
(e)  Onsite sewage disposal system. If permitted by applicable ordinances, any onsite sewage disposal system in the flood-fringe district shall be located to avoid impairment to it or contamination from it during flooding. 
(Code 1976, § 5-125) 
Sec. 42-38. - Special requirements for mobile homes. 
    If permitted in the underlying zone district, and in addition to all other requirements of this article and other applicable ordinances, mobile homes shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. The following are minimum requirements: 
a.  Over-the-top ties must be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile homes of less than 50 feet requiring one additional tie per side; 
b.  Frame ties must be provided at each corner of the home with additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties at each side; 
c.  All components of the anchoring system must be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
d.  Any additions to the mobile home must be similarly anchored. 
(2)  For new mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions; for expansions to existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions; for existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for mobile homes not placed in mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, the following are also required: 
a.  Lots or stands must be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; 
b.  Adequate surface drainage and access for haulers must be provided; and 
c.  In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots must be large enough to permit steps, piling foundations must be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement must be provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(3)  No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway, except in an existing mobile home park or in an existing mobile home subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 5-132) 
Sec. 42-39. - Subdivision proposals. 
    If permitted in the underlying zone district, and in addition to all other requirements of this article and other applicable ordinances, all subdivisions of land shall: 
(1)  Be designed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, electric, gas and water systems, located and constructed in such manner as to minimize flood damage; and 
(3)  Provide drainage in such manner as to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(Code 1976, § 5-133) 
Sec. 42-40. - Utilities. 
(a)  Any new or replacement water supply system shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(b)  Any new or replacement sanitary sewage system shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into the floodwaters. 
(Code 1976, § 5-134) 
Sec. 42-41. - Alteration of watercourses. 
(a)  If a development proposes a stream alteration, the building inspector shall notify adjacent communities and the appropriate state agency prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(b)  The city shall require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse is not diminished. 
(Code 1976, § 5-135) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; court, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; false reporting to police, § 50-5; obstructing police, § 50-6; furnishing false information to police officer, § 50-39; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 

Sec. 46-1. - Minimum standards for law enforcement officers. 
(a)  The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers, as established and adopted by the state law enforcement officers training council, in accordance with Act No. 203, Public Acts of Michigan of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq., MSA 4.450(1) et seq.), are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  Be a citizen of the United States. 
(2)  Minimum age of 21 years. 
(3)  Graduation from high school or equivalent, "equivalent" defined as having attained a passing score on the general education development test indicating high school graduation level. 
(4)  Fingerprinting of applicants with a search of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record. 
(5)  The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony offense. 
(6)  Good moral character as determined by a favorable report following a comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment records, home environment, personal traits and integrity. Consideration will be given to any and all law violations, including traffic and conservation law convictions, as indicating a lack of good character. 
(7)  Acceptable physical, emotional and mental fitness as established by a licensed physician following examination to determine that the applicant is free from any physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect his performance of duty as a police officer. 
(8)  The trainee shall possess normal hearing and normal color vision. He shall be free from any impediments of the senses. He must possess normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye correctable to 20/20. The trainee must be physically sound, well-developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards, and in possession of his extremities. He shall be free from any physical defects, chronic diseases, organic diseases, organic or functional conditions, or mental instabilities which may tend to impair efficient performance of duty which might endanger the lives of others or himself if he lacks these qualifications. 
(9)  A declaration of the applicant's medical history shall become a part of the background investigation. The information shall be available to the examining physician. 
(10)  An oral interview shall be held by the hiring authority or his representative to determine the applicant's acceptability for a police officer position and to assess appearance, background and ability to com- municate. 
(11)  Recruitment and employment practices and standards shall be in compliance with existing state statutes governing the activity. 
(b)  The standards of the state law enforcement officers training council are recognized as minimum standards and higher standards are recommended by the training council when qualified applicants are available. Any portion of any ordinance which meets the minimum standards or exceeds those standards shall remain in effect. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5) 
Chapter 48 - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 94-435, § 1, adopted May 10, 1994, added a new chapter designated as Ch. 3, municipal civil infractions. In order to conform to the alphabetical sequence of the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as Chap. 48 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 48-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the City of Walker Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as established by this chapter. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the City of Walker Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines under section 48-6, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act. 
    Trailway municipal civil infraction means a municipal civil infraction involving the operation of a vehicle on a recreational trailway at a time, in a place, or in a manner prohibited by article II, chapter 54 of the City Code. 
    Trailway municipal civil infraction action means a civil infraction action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a trailway municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, § 1, 5-10-94; Ord. No. 04-518, § 1, 9-27-04) 
Sec. 48-2. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of (1) a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or (2) a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the City of Walker Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, § 1, 5-10-94) 
Sec. 48-3. - Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(3)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the Act. 
(4)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(5)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.  Except as provided by section 48-3(7)b., an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy of the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, § 1, 5-10-94) 
Sec. 48-4. - Same-Contents. 
(a)  A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, § 1, 5-10-94) 
Sec. 48-4.1. - Failure to answer or appear. 
(a)  A person who fails to answer a municipal civil infraction citation or a notice to appear in district court for a municipal civil infraction is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  A person who fails to comply with an order or judgment of the district court issued in a municipal civil infraction case after expiration of the time stated in a notice in writing proved to have been duly mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to the last known addressee of such person is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 04-511, § 1, 6-28-04) 
Sec. 48-4.2. - Trailway municipal civil infractions. 
(a)  An authorized city official may seize and impound a vehicle operated in the commission of a trailway municipal civil infraction. Upon impoundment, the vehicle is subject to a lien, subordinate to a prior lien of record, in the amount of any fine, costs, or assessment that the defendant may be ordered to pay under section 8727 of the Act and any expenses described in subsection (b) that the defendant may be ordered to pay under section 8727 of the Act. The defendant or a person with an ownership interest in the vehicle may post with the court a cash or surety bond in the amount of $750.00. If such a bond is posted, the vehicle shall be released from impoundment. The vehicle shall also be released, and the lien shall be discharged, upon a judicial determination that the defendant is not responsible for the trailway municipal civil infraction or upon payment of the fine, costs, assessment, and damages and expenses. 
(b)  In a trailway municipal civil infraction action, an order under section 8727 of the Act may require the defendant to pay one or both of the following: 
(1)  The amount of damages to any land, water, wildlife, vegetation, or other natural resource or to any facility damaged by the violation. Money collected under this subdivision shall be distributed to the city. 
(2)  The reasonable expense of impoundment under subsection (a). Money collected under this subdivision shall be distributed to the city. 
(c)  If the district court decides that the defendant is responsible for the trailway municipal civil infraction and the defendant defaults in the payment of the fine, costs, assessment, or damages or expenses, or in any installment, as ordered pursuant to section 8727 of the Act, any bond posted under subsection (a) shall be forfeited and applied to the fine, costs, assessment, damages, expenses, or installment. The district court shall certify any remaining unpaid amount to the city attorney. The city attorney may enforce the lien by a foreclosure sale. The foreclosure sale shall be conducted in the manner provided and subject to the same rights as apply in the case of execution sales under sections 6031, 6032, 6041, 6042, and 6044 to 6047 of the Act. 
(d)  Not less than 21 days before the foreclosure sale, the city attorney shall by certified mail send written notice of the time and place of the foreclosure sale to each person with a known ownership interest in or lien of record on the vehicle. In addition, not less than ten days before the foreclosure sale, the city attorney shall twice publish notice of the time and place of the foreclosure sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the vehicle was seized. The proceeds of the foreclosure sale shall be distributed in the following order of priority: 
(1)  To discharge any lien on the vehicle that was recorded prior to the creation of the lien under subsection (a). 
(2)  To the clerk of the court for the payment of the fine, costs, assessment, damages, and expenses that the defendant was ordered to pay under section 8727 of the Act. 
(3)  To discharge any lien on the vehicle that was recorded after the creation of the lien under subsection (a). 
(4)  To the owner of the vehicle. 
(e)  Pursuant to section 8717 of the Act, the district court shall schedule a formal hearing in a trailway municipal civil infraction action if either or both of the following apply: 
(1)  The trailway municipal civil infraction caused damage to a natural resource or facility. 
(2)  The authorized city official impounded the vehicle operated in the commission of the trailway municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 04-518, § 2, 9-27-04) 
Sec. 48-5. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau ("bureau") as authorized under Section 8396 of the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at Walker City Hall, and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to approval of the city commission, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in sections 48-3(6) and (7) of this chapter. In addition to any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, § 1, 5-10-94) 
Sec. 48-6. - Schedule of civil fines established. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is hereby established. The fines for the violations listed below shall be as follows: 
Code 
Section(s)* Offense 
(Violation) Fine (1) Ch. 10, art. II Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 10, article II ("amusement parlors") $ 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (2) Ch. 14, art. II Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 14, article II ("racing pigeons") 100.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (3) Ch. 18, art. II Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 18, article II ("building code") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (4) Ch. 18, art. III Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 18, article III ("plumbing code") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (5) Ch. 18, art. IV Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 18, article IV ("address numbers") 10.00 First repeat offense 20.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 50.00 (6) Ch. 18, art. V Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 18, article V ("moving of buildings"), division 1 or division 2 100.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (7) Ch. 22, art. I Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 22, article I ("business licenses") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (8) Ch. 22, art. III Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 22, article III ("transient merchants") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (9) Ch. 34, art. III, secs. 34-55-34-57 Failure to comply with any provision of open burning regulations (sections 34-55 through 34-57) 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (10) Ch. 34, art. IV, div. 1 Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 34, article IV, division 1 ("noise, generally"), where the source of the noise is associated with a residential activity 10.00 First repeat offense 20.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 50.00 (11) Ch. 22, art. IV Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 22, article IV ("tattoo parlors and body-piercing establishments") 100.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (12) Ch. 34, art. IV, div. 1 Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 34, article IV, division 1 ("noise, generally"), where the source of the noise is associated with a commercial or industrial activity 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (13) Ch. 34, art. V Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 34, article V ("soil redistribution") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (14) Ch. 34, art. VI Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 34, article VI ("soil erosion and sedimentation control") 100.00 First repeat offense 300.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (15) Ch. 34, art. VII Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 34, article VII ("Mineral Mining") 100.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (16) Ch. 38, art. II Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 34, article II ("Fire Code") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (17) Ch. 38, art. III Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 34, article III ("Self-Service Gasoline Stations") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (18) Ch. 50, section 50-47 Failure to comply with section 50-47 ("Defrauding taxicabs") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (19) Chapt. 54, art. I Failure to comply with the provisions of chapter 54, article I, designated as municipal civil infractions ("Parks") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (20) Ch. 54, art. II Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 54, article II ("Recreational Trailways") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (21) Ch. 62, secs. 62-42 and 62-43 Failure to comply with any provision of sections 62-42 or 62-43 2,000.00 First repeat offense 5,000.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 10,000.00 (22) Ch. 62, art. I and II (except sec. 62-42 and sec. 62-43) Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 62, articles I and II ("Solid Waste") (except sections 62-42 and 62-43) 100.00 First repeat offense 500.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 1,000.00 (23) Ch. 70, art. II Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 70, article II ("Repair Work, Location of Utilities Within Public Rights-of-Way") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (24) 70-68 Failure to comply with any provision of section 70-68 ("Clearing of sidewalks"), including, without limitation, failure or refusal to abate a violation following service of a notice and order 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (25) Ch. 82, art. V Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 82, article V ("Inoperable Motor Vehicles") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (26) Ch. 82, art. IX Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 82, article IX ("Truck Routes") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (27) 90-3 Failure to comply with any provision of section 90-3 ("Noxious weeds and other prohibited vegetation"), including, without limitation, failure or refusal to abate a violation following service of a notice and order 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00 (28) Ch. 94 Failure to comply with any provision of chapter 94 ("Zoning") 50.00 First repeat offense 250.00 Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense 500.00  
    *Including chapter(s), article(s), division(s), and subsection(s), or portions thereof, as specified in this schedule. 
(b)  A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, § 1, 5-10-94; Ord. No. 94-438, § 3, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-439, § 2, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-440, § 3, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-441, § 3, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-443, § 6, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 94-444, §§ 3, 4, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 94-446, § 5, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 94-449, § 7, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 94-450, § 2, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 94-451, § 2, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 94-452, § 2, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 94-453, § 2, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 94-454, § 2, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 94-455, § 2, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 95-474, § 2, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 95-476, § 2, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 97-504, § 3, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 00-468, § 2, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 00-469, § 2, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 04-519, §§ 3, 4, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 04-522, § 2, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 04-523, § 2, 12-27-04) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Court, ch. 26; nuisances, § 34-26 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definition; public place. 
    As used in this chapter, "public place" means any street, alley, park, sidewalk, public building, any place of business or assembly open to the public or frequented by the public or any portion thereof, and any other place which is open to public view or to which the public, or any portion thereof, has access. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1; Ord. No. 04-513, § 1, 6-28-04) 
State Law reference- Attempts, MCL 750.92. 
Sec. 50-1.1. - Aiding or abetting; attempt; conspiracy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to aid and abet any other person in the commission of any unlawful act in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any offense prohibited by law if, in such attempt, any act is done towards the commission of such offense. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conspire together with one or more persons to commit an offense prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 04-513, § 2, 6-28-04) 
Sec. 50-2. - Inducing commission of unlawful act. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal or immoral act in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Transporting persons to engage in unlawful act. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport any person to a place for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in any illegal or immoral act. 
(Code 1976, § 10-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Abandoned refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
    No person shall have in his possession, either inside or outside of any building, structure or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other similar airtight container of any kind large enough for a child to enter, which has a snap latch or other locking device thereon, without first removing the snap latch or other locking device, or the doors, from such icebox, refrigerator or other such airtight container. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 10-6) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 34-26 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 50-5. - False report to police. 
    A person commits the crime of false reporting to law enforcement authorities if: 
(1)  He makes a report or intentionally causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their concern when he knows that it did not occur; or 
(2)  He makes a report or purposely causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to a crime or other incident within their concern when he knows that he has no such information. 
(Code 1976, § 10-9) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- False report of crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 50-6. - Obstructing police. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any member of the police force, or any peace officer, in the discharge of his duties as such. 
(Code 1976, § 10-10) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Obstruction of police officers, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 50-7. - Assault. 
    No person shall commit an assault or assault and battery upon any person. 
(Code 1976, § 10-12; Ord. No. 13-620, § 1, 12-21-13 ) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 50-7.5. - Domestic assault and battery; arrest procedures. 
(a)  An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his/her spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he/she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his/her household, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both; except that an individual who has previously been convicted under this section or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section, or a violation of sections 81, 81a, 82, 83, 84, or 86 of Act 382 of Public Acts of 1931, as amended (being the Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.81, 750.81a, 750.82, 750.83,750.84, or 750.86, respectively) may be punished under state law in accordance with the provisions of section 81 of Act 382 of Public Acts of 1931, as amended by Act 64 of Public Acts of 1994 (being MCL 750.81). 
(b)  A police officer may arrest an individual for violating subsection (a) regardless of whether the police officer has a warrant or whether the violation was committed in his or her presence, if the police officer has or receives positive information that another police officer has reasonable cause to believe both of the following: 
(1)  The violation occurred or is occurring. 
(2)  The individual has had a child in common with the victim, resides or has resided in the same household as the victim, has or has had a dating relationship with the victim, or is a spouse or former spouse of the victim. 
(c)  As used in this section, "dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or ordinary fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context. 
(Code 1976, § 10-59; Ord. No. 96-487, § 1, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 02-483, § 1, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 02-485, § 1, 3-25-02) 
Sec. 50-8. - Engaging in fights or quarrels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in any place open to the public except in reasonable self-defense when attacked without reasonable provocation or in reasonable defense of another who was so attacked. 
(Code 1976, § 10-13; Ord. No. 10-589, § 1, 10-11-10) 
Sec. 50-9. - Disorderly person. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be a disorderly person. 
(b)  A person is a disorderly person if the person is any of the following: 
(1)  A person of sufficient ability who refuses or neglects to support his family. 
(2)  A person who urinates in a public place. 
(3)  A person who engages in an illegal occupation or business. 
(4)  A person who is engaged in indecent or obscene conduct in a public place. 
(5)  A common prostitute. 
(6)  A vagrant. 
(7)  A person who unreasonably disturbs the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous, or vulgar conduct or language. 
(8)  A person found loitering in a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed. 
(9)  A person who knowingly loiters in or about a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(10)  A person who loiters in or about a police station, police headquarters building, jail, hospital, court building, or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or of the services of sureties upon criminal recognizance. 
(11)  A person who is found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
(Code 1976, § 10-14; Ord. No. 13-620, § 2, 12-21-13 ) 
Sec. 50-9.5. - Disturbing by soliciting. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask or solicit mean and include, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining donations. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to ask or solicit from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  Within any public transportation vehicle, or within 15 feet of any bus stop, taxi stand or rapid transit stop; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall be interpreted to prohibit related parties from soliciting money or other things of value from one another. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)  Accosting another; or 
(2)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
( Ord. No. 13-620, § 3, 12-21-13 ) 
Sec. 50-10. - Disturbing persons by use of telephone. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, by means or use of a telephone, to disturb or tend to disturb the peace, quiet or right of privacy of any other person or family by repeated and continued anonymous or identified telephone messages intended to harass or disturb the person or family to whom the call is directed; or, by a single call or repeated calls, to use obscene, profane, indecent or offensive language, or suggest any lewd or lascivious act over or through a telephone in this city; or attempt to extort money or other thing of value from any person or family by means or use of the telephone; or to threaten any physical violence or harm to any person or family; or to repeatedly and continuously ring the telephone of any person or family with intent to disturb or harass them; provided, however, the normal use of the telephone for the purpose of requesting payment of debts or obligations or for other legitimate purposes shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-16) 
Sec. 50-11. - Disturbing lawful assemblies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any service of worship or any other assembly gathered for lawful purposes in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-17) 
Cross reference- Obscene conduct and displays prohibited at outdoor assemblies, § 10-69(2), (3). 
State Law reference- Disturbing meetings, MCL 750.169 et seq., MSA 28.366 et seq. 
Sec. 50-12. - Annoying other persons in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to accost, molest or otherwise annoy any person in any public place, either by word of mouth, whistle or by sign or motion. 
(Code 1976, § 10-18) 
Sec. 50-13. - Collecting in crowds for unlawful purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or stand in crowds or arrange, encourage or abet the collection of persons in crowds for illegal or mischievous purposes in any public place. 
(Code 1976, § 10-20) 
Sec. 50-14. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  A minor under the age of 12 years shall not loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(b)  A minor under the age of 16 years shall not loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. immediately following, except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
(c)  Any person of the age of 16 years or over assisting, aiding, abetting, allowing, permitting or encouraging any minor under the age of 16 years to violate the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Arrests and prosecution of minors under the age of 17 years for violation of this section shall be in accordance with section 13 and the other provisions of chapter XIIA of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939 (MCL 712A.1 et seq., MSA 27.3178(598.1) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 10-21) 
Sec. 50-15. - Protection of juveniles from certain detrimental activities. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as the Juvenile Protection Ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect minors from exposure to or any inducement to engage in activities detrimental to their health, safety or welfare and to further promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city by prohibiting encouragement of or causing of or contribution to the delinquency of minors. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Minor means any individual who has not reached the age of 17 years. 
(2)  Delinquency of a minor means the participation or engagement of the minor in any of the following acts: 
a.  Acts which would constitute a violation of any city ordinance or state or federal law. 
b.  Deserting his home without sufficient cause. 
c.  Willful and repeated absence from school while being legally required to attend. 
(d)  Contributing to delinquency. 
(1)  No person shall, by any act or word, encourage, cause or tend to cause or contribute to the delinquency of a minor. 
(2)  No person shall permit a minor to be present in a vehicle, room, house, building or any other place in which an illegal activity is knowingly being conducted and which is owned, occupied or used by or under the control of such person. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (d) shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or both. 
(Code 1976, § 10-20.1) 
Cross reference- Sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, § 6-17. 
Sec. 50-16. - Damaging, defacing, tampering with, etc., property generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, deface, tamper with or damage in any manner any property not his own, or without proper authority; to in any manner mar the walls of any building or any fence, tree or pole within the city; or to take or meddle with any property belonging to the city or remove property from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, standing or stored without authority from the official custodian of such property. 
(Code 1976, § 10-22) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq., MSA 28.609 et seq. 
Sec. 50-17. - Disobeying validly posted signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey any validly posted signs in any public park or other public place. 
(Code 1976, § 10-11) 
Cross reference- Sign regulations, § 94-406 et seq. 
Sec. 50-18. - Obstructing, damaging, etc., official notices or placards. 
    No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by such officer to remove such notice. 
(Code 1976, § 10-25) 
Cross reference- Sign regulations, § 94-406 et seq. 
Sec. 50-19. - Unlawful posting of advertising matter, signs, etc., on public or private property. 
(a)  No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or other matter upon any lamppost, electric light, railway, telegraph or telephone pole, shade tree, fire hydrant, bridge, pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or public building. This shall not be construed as preventing any public officer from doing any such act for any purpose authorized by the laws of the state or the Charter or ordinances of the city. 
(b)  No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or any other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate, post, tree or treebox, without having first obtained the written permission of the owner, agent or occupants of the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 10-24) 
Cross reference- Sign regulations, § 94-406 et seq. 
Sec. 50-20. - Larceny. 
    Any person who shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, of the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record, or any person who shall aid and abet another in the commission thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1976, § 10-26) 
State Law reference- Larceny, MCL 750.356 et seq., MSA 28.588. 
Sec. 50-20.5. - False pretenses; fraud. 
    No person shall obtain or attempt to obtain money, goods, property or services by fraud, trick or false pretenses. 
( Ord. No. 15-623, § 1, 2-9-15 ) 
Sec. 50-21. - Altering, removing, etc., merchandise tags. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change, switch, remove, deface, replace, cover or otherwise alter any label, tag, mark or other identification which is intended to identify merchandise to be sold or to indicate the price of which any merchandise is to be sold, without the consent of the owner or vendor of such merchandise. 
(Code 1976, § 10-28) 
Sec. 50-22. - Retail fraud. 
    A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(3)  With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store. 
(Code 1976, § 10-49) 
Sec. 50-23. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in prostitution in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-30) 
Sec. 50-24. - Gambling and related offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Keep or maintain or permit the use of a gambling room, table or equipment, or any policy or pool tickets, to be used for gambling on any premises occupied or controlled by him; 
(2)  Conduct or attend any cockfight or dogfight; or 
(3)  Place, receive or transmit any bet on the outcome of any race, contest or game of any kind whatsoever. 
(Code 1976, § 10-37) 
Sec. 50-25. - Frequenting, operating, etc., unlawful business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or any other illegal or immoral business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquors, ch. 6. 
Sec. 50-26. - Obscene, blasphemous, etc., language. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to utter any vile, blasphemous, vulgar or obscene language in any public place or in such a way as to subject the public or any woman or child to such language. 
(Code 1976, § 10-31) 
State Law reference- Indecent language, MCL 750.103, 750.337, MSA 28.298, 28.569. 
Sec. 50-27. - Trespass. 
(a)  It shall be a trespass and unlawful for any person to willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person legally in possession thereof or his agent or servant, or for any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person legally in possession thereof, or his agent or servant, without lawful authority to neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. The owner or lessee of any lands may erect a poster, sign or other form of notice to forbid entry thereon or any part, portion or area thereof, at a place or places where such poster, sign or other form of notice may reasonably be seen. 
(b)  It shall be a trespass and unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, which term is defined to include a motorcycle, over or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such land or of a tenant or other person legally in occupancy or possession of such land. 
(c)  Unless the operator of a motor vehicle shall operate such motor vehicle upon private property for the purpose of a business or pleasure visit with a legal occupant of such private property, the operator shall secure a written permit from the owner or such tenant or person in legal possession of such land for the operation of such motor vehicle thereon. 
(d)  The operation of a motor vehicle over or upon privately owned land by one not entitled to possession of such land and not engaged in performing a duty or function prescribed by law or without the written permit required by this section shall be prima facie evidence of a trespass and of operation of the motor vehicle upon private property without proper authority. 
(Code 1976, § 10-27) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq., MSA 28.814 et seq. 
Sec. 50-28. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any window peeping in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-33) 
State Law reference- Person found window peeping defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c), MSA 28.364(1)(c). 
Sec. 50-29. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his person. 
(Code 1976, § 10-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a, MSA 28.567(1). 
Sec. 50-30. - Nude swimming or bathing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in the nude in any public place. 
(Code 1976, § 10-35) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 54. 
Sec. 50-31. - Swimming in unguarded waters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe or wade in any unguarded creek, stream, pond, lake, pit or quarry located in any public park, other public place or on property other than one's own. "Unguarded" shall mean where a lifeguard or other adult reasonably capable of performing the functions of a lifeguard is not in attendance. 
(Code 1976, § 10-36) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 54. 
Sec. 50-32. - Fortunetelling, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tell or pretend to tell fortunes for hire, gain, reward or profit, whether by means of cards, tokens, trances, inspection of the hands or skull, mindreading, consulting the movements of the heavenly bodies, or otherwise; or for hire, gain, reward or profit, pretend to enable another to recover lost or stolen property, pretend to give success in any business, enterprise, speculation or game of chance, or by improper means induce any person to dispose of property in favor of another. 
(Code 1976, § 10-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.267 et seq., MSA 28.478 et seq. 
Sec. 50-33. - False registration for overnight accommodations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to register at any hotel, roominghouse, trailer camp, tourist home, motel or other place offering overnight accommodations to the public under an assumed name, or as the wife or husband of any person to whom he is not legally married. 
(Code 1976, § 10-39) 
Sec. 50-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-646 , § 8, adopted May 20, 2019, repealed § 50-34, which pertained to influence of narcotic drug and derived from Code 1976, § 10-40.2. 
Sec. 50-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-646 , § 9, adopted May 20, 2019, repealed § 50-35, which pertained to controlled substances and derived from Code 1976, § 10-41 and Ord. No. 04-512, § 1, adopted June 28, 2004. 
Sec. 50-36. - Soliciting gifts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit gifts for himself or for someone other than a recognized charitable cause or institution. 
(Code 1976, § 10-43) 
Sec. 50-37. - Obstructing public passages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authority, to conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(Code 1976, § 10-44) 
State Law reference- Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 50-38. - Franchise required for CATV. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "community antenna television" shall mean the business of transmission or distribution of television signals by means of cable to private subscribers. 
(b)  No person shall install or operate a community antenna television system within the city without having first obtained a franchise from the city authorizing the establishment of such a business, nor shall any person furnish such service without having first obtained such a franchise. 
(c)  No person shall use, occupy or traverse the streets of the city or lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges or any other public place in the city for the purpose of installing, operating or furnishing community antenna television services to subscribers without having first obtained the franchise required by this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-45; Ord. No. 93-417, § 1, 3-9-93) 
Charter reference- Franchises, ch. XII. 
Cross reference- Franchise ordinances not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, § 1-5(4); CATV franchise form, app. A. 
Sec. 50-39. - False information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish false information to any police officer or employee or official of the city who receives such information pursuant to his duty. 
(Code 1976, § 10-47) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 46. 
Sec. 50-40. - Drawing order for payment unlawful when funds insufficient. 
(a)  No person shall, with intent to defraud, make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation. 
(b)  No person shall, with intent to defraud, make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply, on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for payment for same when presentment is due to the drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing. 
(c)  As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(d)  Where such check, draft or order is protested on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1976, § 10-48) 
Sec. 50-41. - Spitting in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk or in any public carrier, public building or place of public assemblage, except in receptacles placed there for such purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 10-42) 
Sec. 50-42. - Nudity prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall engage in public nudity. 
(b)  No person shall hire, employ or procure any other person to engage in public nudity. 
(c)  No business establishment or the owners, officers, agents, and employees of the business establishment shall allow any person to engage in public nudity in or upon the premises of such establishment. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, "public nudity" means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. A woman's breast-feeding of a baby does not under any circumstances constitute public nudity irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding. Public nudity also does not include "material" as defined in Section 2 of Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of 1984, being MCL 752.362, or "sexually explicit visual material" as defined in Section 3 of Act No. 33 of the Public Acts of 1978, being MCL 722.673. 
(e)  A violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 (plus costs of prosecution) or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment. Each day on which a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. In addition, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-510, § 2, 3-23-98) 
Sec. 50-43. - Defrauding innkeepers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is a guest at any hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast, restaurant or cafe to procure any food, beverage, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, except when credit is given by express agreement, with intent to defraud the operator out of payment therefor, or, with intent to defraud the operator out of the payment, to obtain credit at any hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast, restaurant or cafe for food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects. No conviction shall be had under the provisions of this section unless complaint is made within 60 days of the time of the violation hereof. 
(b)  Obtaining such food, beverage, entertainment, lodging or accommodation by false pretense, or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository or a credit card on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying or offering to pay therefor, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage, shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud for purposes of subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 00-455, § 1, 4-10-00) 
Sec. 50-44. - Prohibition of animal defecation; violation as civil infraction. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of an animal shall intentionally, or through failure to exercise due care, permit or allow (or be a party to permitting or allowing) the animal to defecate on any city property or right-of-way (including sidewalks) or on other public property or right-of-way, unless such person immediately collects all fecal matter deposited by the animal. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code, and subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this section shall be subject to increased fines as provided by subsection 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-456, § 1, 4-10-00) 
Sec. 50-45. - Embezzlement. 
(a)  A person who, as the agent, servant, or employee of another person, governmental entity, or other legal entity or who as the trustee, bailee, or custodian of the property of another person, governmental entity, or other legal entity, fraudulently disposes of or converts to his or her own use, or takes or secretes with the intent to convert to his or her own use without the consent of his or her principal, any money or other personal property of his or her principal that has come to that person's possession or that is under his or her charge or control by virtue of his or her being an agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, or custodian, is guilty of embezzlement. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine. 
(Ord. No. 00-460, § 1, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 00-465, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 50-46. - Prowling. 
(a)  No person shall prowl about the private premises of any other person, either by day or night, without lawful authority or without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the premises. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "prowling" shall mean willfully lurking about, lying in wait or moving stealthily about private property as if in search of prey or plunder. 
(Ord. No. 01-472, § 1, 3-26-01) 
Sec. 50-47. - Defrauding taxicabs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to receive the service of a taxicab within the city without paying therefor with intent to defraud the owner or operator of the taxicab. 
(b)  Leaving the taxicab without paying for such service shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud for purposes of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this section shall be subject to increased fines as provides by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-473, § 1, 3-26-01) 
Sec. 50-48. - Lasers. 
    No person shall willfully focus, point, or shine a laser beam, directly or indirectly, upon another person or animal in any manner which would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, threatened, harassed, or annoyed and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, threatened, harassed, or annoyed. 
(Ord. No. 03-504, § 1, 9-22-03) 
Sec. 50-49. - Tobacco products; violation as civil infraction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish cigarettes or other tobacco products to a minor, meaning an individual less than 18 years of age, within the limits of the city. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this subsection that the defendant had in force at the time of the violation and continues to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age and that the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy. 
(2)  This subsection does not apply to the handling or transportation of a tobacco product by a minor under the terms of that minor's employment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase or possess cigarettes or other tobacco products or to use cigarettes or other tobacco products in a public place within the limits of the city. 
(1)  This subsection does not apply to a minor participating in any of the following: 
a.  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a tobacco product under the direction of the minor's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
b.  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a tobacco product under the direction of the state police or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action, unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of the tobacco product by the minor was not under the direction of the state police or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
c.  Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to purchase tobacco products for the purpose of satisfying federal substance abuse block grant youth tobacco access requirements, if the compliance checks are conducted under the direction of a substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in Section 6103 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6103, and with the prior approval of the state police or a local police agency. 
(2)  This subsection does not apply to the handling or transportation of a tobacco product by a minor under the terms of that minor's employment. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this section shall be subject to increased fines as provides by subsection 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(d)  No part of this section shall be construed so as to interfere with the right of parents or legal guardians in the rearing and management of their minor children or wards within the bounds of their private premises. 
(Ord. No. 09-564, § 1, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 50-50. - Reserved. 
Sec. 50-51. - Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children. 
    Any parent, legal guardian or other person having the care or custody of a minor child under the age of 17 years who shall by any act, or by any word, or by the failure to act, or by lack of supervision and control over the minor child, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause the minor child to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined by Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1944, First Extra Session (MCL 712A.1 et seq.), and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court, shall be guilty of a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 10-584, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 50-52. - Drugs and/or alcohol at open house parties. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The city commission finds that the unregulated use of alcohol and drugs by minors creates social problems in many communities throughout the United States, including the City of Walker, and the use of alcohol and drugs by minors can have devastating effects on not only the minors, but on the public at large, including, but not limited to, injuries caused by vehicles operated by persons under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs. Further, the city commission finds that adults can significantly alleviate alcohol and drug problems by assuming responsibility for open house parties which occur at their residences and/or at locations in their control. Therefore, this section is adopted for the purpose and with the intent of regulating the use of alcoholic beverages and drugs at open house parties. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms should be defined as set forth below: 
    Adult means a person 18 years of age or older. 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing one-half of one percent of alcohol or more by volume as specified in the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq., as amended. 
    Control means any form of regulation or dominion, including a possessory right. 
    Drug means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public Acts of Michigan. 
    Minor means an individual less than 21 years of age. Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence or premises, other than the owner of the residence or premises, or those with rights of possession to the residence or premises or their immediate family members. 
    Residence or premises means a motel room, hotel room, home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, including the property and premises of the same, or hall, meeting room or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for social functions and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. 
(c)  Adult responsibility. 
(1)  No adult having control of any residence or premises shall allow an open house party to take place at the residence or premises if any alcoholic beverage or drugs are possessed or consumed at the residence or premises by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that any alcoholic beverage or drug was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at such residence or premises, and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at the residence or premises. For purposes of this subsection, reasonable knowledge will be presumed to exist if the adult received documented notice from the city in the previous 180 days concerning a purported violation of this subsection. 
(2)  No adult having control of any residence or premises shall allow an open house party to take place at the residence or premises that becomes so large or loud so as to disrupt the peace and dignity of the neighboring residences or premises, where the adult in control of the residence or premises knew or should have known that the house party was disturbing the neighboring residences or premises. 
(d)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to legally protected religious observances under the direct guidance of an ordained person. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person who shall be convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 10-584, § 2, 6-14-10; Ord. No. 19-646 , § 1, 5-20-19) 
Secs. 50-53-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq., MSA 28.91 et seq., 28.419 et seq. 

Sec. 50-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means and includes any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion, except any smooth bore rifle or handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling, on any one manipulation of the trigger, a single BB, not exceeding .177 caliber, by means of a spring, gas or air. 
(Code 1976, § 10-56) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-62. - Possession in public place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have any firearm or other dangerous weapon in his possession in any public street, park or place, unless such firearm or other dangerous weapon is licensed as required by law or securely wrapped or encased. 
(Code 1976, § 10-58) 
Sec. 50-63. - Discharge of firearms generally. 
(a)  Within the area of the city which is described as south of Interstate I-96 and north of Lake Michigan Drive (from the westerly city limits to the easternmost city limits) and within the area of the city which is described as south of Lake Michigan Drive and north of O'Brien Road from Wilson Avenue (M-11) on the west to Sunset Hills Avenue on the east, the following limitations on the discharge of firearms shall apply: 
(1)  No firearm shall be discharged at any time except as provided in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  The discharge of a slug load from a shotgun shall be permitted pursuant to either a valid crop damage block permit or a deer damage control permit issued by the state department of natural resources provided that the discharge occurs at least 500 feet from any building and at least 300 feet from any public roadway. 
(b)  Within all areas of the city except the area described in subsection (a) above, the following limitations on the discharge of firearms shall apply: 
(1)  No firearm, except a shotgun loaded with no shot or projectile larger than no. 6 chilled shot, shall be discharged at any time, except when properly discharged on a firing range for which a permit has been issued under this article. No shotgun excepted from the provisions of this subsection shall be discharged within 500 feet of any building or within 300 feet of any public roadway within the city limits. No shotgun excepted from the provisions of this subsection shall be loaded in such a way as to make a single projectile or slug out of the loose shot contained in any ordinary shotgun shell. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) above, a slug load shall be permitted in a shotgun when a person is hunting deer (a)(i) during an open season for the taking of deer pursuant to a valid deer hunting license and in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances, or (ii) pursuant to a valid deer damage control permit issued by the state department of natural resources pursuant to sections 5.40 through 5.43 of the Wildlife Conservation Act Commission Order, and (b) the discharge of a shotgun with a slug load occurs at least 500 feet from any building and at least 300 feet from any public roadway. 
(Code 1976, § 10-59; Ord. No. 96-490, § 1, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 99-531, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 01-471, § 1, 5-14-01) 
Sec. 50-64. - Permit for firing ranges. 
    Upon written application to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent, a written permit may be issued to any person for the use of firearms in a specified firing range. Such application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, a description of and the dimensions of the property on which the firing range is proposed to be located, the name of the owner of the property, the type of firearms proposed to be used on the firing range, and such other information as will be helpful in assessing the safety of the proposed firing range. If it appears that the firing range can be operated with reasonable safety to the persons using the range and to the public, the chief of police or his duly authorized agent may issue a permit for such use. The permit shall allow the use of firearms on the specified firing range for a period of one year, and shall be revocable at any time upon violation of this article by the permit holder or when, in the opinion of the chief of police or his duly authorized agent, continued operation of the firing range shall no longer be reasonably safe. The permit shall be renewable each year, upon a showing that conditions are such that the operation of the firing range can be continued with reasonable safety to the persons using the range and to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 10-60) 
Sec. 50-65. - Exemptions from article. 
    Nothing in this article shall restrict the otherwise proper discharge of firearms by public officials when such use is required in the course of their official duties, nor shall this article restrict the otherwise proper discharge of firearms by any person when such discharge is necessary for the protection or preservation of life or property. 
(Code 1976, § 10-57) 
Sec. 50-66. - Careless use of BB handgun; violation as a civil infraction. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, a BB handgun means a handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling, on any one manipulation of the trigger, a single BB not exceeding .177 caliber, by means of spring, gas or air. 
(b)  No person shall, because of carelessness, recklessness or negligence, but not willfully or wantonly, cause or allow any BB handgun under his control to be discharged resulting in the destruction or injury of another's property of another, whether real or personal. 
(c)  No person shall, because of carelessness, recklessness or negligence, but not willfully or wantonly, cause or allow any BB handgun under his control to be discharged resulting in injury to another person. 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this section is a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 (plus costs of prosecution) or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment. Each day on which a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-565, § 1, 6-9-09) 
Secs. 50-67-50-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 50-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance means that term as defined in Section 7104 of the Public Health Code, MCL 333.7104, as amended. 
    Cultivate means that term as defined in Section 3 of the MRTMA, MCL 333.27953, as amended. 
    Drug paraphernalia means that term as defined in Section 7451 of the Public Health Code, MCL 333.7451, as amended. 
    Marihuana, marihuana concentrate, and marihuana-infused product shall mean those terms as defined in Section 3 of the MRTMA, MCL 333.27953, as amended, except that marihuana and marihuana-infused product when used in reference to the MMMA shall mean those terms as defined in Section 3 of the MMMA, MCL 333.26423, as amended. 
    Marihuana accessories means that term as defined in Section 3 of the MRTMA, MCL 333.27953, as amended. 
    MMFLA means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, MCL 333.27101 et seq., as amended. 
    MMMA means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, MCL 333.26421 et seq., as amended. 
    MRTMA means the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, MCL 333.27951 et seq., as amended. 
    Narcotic drug means that term as defined in Section 7107 of the Public Health Code, MCL 333.7107, as amended 
    Practitioner means that term as defined in Section 7109 of the Public Health Code, MCL 333.7109, as amended. 
    Public Health Code means the Michigan Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.1101 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 10-80; Ord. No. 19-646 , § 2, 5-20-19) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-87. - Drug paraphernalia; penalties. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to illegally use, possess, deliver, or advertise drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a drug or controlled substance in violation of this article, the Public Health Code, or the laws of the state. 
(b)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  An object sold or offered for sale to licensed medical or dental professionals, veterinarians, and other persons licensed under the Occupational Code, 1980 PA 299, as amended, for use in the licensed profession; 
(2)  An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital, clinical laboratory, or other health care institution, including a penal, correctional, or juvenile detention facility, for use in that institution; 
(3)  The possession, use, manufacture, sale, or delivery of marihuana accessories by a person 21 years of age or older, or the distribution or sale of marihuana accessories to a person 21 years of age or older, in connection with the recreational use of marihuana, by a person acting in strict compliance with the MRTMA, as amended; 
(4)  The possession, use, manufacture, or delivery of drug paraphernalia in connection with the medical use of marijuana by a person acting in strict compliance with the MMMA, as amended. 
(c)  A person who violates subsection (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days' imprisonment, a fine of up to $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 19-646 , § 3, 5-20-19) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-646 , §§ 3-6, adopted May 20, 2019, repealed the former §§ 50-87-50-90 and enacted new §§ 50-87-50-90 as set out herein. The former §§ 50-87-50-90 pertained to use or possession penalties; manufacture or delivery penalties; advertisement penalties; and sale; civil remedy, and derived from Code 1976, §§ 10-81-10-84. 
Sec. 50-88. - Controlled substances, excluding marihuana; prohibited acts; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person in the city to use or possess any controlled substance unless the controlled substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order from, a practitioner while acting in the course of his professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by state law. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person in the city to sell, offer to sell, distribute, administer, prescribe or give away any controlled substance, except as authorized by state law. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(d)  This section does not apply to marihuana, marihuana concentrate, marihuana-infused products, or marihuana plants. 
(Ord. No. 19-646 , § 4, 5-20-19) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to § 50-87. 
Sec. 50-89. - Marihuana; prohibited acts; penalties. 
(a)  Permitted acts. Except as provided in the MRTMA, MMMA, and/or subsection (2) below, the following acts by a person 21 years of age or older are not unlawful: 
(1)  Possessing, using or consuming, internally possessing, purchasing, transporting, or processing two and one-half ounces or less of marihuana, except that not more than 15 grams of marihuana may be in the form of marihuana concentrate; 
(2)  Within the person's residence, possessing, storing, and processing not more than ten ounces of marihuana and any marihuana produced by marihuana plants cultivated on the premises and cultivating not more than 12 marihuana plants for personal use, provided that no more than 12 marihuana plants are possessed, cultivated, or processed on the premises at once; 
(3)  Assisting another person who is 21 years of age or older in any of the acts described in this section; and 
(4)  Giving away or otherwise transferring without remuneration up to two and one-half ounces of marihuana, except that not more than 15 grams of marihuana may be in the form of marihuana concentrate, to a person 21 years of age or older, as long as the transfer is not advertised or promoted to the public. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. Except as may be permitted by the MMMA, the following acts by any person shall be a violation of this Code: 
(1)  Operating, navigating, or being in physical control of any motor vehicle, aircraft, snowmobile, off-road recreational vehicle, or motorboat while under the influence of marihuana; 
(2)  Transfer of marihuana or marihuana accessories to a person under the age of 21; 
(3)  Any person under the age of 21 to possess, consume, purchase or otherwise obtain, cultivate, process, transport, or sell marihuana; 
(4)  Separation of plant resin by butane extraction or another method that utilizes a substance with a flashpoint below 100 degrees Fahrenheit in any public place, motor vehicle, or within the curtilage of any residential structure; 
(5)  Consuming marihuana in a public place or smoking marihuana where prohibited by the person who owns, occupies, or manages the property, except for purposes of this subdivision a public place does not include an area designated for consumption within a municipality that has authorized consumption in designated areas that are not accessible to persons under 21 years of age; 
(6)  Cultivating marihuana plants if the plants are visible from a public place without the use of binoculars, aircraft, or other optical aids or outside of an enclosed area equipped with locks or other functioning security devices that restrict access to the area; 
(7)  Consuming marihuana while operating, navigating, or being in physical control of any motor vehicle, aircraft, snowmobile, off-road recreational vehicle, or motorboat, or smoking marihuana within the passenger area of a vehicle upon a public way; 
(8)  Possessing marihuana accessories or possessing or consuming marihuana on the grounds of a public or private school where children attend classes in preschool programs, kindergarten programs, or grades 1 through 12, in a school bus, or on the grounds of any correctional facility; or 
(9)  Possessing more than two and one-half ounces of marihuana within a person's place of residence unless the excess marihuana is stored in a container or area equipped with locks or other functioning security devices that restrict access to the contents of the container or area. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Except for a person engaged in conduct described in subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(7), or (b)(8), a person who possesses or cultivates not more than the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a), delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person who is at least 21 years of age not more than the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a), or possesses with intent to deliver not more than the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a), is responsible for a civil infraction and may be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 and forfeiture of the marihuana. 
(2)  Except for a person who engaged in conduct described in subsection (b), a person who possesses or cultivates not more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a), delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person who is at least 21 years of age not more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a), or possesses with intent to deliver not more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a): 
a.  For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and forfeiture of the marihuana; 
b.  For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and forfeiture of the marihuana; 
c.  For a third or subsequent violation, is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and forfeiture of the marihuana. 
(3)  Except for a person who engaged in conduct described in subsection (b), a person who possesses or cultivates more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a), or delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person who is at least 21 years of age more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (a), shall be responsible for a misdemeanor, but shall not be subject to imprisonment unless the violation was habitual, willful, and for a commercial purpose or the violation involved violence. 
(4)  Except for a person who engaged in conduct described by subsection (b)(1), (b)(4), or (b)(7), a person under 21 years of age who possesses not more than two and one-half ounces of marihuana or who cultivates not more than 12 marihuana plants: 
a.  For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be punished as follows: 
i.  If the person is less than 18 years of age, by a fine of not more than $100.00 or community service, forfeiture of the marihuana, and completion of four hours of drug education or counseling; or 
ii.  If the person is at least 18 years of age, by a fine of not more than $100.00 and forfeiture of the marihuana. 
b.  For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be punished as follows: 
i.  If the person is less than 18 years of age, by a fine of not more than $500.00 or community service, forfeiture of the marihuana, and completion of eight hours of drug education or counseling; or 
ii.  If the person is at least 18 years of age, by a fine of not more than $500.00 and forfeiture of the marihuana. 
(5)  If a state law requires the classification of an act violating this article as a civil infraction, it shall be a civil infraction. If a state law requires the classification of an act violating this article as a misdemeanor, it shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code unless otherwise expressly provided in this article. 
(6)  Except as otherwise provided, acts violating this article shall be misdemeanors punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(7)  This article does not prevent a court from deferring or discharging proceedings or sentencing a person who has not previously been convicted of an offense under any local, state or federal law relating to narcotic drugs, coca leaves, marihuana, or stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic drugs, under Section 7411 of the Public Health Code, MCL 333.7411, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 19-646 , § 5, 5-20-19) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to § 50-87. 
Sec. 50-90. - Influence of narcotic drug. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of any narcotic drug in any public place in the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-646 , § 6, 5-20-19) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to § 50-87. 
Sec. 50-91. - Exceptions; rights unaffected by article. 
(a)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of any individual or other person described under section 22-202, including, but not limited to, any privileges, rights, immunities, or defenses of a person as provided in the MRTMA, the MMMA, the MMFLA, or any other law allowing for or regulating the medical use of marihuana. 
(b)  This article does not preclude a law enforcement officer who, in the course of official duties, is required to perform certain acts in the investigation and enforcement of laws related to illegal drug activities. 
(c)  This article does not preclude properly licensed, registered and certified medical, dental, psychiatric, psychological and pharmacy personnel and facilities from performing lawful acts in the course of business when performed in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations applicable to that practice. 
(Ord. No. 19-646 , § 6, 5-20-19) 
Secs. 50-92-50-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OBSCENITY 

Sec. 50-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Explicit sexual material means: 
(1)  Any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation which depicts actual or simulated acts of human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation, excretory functions, torture in the context of a sexual relationship or exhibition of the genitals; 
(2)  Any artificial human penis or vagina or device primarily designed physically to stimulate genitals, or any description, advertisement or offer to sell or distribute such an artificial organ or device where such description or advertisement presents either a pictorial representation or detailed verbal description of such organ or device or its manner of use; or 
(3)  Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material which is made up, in whole or in dominant part, of depictions or descriptions of human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation, excretory functions, torture in the context of a sexual relationship or exhibition of the genitals. 
    Live conduct means the actual or simulated performance of acts of human sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, excretory functions or the actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the genitals, anus or female breast. 
    Material means any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation, figure, object, article, instrument, novelty, device, recording or transcript. 
    Minor means a person less than 18 years old. 
    Nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple. 
    Obscene means that the average person, applying contemporary community standards in the city, would find that the material or conduct, taken as a whole: 
(1)  Appeals to the prurient interest; 
(2)  Portrays, represents, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way ultimate sexual conduct, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and 
(3)  Does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Public display means any material which is visible on a billboard, viewing screen, theater marquee, newsstand, display rack, window, showcase, display case or any other area which is visible from a public street, sidewalk or other place to which the public has unrestrained access, including any place of business. 
    Sado-masochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
    Sexual conduct means human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks of the human male or female or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of the human male or female genitals or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity. 
(Code 1976, § 10-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-112. - Traffic in obscenity prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly exhibit, print, sell, offer to sell, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to distribute any obscene material. 
(Code 1976, § 10-91) 
Sec. 50-113. - Public display of obscene material. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit, authorize or engage in the public display of any obscene material, explicit sexual material or material depicting nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse. 
(Code 1976, § 10-92) 
Sec. 50-114. - Distribution or display of obscene material to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly distribute or display obscene material, explicit sexual material or material that depicts sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse to a minor. 
(Code 1976, § 10-93) 
Sec. 50-115. - Obscene live conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, voluntarily and intentionally engage in an act of obscene live conduct in a public place or place open to the public or open to public view, or to employ, encourage or procure another person to so appear. 
(Code 1976, § 10-94) 
Secs. 50-116-50-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISHONORED CHECK COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 50-130. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that a significant number of checks are written and dishonored within its geographical boundaries causing serious financial loss and hardship to citizens and merchants therein. In addition, the city finds that the financial loss and hardship incurred by its citizens and merchants seriously impacts on the stream of commerce and the general public by causing increases in the costs of goods and services. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police and legal services by persons who are placing dishonored checks into the stream of commerce. 
(Ord. No. 94-429, § 1, 2-22-94) 
Sec. 50-131. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Address of record means the address that appears on the check or the last known address of record with the secretary of state at the time the check was presented for payment of goods or services. 
    Check means any check, draft or order for payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository. 
    Dishonored means: 
(1)  Any check, draft or order drawn or written on any account, or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, without sufficient funds for the payment of same when presentation is made to the drawee. 
(2)  Any check, draft or order drawn or written on any account which has been closed with or by the bank or other depository upon which it is drawn. 
    Expenses of dishonored check response means the direct and reasonable cost incurred by the city or to a private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, when responding to a reported dishonored check, including the cost of providing police, city attorney and/or administrative services in response to any reported dishonored check. These costs further include all of the salaries and wages of the city personnel and/or contractors engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, and all costs connected with the administration and provision of any prosecution of the person responsible for the dishonored check. 
(Ord. No. 94-429, § 1, 2-22-94) 
Sec. 50-132. - Liability for the expense of dishonored check responses. 
(a)  Person responsibility. Any person is liable for the expense of a dishonored check response, if such person proximately causes any incident resulting in a dishonored check response. 
(b)  Presumption. For the purpose of this article, a person is presumed to be the proximate cause of an incident resulting in a dishonored check response if such person makes, draw, utters or delivers any dishonored check or causes directly or indirectly a check to become dishonored. 
(c)  Charges against person. The expense of a dishonored check response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expense under this article. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(d)  Cost recovery schedule. The city commission shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of costs included within the expense of a dishonored check response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk, treasurer or the police department. 
(e)  Billing. The city manager, or his or her designee, may submit a bill for the dishonored check response by first-class mail to the last known address of record or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this article. The bill(s) shall require full payment within 30 consecutive days from the date of service. Service by mail shall be effective upon depositing such bill in a United States Postal Service receptacle. In no event shall billing be permitted after one year from the last expense incurred. 
(f)  Failure to pay; procedure to recover cost. Any failure by the person described in this article as liable for the expense of a dishonored check response, to pay the bill within 30 consecutive days of service shall be considered in default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by the law. 
(Ord. No. 94-429, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 95-464, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Secs. 50-133-50-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC NUISANCES 

Sec. 50-140. - Purpose. 
    The city commission finds that the adoption of this article is necessary and in the best interest of the city to enhance the public welfare by regulating nuisances in a manner that balances reasonable use of property with the effects of that use on neighboring properties. The city commission further finds that this article is intended to provide a mechanism for expeditiously resolving nuisances and stabilizing neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-141. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, "nuisance" shall mean whatever act, omission or condition annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of others; offends decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any public street, sidewalk, stream or right-of-way; in any way renders the public insecure in life or property; or interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. Such term shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-142. - Illustrative nuisances. 
    Maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property any of the following is prohibited as a public nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration may not be construed as exclusive: 
(1)  Unless otherwise authorized by law, the storage of building materials unless there is in effect a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon such property, and such building materials are intended for use in connection with that construction. Building materials include, but are not limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinderblocks, blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. All unused building materials must be removed from the premises prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy or final acceptance by the city building inspector. 
(2)  The storage or accumulation of junk, goods and/or materials. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other material or other castoff material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(3)  The existence of any structure or damaged partial structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable if a dwelling, or useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(4)  The existence of any vacant building, garage or other outbuilding unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or securely boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance by vandals. 
(5)  The existence of any incomplete structures, unless the structure is in the process of being constructed pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the city, and unless such construction is completed in accordance with law. 
(6)  The storage or placement of an inoperable motor vehicle or any part or parts thereof as prohibited by chapter 82, article V. 
(7)  Snow or ice on sidewalks in contravention of the provisions of subsection 70-68(a). 
(8)  Failure by an owner or occupant of a parcel of real property which contains a fire hydrant or on which a fire hydrant abuts to keep the fire hydrant clear of an accumulation of snow, which results in impeding the operations of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-143. - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation of this article the following definitions apply: 
    Garbage is liquid and solid wastes from the storage, preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the growing, handling, storage or sale of produce or other edible products. 
    Litter is "garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Park is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city or other public entity and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
    Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-144. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-145. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-146. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter upon any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-147. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity which violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to such fines, costs and other relief as provided for in subsection 1-11(c). 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance as provided for in sections 13.7 and 13.8 of the City Charter and, in addition to any other penalties or remedies available to the city, the city is authorized and empowered to provide reasonable written notice to a property owner of a violation of this article and to direct the property owner to remove the nuisance. Such notice shall be addressed to the property owner as appears on the latest ad valorem property tax assessment roll, and shall inform the property owner of the following: 
(1)  The nature of the violation. 
(2)  The time in which the violation must be abated. 
(c)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any property owner to comply with the provisions of this article, the city or its authorized contractor or other designee is authorized and empowered to enter the property owner's property to abate the nuisance or to provide and to make payment for the abatement of the nuisance maintained. 
(d)  When the city abates a nuisance as provided in this article, the cost of any abatement and the authorized administrative fee will be billed to the property owner. The cost and fee will be a debt of the property owner to the city, which may be assessed as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 66-26 and shall constitute a lien against the property, including interest, until paid, and enforced and collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes. 
(e)  The failure to receive the notice as provided for in subsection (b) is not a defense to any action brought by a member of the public for injury or by the city to collect the costs of abatement or impose penalties or other fees as authorized by this article. 
(f)  Upon the removal by the city of any refuse as provided for herein, the property owner shall, in addition to other remedies provided for in this Code, be responsible for all city costs and fees and an administrative fee as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 50-148. - Article supplementary. 
    This article shall not be construed as repealing any ordinance relating to nuisances but shall be construed as supplementary to such an ordinance as well as to any statutes relating thereto; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between a provision of this article and another ordinance or statue, the more restrictive shall apply and control. 
(Ord. No. 08-562, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nude swimming or bathing, § 50-30; swimming in unguarded waters, § 50-31; approval of public works, § 58-37; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate a system of public recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PARKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2004, amended Art. I in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Art. I derived from Code 1976, §§ 141/2-1, 141/2-3, and 141/2-4; Ord. No. 00-457, §§ 1-4, adopted April 10, 2000; and Ord. No. 04-519, § 1, adopted Sept. 27, 2004. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Purpose. 
    The parks of the city are valuable resources designed to provide public park and recreation opportunities. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the safe and efficient operation of city parks. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates another meaning: 
    City park means the entire area of Harmon Park, Community Park, English Hills Park, Alpine Estates Park, West Chesterfield Park, City Central Park, Lincoln Lawns Park, Orchard Ridge Park, and any other parks established by the city or otherwise designated by the city commission for use by the public for park purposes, including, but not limited to, parking lots and driveways providing access to public streets. 
    Motor vehicle means a motorized vehicle including, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, buses, tractors, motorcycles, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, motor scooters, snowmobiles, and any other vehicle propelled by a motor except electric wheelchairs or other electrically powered vehicles designed to be operated at a speed of not more than five miles per hour. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Wildlife means any living creature, not human, wild by nature, including mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans and mollusks. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 54-3. - Park hours. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), city parks shall be closed between one-half hour after sunset and 6:00 a.m. The city commission by resolution may close city parks or establish different closing hours provided that adequate notice of such closing or the revised park hours is posted. The mayor shall also have the authority to order the closing of a city park or any part thereof in the event of an emergency or disaster and such closing shall immediately be posted. 
(b)  Events sponsored by the city in a city park may proceed beyond one-half hour after sunset. In such cases, the city park shall be closed from one-half hour after completion of the event until 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  No person shall remain or enter a city park, or any part thereof, when the city park is closed pursuant to subsection (a) or subsection (b), whichever is applicable. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers, firefighters, and other authorized city officers, agents, and employees performing city functions. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-4. - Preservation of real and personal property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any buildings (including restrooms), bridges, fountains, playground equipment, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving, or paving materials, water lines or other utilities, signs, notices or placards, (whether temporary or permanent), monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or any other structures, equipment, facilities, appurtenances, or other real or personal property belonging to a city park or any other person or entity within a city park. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers, firefighters, and other authorized city officers, agents, and employees performing city functions. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-5. - Preservation of natural features. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant, destroy, or remove any plant or tree, injure or remove any bark or wood, pick flowers or harvest seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb or remove soil, sand, grass, rock, minerals, stones, ground cover, or other surface or subsurface materials, excavate any natural feature by tool, equipment or explosive, or in any other way injure the natural features of any area in a city park. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers, firefighters, and other authorized city officers, agents, and employees performing city functions. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-6. - Preservation of wildlife. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, pursue with dogs, trap, or in any other way pursue, injure, tease, or feed any noxious substances to, or throw objects at, any wildlife, including the young or the habitat of any wildlife, found within the confines of a city park, or to attempt to do any of the above. Any wildlife killed, taken or in the possession of any person in a city park in violation of this section shall be considered contraband, and may be seized and confiscated by law enforcement officers or city officers and employees. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers, firefighters, and other authorized city officers, agents, and employees performing city functions. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-7. - Horses; livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or bring a horse in a city park, or to bring any other livestock into a city park, without a special permit from the city manager or his or her designee pursuant to subsection 54-29(b) for a city-sponsored event. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-8. - Fishing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in a city park except for catch-and-release fishing in an area specifically posted for fishing or except as permitted at a city-sponsored event. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-9. - Swimming; boating. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wade, swim, or enter the water in ponds or other bodies of water within a city park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, occupy, or use a boat or other watercraft in a pond or other body of water within a city park. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers, fire fighters, and other authorized city officers, agents, or employees performing city functions. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-10. - Animal control; defecation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow an animal in a city park without the animal being on a suitable leash not longer than six feet, or on a suitable physical restraint, within the immediate control of a competent person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody or control of an animal to intentionally, or through failure to exercise due care, permit or allow the animal to defecate on property within a city park unless such person immediately collects all fecal matter deposited by the animal and deposits such matter in an appropriate receptacle designed for such purpose or carries such matter away from the park. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody or control of an animal to intentionally, or through failure to exercise due care, permit or allow the animal to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor, or other manner in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-11. - Fire. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully kindle, build, maintain or use a fire in any park, except for cooking fires in personal grills. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a cooking fire unattended or fail to extinguish a cooking fire when not in use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully drop, throw, or otherwise discard any burning fire-starting device, burning tobacco product, or other burning or inflammable material in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-12. - Littering; sanitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, scatter, throw, leave, or cause or permit dumping, placing, throwing, or leaving of any litter, waste, yard waste, wastewater, glass, garbage, refuse, ashes, tobacco waste, sewage, noxious material, or any other material, solid or liquid, in a city park, or a city park building, except in receptacles provided for such purposes or in locations designated by posted notice. Where receptacles or locations are not provided, all such materials shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any hazardous waste, yard waste, household waste, solid or liquid waste, or any material described in subsection (a) above, into a city park with intent to dispose of said material in the park. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to temporary drop-off events or programs (such as yard waste or recycling drop-off programs) sponsored by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-13. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in any form of gambling, lottery, or game of chance of any kind within a city park. This section shall not apply to raffles or other gambling activity for which a license or permit has been issued by the state and which is conducted by an organization permitted by state law to conduct such activity and held in conjunction with an event sponsored by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-14. - Fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, discharge or have in possession any rocket, firecracker, sparkler, torpedo, squib or other fireworks or any substance of an explosive or dangerous nature within a city park, except pursuant to a fireworks permit issued by the city under chapter 38 of the City Code for a city-sponsored event. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-15. - Aircraft; radio-controlled airplanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ascend or descend in any aircraft, hang glider, ultra light, hot air balloon, parachute, or other flying apparatus, within a city park without a special permit from the city manager or his or her designee pursuant to subsection 54-29(b) for a city-sponsored event. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers performing police functions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fly or operate a radio-controlled airplane within a city park. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-16. - Construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, or maintain a building, structure or shelter of any kind, whether permanent or temporary, within a city park. This subsection shall not apply to authorized city officers, agents, or employees performing city functions. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-17. - Games; roller skating. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in games with roller skates, roller blades, or skateboards except in areas designated for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-18. - Camping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stay or sleep overnight, or to erect a tent, shelter, or other temporary lodging, in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-19. - Motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, within a city park, to: 
(a)  Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by the city pursuant to chapter 82 of the City Code with respect to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such provisions as are contained in this article and other ordinances. 
(b)  Fail to obey all law enforcement officers and city employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in city parks on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto. 
(c)  Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and all other signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(d)  Operate or drive a motor vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles an hour. 
(e)  Operate or drive a motor vehicle on any area other than on park roads designated for vehicular travel except for loading and unloading expressly authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(f)  Park a motor vehicle in any area other than an established or designated parking area except for loading and unloading expressly authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(g)  Fail to comply with section 54-31 of the City Code which prohibits the operation, driving, parking, placing or occupying of any motor vehicle on recreational trailways, as defined therein, including recreational trailways within city parks. 
(h)  Park or store any motor vehicle overnight within a city park. Law enforcement officers are hereby authorized to remove any vehicles so parked or stored. 
(i)  Operate or drive an all-terrain vehicle, three-wheel vehicle, snowmobile, dirt bike, or mini-bike on roads, in parking areas, or in any other location, in a city park. 
(j)  This section shall not apply to law enforcement, fire, or other emergency vehicles, or to vehicles of authorized city employees used in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-20. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, or sell alcoholic beverages within a city park except as provided in subsection 6-2(b) of the City Code. 
Sec. 54-21. - Sound amplification. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any sound within a city park that may be heard by persons of normal sensitivity at a distance of more than 300 feet. However, this section shall not apply to city-sponsored events, to spectators and participants at events for which a permit has been issued pursuant to subsection 54-29(b) or subsection 54-29.1(a), or to the operation of park maintenance equipment by authorized city employees. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-22. - Golf; other games. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to play golf or practice golf shots within a city park except in conjunction with a city recreation department-sponsored or -approved program. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in archery or the playing of any games with potentially dangerous propelled objects such as arrows, stones, javelins, or similar objects. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-23. - Climbing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized city officers, employees, and law enforcement officers, to climb any building, walkway, or bridge, or to stand or climb upon monuments, fountains, railings, fences, or upon any other property within a city park not designed or customarily used for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-24. - Restriction of use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than city officers, employees, and law enforcement officers, to attempt to prevent any other person from entering, leaving or making full use of a city park, by force, threats, unlawful fencing or any other means. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-25. - Admission charges for activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to charge admission for any activity within a city park without a special permit from the city manager or his or her designee pursuant to subsection 54-29(b) in connection with a city-sponsored event. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-26. - Commercial activities; fundraising. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit business, or to sell, distribute, or display for sale, goods, material, services, or signs of a commercial nature. This section shall not apply to commercial activities or advertisements approved by the city manager or his or her designee as part of city-sponsored events or to picnics and social parties by commercial and private organizations, limited to their members, employees and families, subject to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in fundraising, or to solicit, display for sale, or sell goods or services, for a nonprofit organization without a special permit issued pursuant to subsection 54-29(b). 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-27. - Ejection of violators. 
    Law enforcement officers and authorized city officers, agents, or employees shall have authority and power to eject any person from any city park when such person violates any of the provisions or requirements of this article, or violates other applicable laws, ordinances, or rules and regulations within a city park. The refusal or failure of any person to leave the city park when ordered so to do by law enforcement officers, or authorized city officers, agents, or employees, or the return to a city park by the person so ejected before the expiration of the period of ejection, shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-28. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of this article, the city manager is authorized to promulgate supplemental rules and regulations applicable to city parks for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and to provide for the safe and efficient use of city parks. Copies of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this section shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. No rule or regulation, or any change in any rule or regulation, shall be effective until approved by resolution of the city commission. Upon promulgation and approval, the supplemental rules and regulations shall be posted in each city park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any supplemental rule or regulation approved by the city commission and posted pursuant to subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 54-29. - Park facilities; permits. 
(a)  The recreation department may issue permits for rental of city park facilities such as shelters, athletic fields and courts (including in-line skating rink), and concessions. The city commission may, by resolution, establish rental fees for such facilities. Permits shall not be issued without payment of the required rental fees. The recreation department may impose reasonable conditions on a permit to provide for the safe and efficient use of city parks and to avoid disruption of the public's use of city parks consistent with the intent of this article. The recreation department, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish policies and procedures for the application and issuance of permits. Such policies and procedures may include preferences for city residents in the reservation and use of park facilities. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee may issue special permits for certain activities as provided in this article if the city manager or his or her designee finds that the proposed activity shall not interfere with the safe and efficient use of a city park consistent with the intent of this article. The city commission may, by resolution, establish fees for special permits issued under this section. The city manager or his or her designee may establish reasonable conditions on a special permit to provide for the safe and efficient use of city parks and to avoid disruption of the public's use of city parks consistent with the intent of this article. 
(c)  A permittee or his or her designee shall be present for the entire specified use and shall have physical possession of the permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to produce his or her permit upon request of an authorized city employee or a law enforcement officer. A permit may be revoked for good cause by the city manager or his or her designee, or by a law enforcement officer, upon violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the terms and conditions of a permit issued under this article. 
(e)  A permit shall not be issued for the exclusive use of any city park and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or person to exclude any member of the public from a city park. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent the use of, occupy, or loiter or remain in, a park facility within a city park for which a valid permit has been issued pursuant to this article. 
(g)  Park facilities for which a permit has not been issued pursuant to this section are available to any member of the public on a first-come, first-served basis. It shall be unlawful for any person to disrupt or prevent the use of a park facility within a city park by a person or group who is using the park facility on a first-come, first-served basis when no permit has been issued. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the direction of a law enforcement officer or an authorized city employee for the regulation of park activities for the prevention of congestion and to secure the use of a park for the comfort and convenience of all persons. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 05-540, § 1, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 54-29.1. - Permits; large gatherings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly advertise, publicize, organize, or participate in any event, activity, or gathering in a city park for which more than 50 persons are expected to or actually attend without first having received a permit from the city manager or his or her designee. The permit required by this section shall be in addition to permits, if any, obtained pursuant to section 54-29. The city commission may, by resolution, establish administrative fees for permits issued under this section. 
(b)  A permit pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be issued if the city manager or his or her designee determines that the proposed activity is consistent with purposes of city parks, adequate safety and sanitary precautions will be taken and the proposed activity will not be a hazard to the safety of the public or city employees, and the activity will not unreasonably interfere with the use of the park by the public. A permit pursuant to subsection (a) may impose reasonable conditions for the safe and efficient use of city parks consistent with the intent of this article. The city manager or his or her designee shall act upon a complete application for a permit under this section without unreasonable delay which shall in no event be longer than ten days. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly violate the terms and conditions of a permit issued under this section. 
(d)  For good cause shown, the city manager or his or her designee may waive the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 05-540, § 2, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 54-29.2. - Authority to require bond for use of facilities. 
    Where there is risk of public injury or property damage, the city manager may require any person, group or organization desiring a permit under section 54-29 or section 54-29.1 to furnish security (such as deposits, bonds, insurance, or other financial mechanisms, as determined by the city manager or his or her designee) in amounts and types satisfactory to him or her, and to hold the city harmless from injuries or damage resulting from activities engaged in by such person, group or organization. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Sec. 54-29.3. - Penalties; sanctions; other code provisions. 
(a)  A person who violates sections 54-3, 54-4, 54-5, 54-6, 54-11, 54-13, 54-14, 54-20, 54-24, 54-27, 54-29(e), 54-29(f), 54-29(g), 54-29(h), and 54-29.1, of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(b)  A person who violates sections 54-7, 54-8, 54-9, 54-10, 54-12, 54-15, 54-16, 54-17, 54-18, 54-19 (except section 54-19(a)), 54-21, 54-22, 54-23, 54-25, 54-26, 54-28, 54-29(c), and 54-29(d) of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code, and subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under such sections shall be subject to increased fines as provided by subsection 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(c)  A person who violates subsection 54-19(a) of this article is either guilty of a misdemeanor or responsible for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with the applicable provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code or Uniform Traffic Code adopted pursuant to chapter 82. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with other general provisions of the city code or laws, rules, or regulations that are otherwise applicable within city parks. Nothing in this article shall relieve any person from complying with all other provisions of the City Code or applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-522, § 1, 12-13-04) 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATIONAL TRAILWAYS 

Sec. 54-30. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Motor vehicle means a motorized vehicle including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, tractors, motorcycles, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, motor scooters, snowmobiles, and any other vehicle propelled by a motor other than electric wheelchairs. 
    Recreational trailway means a trail, path or corridor that is: (a) outside of a street right-of-way, (b) owned or under the control of the city, and (c) designated by the city commission for use by the public for recreational purposes such as bicycling, walking, jogging, and similar nonmotorized uses. 
(Ord. No. 04-519, § 2, 9-27-04) 
Sec. 54-31. - Prohibition of motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate, drive, park, place, or occupy a motor vehicle, or permit the operation, driving, parking, placing or occupancy of any motor vehicle owned or possessed by him or her, upon a recreational trailway. 
(b)  Subsection (a) above shall not apply to emergency vehicles (such as fire vehicles, police vehicles, and ambulances) or to maintenance, construction or other vehicles expressly permitted by the city for operation upon a recreational trailway. 
(Ord. No. 04-519, § 2, 9-27-04) 
Sec. 54-32. - Posting. 
    This article shall be posted and maintained near each gate or principal entrance of each recreational trailway to which this article applies, as designated by the city commission, in accordance with section 4m of the Home Rule Cities Act (MCL 117.4m). 
(Ord. No. 04-519, § 2, 9-27-04) 
Sec. 54-33. - Trailway municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a trailway municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as provided by subsection 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. A civil fine for a trailway municipal civil infraction shall not exceed $500.00. 
(b)  In addition, the provisions of section 48-4.2 of the Code shall apply to a recreational trailway municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 04-519, § 2, 9-27-04) 
Chapter 58 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; soil redistribution, § 34-181 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation prevention, § 34-206 et seq.; floods, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; vegetation, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; approval or disapproval of preliminary subdivision plats by planning commission, § 74-34; recommendation of amendments to zoning chapter by planning commission, § 94-6; review of preliminary plans for site condominium projects by planning commission, § 94-308; planning commission recommendations relative to site condominium projects, § 94-309. 

Sec. 58-26. - Created. 
    A city planning commission is hereby created under and pursuant to Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 2-16) 
Sec. 58-27. - Composition; appointment of members; compensation. 
    The planning commission shall consist of nine members, one of whom shall be a member of the city commission to be selected by the city commission to serve as a member ex officio, and eight of whom shall be appointed by the mayor. The appointments by the mayor shall be subject to approval by majority vote of the city commission. The eight members appointed by the mayor shall be representative, insofar as possible, of different professions or occupations. All appointed members of the planning commission may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 2-17; Ord. No. 99-356, § 1, 5-24-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33(2), MSA 5.2993(2). 
Sec. 58-28. - Terms of members. 
    The term of the ex officio member of the planning commission shall be determined by the city commission and stated in the resolution appointing the member, but shall not exceed the member's term of office on the city commission. The term of such appointed member shall be three years or until his successor takes office. 
(Code 1976, § 2-18; Ord. No. 99-356, § 2, 5-24-99) 
Sec. 58-29. - Members to hold no other city office; exception. 
    The appointed members of the planning commission, other than the ex officio member, shall hold no other municipal office except that one of such members may be a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 2-19; Ord. No. 99-356, § 3, 5-24-99) 
Cross reference- Board of zoning appeals, § 94-56 et seq. 
Sec. 58-30. - Removal of members; filling of vacancies. 
    Members of the planning commission appointed by the mayor may be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance of office after a public hearing and subject to approval by a majority vote of the city commission. Vacancies for members of the planning commission appointed by the mayor occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor, subject to the approval by a majority vote of the city commission. The ex officio member of the planning commission may, after public hearing, be removed by the city commission for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. A vacancy in the ex officio member's position shall be filled by the city commission for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1976, § 2-20; Ord. No. 99-356, § 4, 5-24-99) 
Sec. 58-31. - Travel expenses of members. 
    Members of the planning commission, when duly authorized by such commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning institutes, or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the city commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. 
(Code 1976, § 2-21) 
Sec. 58-32. - Organization; meetings; records. 
    The planning commission shall elect its chairman from the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1976, § 2-22) 
Sec. 58-33. - General powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the master plan adopted pursuant to this article. The planning commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions. All city officials and employees shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. The planning commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning, or carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 2-23) 
Sec. 58-34. - Hiring of employees; contracting for special services; expenditures. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the city. The planning commission may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city commission, which shall provide for funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the planning commission's work. 
(Code 1976, § 2-24) 
Sec. 58-35. - Adoption and contents of master plan; amendments to plan. 
(a)  It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city and the adjacent areas. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the development of such territory, including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, waterways, bridges, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces; the general location of public buildings and other public property; and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the general character, extent and layout of the replanning and redevelopment of blighted districts and slum areas. 
(b)  The planning commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts of the proposed master plan, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The planning commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan. In the preparation of such plan, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to the neighborhood or neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with the present and future needs of the city, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population and promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(c)  The planning commission may adopt the master plan of the city, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city, as a whole by a single resolution or by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the city and surrounding areas or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. 
(d)  Before the adoption of the plan or any part, amendment, extension or addition thereof, the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given not less than 15 days prior to such hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by registered United States mail to each public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the geographical sections or divisions of the city. The adoption of the plan or of any such part, amendment, extension or addition shall be by resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six members of the commission. The resolution shall expressly refer to the maps and descriptive and other matters intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman or secretary of the commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the city commission and to the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1976, § 2-25) 
Sec. 58-36. - Promotion of public interest in master plan. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
(Code 1976, § 2-26) 
Sec. 58-37. - Approval of public works-Generally. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the master plan of the city or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space or public building or structure shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission; provided that, in case of disapproval, the planning commission shall communicate its reasons to the city commission which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. If the public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility is one, the authorizing or financing of which does not, under the law or Charter provisions governing same, fall within the province of the city commission, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by such board, commission or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the planning commission to take final action within 60 days from and after the date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval. 
(Code 1976, § 2-27) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
Sec. 58-38. - Same-Rescission of action. 
    Whenever the city commission shall have taken final action for the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the city commission shall have taken final action ordering that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space in conformity with the master plan, such final action shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the planning commission for a report and until after a public hearing shall have been held. The city commission shall have the power to overrule the recommendation of the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(Code 1976, § 2-28) 
Sec. 58-39. - Plans for future development. 
    For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the city and adjacent areas under the master plan, the planning commission, after the adoption of the master plan, may prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and improvements which shall be accompanied by a program for the financing thereof. The commission may annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six years, which program shall show those public structures and improvements in the general order of their priority, which in the commission's judgment will be needed or desirable and can be financed and undertaken within the six-year period. Such comprehensive coordinated programs shall be based upon the requirements of the city and the adjacent areas related thereto in the master plan for all types of public improvements, and to that end, each agency or governmental unit concerned with such improvements shall, upon request, furnish the commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public improvements within the purview of such agency or governmental unit. 
(Code 1976, § 2-29) 
Sec. 58-40. - Duty to assist city commission on problems of zoning and related matters. 
    When requested to do so by the city commission, it shall be the duty of the planning commission to consider and make informal suggestions to the city commission regarding any application, petition or proposal for changing the zoning of any parcel of land in the city or such other related problems as the city commission shall request the planning commission to consider. Except when the planning commission is acting in its capacity specified in this article for formal adoptions or recommendations, which necessitate public hearings and specific approval or disapproval by the city commission, such informal suggestions shall not require public hearings or approval or disapproval by the city commission but shall only assist the city commission in its determination regarding the application, petition, proposal or other related problem. 
(Code 1976, § 2-30) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 94. 
Sec. 58-41. - Powers and duties with respect to subdivisions. 
(a)  Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision jurisdiction or any part thereof, and shall have filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds, no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the commission. 
(b)  Before exercising the powers referred to in subsection (a), the planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access for firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. Such regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the planning commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to such installation, but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the planning commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the planning commission. The city shall have the power to enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the planning commission to the register of deeds of the county. 
(c)  The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within 60 days after the submission thereof to it; otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand. The applicant for the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. 
(d)  Any plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent, and no plat shall be acted on by the commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to such address by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing, not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office or as their addresses appear upon the records of the city in the directory of the city or on the tax records of the city. 
(e)  Every plat approved by the planning commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the city plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. 
(f)  The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the city commission amendment of the zoning ordinance, included as chapter 94 of this Code, or map, or additions thereto, to conform to the planning commission's recommendations for the zoning regulations of the territory comprised within approved subdivisions. The planning commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning ordinance. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as part of the zoning ordinance or map. 
(Code 1976, § 2-31) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 74. 
Secs. 58-42-58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 58-61. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Downtown Development Authority Article. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-11) 
Sec. 58-62. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given them in Act No. 197 or as in this section provided, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Act No. 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), as amended. 
    Authority means the downtown development authority of the city created by Ordinance No. 86-332. 
    Board or board of directors means the board of directors of the authority. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated in this article, as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-12) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-63. - Purpose and findings. 
    The city commission hereby determines and finds that it is in the best interests of the city to create a public body corporate in order to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the downtown district, eliminate the causes of that deterioration and promote economic growth pursuant to Act No. 197. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-13) 
Sec. 58-64. - Created; general powers. 
    There is hereby created pursuant to Act No. 197 a downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Walker." The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state, and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided in this article and in Act No. 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act No. 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-14) 
Sec. 58-65. - Description of downtown district. 
(a)  The downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act No. 197 shall consist of the property in the city described on Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 86-332 and made a part thereof, subject to such changes as may be made pursuant to such ordinance and Act No. 197. 
(b)  Effective August 11, 1992, the boundaries of the downtown district shall consist of the property in the city described on Exhibit B attached to Ordinance No. 92-410 and made a part thereof, subject to such changes as may be made pursuant to this article and Act No. 197. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-15; Ord. No. 92-410, § 1, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 58-66. - Board of directors. 
    The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board of directors consisting of the city manager and eight members. The members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by the commission. Eligibility for membership on the board and terms of office shall be as provided in Act No. 197. Each member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-16) 
Sec. 58-67. - Powers of the authority. 
    The authority shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purposes of its incorporation and shall have all powers provided by Act No. 197, except that the authority is prohibited from levying or from requesting the approval of the commission for the levy of any ad valorem property tax as set forth in section 12 of Act No. 197. This prohibition on the levy of an ad valorem property tax shall remain in effect for the duration of the authority itself. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-17) 
Sec. 58-68. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget; reports; audits. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may be adopted by the city. 
(b)  The board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the city manager for submission to the commission. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the commission. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)  The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the commission. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-18) 
Cross reference- Finance, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 58-69. - Termination. 
    Upon completion of its purposes, the authority may be dissolved by an ordinance duly adopted by the commission. The property and assets of the authority, after dissolution and satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-19) 
Secs. 58-70-58-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 58-91. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Downtown Redevelopment Management Article. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-30) 
Sec. 58-92. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Downtown development authority board means the board of directors of the downtown development authority of the city appointed and serving pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
    Principal shopping area means the portion of the city described in section 58-99 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-31) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-93. - Established; purpose. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 120 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 125.981 et seq., MSA 5.3533(1) et seq.), as amended, the city hereby establishes the downtown redevelopment management board for the management of the ongoing maintenance, promotion, security, and continued operation of redevelopment projects within the principal shopping area. The downtown redevelopment management board shall be a public body corporate which may sue and be sued. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-32) 
Sec. 58-94. - Members of board. 
    The downtown redevelopment management board shall consist of the nine members of the downtown development authority board appointed and serving pursuant to article III of this chapter. The terms of office of each member of the downtown redevelopment management board shall correspond to that member's term of office on the downtown development authority board. Members of the downtown redevelopment management board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-33) 
Sec. 58-95. - Powers of board. 
    The downtown redevelopment management board shall be responsible for managing the ongoing maintenance, security, promotion, and continued operation of redevelopment projects within the principal shopping area. In furtherance of these objectives, the board shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Subject to the prior approval of the city commission, to enter into and administer contracts for the ongoing maintenance, promotion, security, and continued operation of redevelopment projects within the principal shopping area. 
(2)  To recommend special assessments to the city commission to defray the cost of the ongoing maintenance, promotion, security, and continued operation of redevelopment projects within the principal shopping area. 
(3)  To receive from the city funds appropriated from special assessments levied against real property in the principal shopping area, or a portion thereof, and to receive other funds appropriated by the city, if any, to defray the costs of maintenance, security, promotion, and continued operation of redevelopment projects within the principal shopping area. 
(4)  To accept grants, gifts or donations of property, labor, or other things of value from a public or private source. 
(5)  To perform any act necessary or incidental to the exercise of its powers set forth in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-34) 
Sec. 58-96. - Budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the downtown redevelopment management board shall correspond to the fiscal year of the city. 
(b)  The downtown redevelopment management board shall annually prepare and adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year, subject to the prior approval of the budget by the city commission. The city commission reserves the sole and absolute right to determine the amount of special assessments, if any, to be levied on property within the principal shopping area and the amount, if any, appropriated to the board from such special assessments or from other city funds. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-35) 
Cross reference- Finance, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 58-97. - Meetings; rules of procedure. 
    The business which the downtown redevelopment management board may perform shall be conducted at a meeting held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.), as amended (open meetings act). The downtown redevelopment management board shall adopt such rules of procedure as it deems appropriate, provided that such rules are consistent with this article and Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-36) 
Sec. 58-98. - Termination. 
    The downtown redevelopment management board may be dissolved at the sole discretion of the city commission. Upon dissolution, all assets of the board remaining after the satisfaction of the obligations of the board shall become the sole property of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-37) 
Sec. 58-99. - Principal shopping area. 
    For purposes of this article, the principal shopping area shall consist of those properties included in the downtown district for the Downtown Development Authority of the City of Walker, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 61/2-38; Ord. No. 93-418, § 1, 4-27-93; Ord. No. 07-552, § 1, 10-8-07) 
Chapter 62 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste disposal at outdoor assemblies, § 10-80; environment, ch. 34; nuisances, § 34-26 et seq.; abandoned refrigerators and other airtight containers, § 50-4; utilities, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in articles I and II, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved incinerator and approved garbage grinder mean incinerators and garbage grinders, respectively, which conform with all city ordinance requirements, are used exclusively to dispose of solid waste generated by the occupant of the site of generation on which they are located, and are consistent with the county solid waste management plan. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, refuse, wastewater sludge, or other combustible materials. 
    Board of public works means the county board of public works established pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 185 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1957 (MCL 123.731 et seq.), as amended. 
    Combustible waste means solid waste that is combustible in the MBI as shall be determined solely by the board of public works. "Combustible waste" shall include: 
(1)  Garbage; 
(2)  Combustible rubbish, such as paper, cardboard, cartons, wood, boxes, rags, cloth, bedding, leather, grass, leaves and brush, yard trimmings, tree limbs, timber, logs, stumps six inches in diameter or less, carpeting, and combustible construction and demolition debris; and 
(3)  Any other solid waste that is combustible in the MBI as shall be determined solely by the board of public works. 
    "Combustible waste" shall exclude: 
(1)  Noncombustible solid waste, such as ashes, noncombustible rubbish, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, municipal and industrial sludges, animal waste, pathological and biological waste, asbestos and asbestos waste products, explosives, radioactive materials, appliances, concrete rubble, noncombustible construction and demolition debris, rock, gravel and earth materials, automobiles, trailers, equipment wire and cable; 
(2)  All waste other than solid waste, such as hazardous waste, site-separated materials, and source-separated materials; and 
(3)  Any other type of waste that is noncombustible in the MBI, as shall be determined solely by the board of public works. 
    Commercial operation date means the date when the MBI has been completed and tested and is, in the sole opinion of the county, ready for full commercial operation. 
    County means the County of Kent, Michigan, acting by and through its board of commissioners or its department of public works. 
    County solid waste management plan means the county solid waste management plan approved by the city, the county board of commissioners, and by the director of the department of natural resources (or other state official as required by state law), pursuant to the provisions and requirements of the state Solid Waste Management Act, and any amendments to the plan adopted in accordance with that Act. 
    Disposal site means any of the following: 
(1)  A solid waste transfer facility; 
(2)  A single incinerator having an average daily design capacity exceeding 50 tons of solid waste per day or two or more incinerators located at one site under the control of one person and having an aggregate average daily design capacity exceeding 150 tons of solid waste per day; 
(3)  A sanitary landfill; 
(4)  A solid waste processing plant; or 
(5)  Any other solid waste handling or disposal facility utilized in the disposal of solid waste. 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes, including waste accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
    Hazardous waste means hazardous waste as defined in the state Hazardous Waste Management Act (part 111 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended; MCL 324.11101 et seq., as amended (formerly Act No. 64 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979, as amended)). 
    MBI means the mass-burn steam energy-generating incinerator to be constructed by or on behalf of, or available by contract or lease with, the county within the City of Grand Rapids in accordance with the county solid waste management plan. 
    Premises means any enclosed area used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes, separately or in combination, to which a separate street address, postal address or box, tax roll description, or other similar identification has been assigned or is in use by a person having control of the area. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
    Site of generation means any premises in or on which solid waste is generated by any person. 
    Site-separated materials means recyclable materials (including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, newspapers, corrugated containers, metals, grass, leaves, brush and yard trimmings) that are separated from solid waste after collection from a site of generation by either a waste hauler or by the operators of a disposal site to which it is delivered. 
    Solid waste means garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, solid commercial and solid industrial waste and animal waste; provided, however, that this definition shall not include hazardous waste, site-separated materials, source-separated materials, human body waste, liquid or other waste regulated by statute, ferrous or nonferrous scrap directed to a scrap metal processor or to a reuser of ferrous or nonferrous products, and slag or slag products directed to a slag processor or to a reuser of slag or slag products. 
    Source-separated materials means recyclable materials (including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, newspapers, corrugated containers, metals, grass, leaves, brush, and yard trimmings) that are separated from solid waste prior to the collection of solid waste from a site of generation. 
    State Solid Waste Management Act means part 115 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended; MCL 324.11501 et seq., as amended (formerly Act No. 641 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended). 
    Tipping fee means the fee established by the board of public works to be charged upon delivery of combustible waste to the MBI. 
    Transporting vehicle means any vehicle used for the purpose of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste. 
    Waste hauler means any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1; Ord. No. 95-470, § 11, 10-24-9; Ord. No. 10-585, § 1, 5-24-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-2. - Use of solid waste containers. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this article, every person shall keep, within the lot line of his premises, a suitable and properly sealed solid waste container for depositing solid waste and shall not litter or permit the littering of his premises with any solid waste. No solid waste shall be kept outdoors except in a solid waste container. 
(b)  The occupant of any premises or the person responsible for any premises within the city in which any solid waste is accumulated, which solid waste is not disposed of by an approved incinerator or an approved garbage grinder, shall maintain on the premises one or more solid waste containers with suitable tightly fitted covers, which shall be kept in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition, shall be rodent proof, and shall, subject to the provisions of this article, be located in a convenient place to facilitate the proper collection of solid waste. 
(c)  A solid waste container, of whatever size, which contains organic material shall be emptied of such material and the material shall be removed from the premises not less frequently than once a week. 
(d)  A solid waste container may not be stored or located in the front yard of any premises in the city except during the 24 hours immediately before it is removed or emptied. For purposes of this subsection, "front yard" shall have the same meaning as contained in chapter 94 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2; Ord. No. 10-585, § 2, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 11-600, § 1, 7-27-11) 
Sec. 62-3. - Identification of solid waste containers. 
(a)  A solid waste container having a capacity of at least one-half cubic yard shall be plainly marked with the name and current street address or the name and current telephone number of the waste hauler which collects solid waste from or transports solid waste within the solid waste container. The name and current street address or the name and current telephone number of the waste hauler shall be plainly marked in letters and figures not less than three inches in height. 
(b)  The waste hauler collecting solid waste from or transporting the solid waste container having a capacity of at least one-half cubic yard shall be responsible for complying with this article. It shall be a violation of this section for any waste hauler to collect solid waste from or to transport such a solid waste container unless the solid waste container has been marked in compliance with this section. 
(c)  For purposes of this section and section 62-2, "solid waste container" means a container or receptacle designed or used for depositing, storing, or accumulating solid waste for collection or transportation by a waste hauler. Without limitation, this definition shall include dumpsters, packer boxes, and roll-offs or other receptacles designed or used to store solid waste or to transport solid waste from a site of generation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2.1; Ord. No. 10-585, § 3, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 11-600, § 2, 7-27-11) 
Sec. 62-4. - Littering. 
(a)  No person shall place, deposit, throw, scatter or leave in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place or square, or on the private property of another, any solid waste, dead animals or other noxious or unsightly materials. 
(b)  No person shall place, deposit, throw, scatter or leave in any street, alley or public place any tacks, screws, nails, glass, metal scraps, metal shavings or other sharp or dangerous materials. No person shall convey or transport junk, broken glass, scrap metal, metal shavings or other sharp or dangerous material in any form over the public streets or alleys of the city, unless the same shall be contained in a box or other receptacle so constructed that such junk, glass, metal or other material cannot fall through the receptacle or over the sides of such receptacle onto the public streets or alleys of the city. 
(c)  No person shall transport or dump any solid waste in such a manner as to cause the littering of any stream, public way or public place, or the private property of another, or to cause the obstruction of any ditch, drain, culvert or gutter. 
(d)  No person shall place, deposit, drop, throw, track or leave or cause to be placed, deposited, thrown, dropped, tracked or left on any street, highway, lane, alley or sidewalk any clay, dirt, sand, gravel, rock, or other substance in such a manner which will cause, tend to cause, contribute to, or be likely to contribute to the injury or danger of injury to any person, animal or vehicle or to cause any other unsafe condition on any highway, lane, alley, or sidewalk within the city. No person who places, deposits, drops, throws, tracks or leaves any clay, dirt, sand, gravel, rock, or any other substance or causes the same to be placed, deposited, dropped, thrown, tracked or left on any street, highway, lane, alley or sidewalk in violation of this subsection shall fail to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(Code 1976, § 8-3; Ord. No. 10-585, § 4, 5-24-10) 
Secs. 62-5-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTING VEHICLES AND WASTE HAULERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-31. - Compliance with article. 
    No person shall use any transporting vehicle within the city except in compliance with the provisions of this article; provided, however, that a vehicle used by an individual to transport solid waste from his household and not for hire need not comply with the provisions of sections 62-34, 62-35 and 62-36, but such person shall be required to tightly cover and secure the load, so that no part thereof shall be lost, and the load shall not be emptied in the city except as provided in sections 62-42 and 62-43. 
(Code 1976, § 8-4; Ord. No. 10-585, § 5, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-32. - Compliance with laws, rules and regulations. 
    Waste haulers shall comply with the county solid waste management plan and all applicable federal, state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations (including, but not limited to, the state Solid Waste Management Act and administrative rules promulgated pursuant to the Act) in the collection, transportation, delivery and disposal of combustible waste. Waste haulers shall also comply with all rules and regulations of the board of public works for the administration and operation of the MBI (including, without limitation, rules and regulations prohibiting delivery of loads consisting primarily of unacceptable waste as solely determined by the board of public works acting through its designated representatives) and other disposal sites of the county refuse system. To the extent of any conflict between these laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, the more restrictive shall be deemed to control. 
(Code 1976, § 8-19; Ord. No. 95-470, § 12, 10-24-95; Ord. No. 10-585, § 6, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-33. - Municipal civil infractions. 
    A violation of any provision of this article or article I is a municipal civil infraction. The civil fine for a violation of sections 62-42 or 62-43 shall be as follows: 
First offense Not less than $2,000.00 (plus costs) First repeat offense Not less than $5,000.00 (plus costs) Second or any subsequent repeat offense Not less than $10,000.00 (plus costs)  
    The civil fines for all other violations of this article or article I shall be as follows: 
First offense Not less than $100.00 (plus costs) First repeat offense Not less than $500.00 (plus costs) Second or any subsequent repeat offense Not less than $1,000.00 (plus costs)  
    For purposes of this article and article I, a "repeat offense" means a second (or subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision: 
(1)  Committed by a person within any five-year period, and 
(2)  For which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
    Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be subject to sanctions as a separate offense. In addition to municipal civil infractions and any other remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this chapter. In addition, a violation of any provision of this article or article I shall be cause for revocation of a waste hauler license. 
(Ord. No. 97-504, § 2, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 10-585, § 7, 5-24-10) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Sec. 62-34. - Required markings on vehicles. 
    Any transporting vehicle shall have the name of the waste hauler and its address and telephone number plainly marked upon both sides of the vehicle, in letters and figures three inches or more high. 
(Code 1976, § 8-5; Ord. No. 10-585, § 8, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-35. - Construction requirements for vehicles with compaction units. 
    Transporting vehicles with compaction units must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The load carrying portion of the vehicle shall be equipped with a unit for compacting, and shall be totally and permanently enclosed and of welded steel construction. Articulated units need not provide compacting devices in those instances where the portion of the vehicle designed to hold or contain the solid waste is an independent transportable unit designed to be replaced rather than emptied at the premises. 
(2)  Such vehicles shall be of tight fitting construction and of a design to form a totally enclosed body or unit. 
(3)  Such vehicles shall be equipped so that all loading and unloading openings on the body have tight fitting doors or covers fitted with latches or clamps and rubber or other suitable gaskets to form a spill proof, leak proof and dust proof enclosed body or unit. 
(4)  All vehicles used in the transportation of solid waste shall comply at all times with any applicable federal or state transportation or safety laws (e.g., Department of Transportation, etc.). 
(Code 1976, § 8-6; Ord. No. 10-585, § 9, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-36. - Construction requirements for open body vehicles. 
    The solid waste carrying portion of all open body transporting vehicles shall be of steel construction to a minimum height of two feet and designed to prevent the accidental discharge of its contents. Built-up walls of open body transporting vehicles shall be free of any gaps or spaces, and shall be of steel construction. Any such unit or vehicle shall have a suitable cover which prevents the loss of the vehicle's contents and which is not easily torn, shredded, or broken under normal use. All vehicles used in the transportation of solid waste shall comply at all times with any applicable federal or state transportation or safety laws (e.g., Department of Transportation, etc.). 
(Code 1976, § 8-7; Ord. No. 10-585, § 10, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-37. - Cleaning of vehicles. 
    A transporting vehicle shall be cleaned at intervals frequent enough to maintain it in a sanitary condition and free from disagreeable odor and to prevent a nuisance or vermin attraction. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8; Ord. No. 10-585, § 11, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-38. - Parking and storing restrictions for vehicles. 
    A transporting vehicle shall not be parked in an AA, A, A-2, SA, S, ARM, ARM District One or RMT zoning district longer than necessary to collect solid waste and shall not be parked, stored or established at any location so as to cause a nuisance or hazard or in violation of chapter 94. 
(Code 1976, § 8-9; Ord. No. 10-585, § 12, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-39. - Openings to be closed and covers secured on vehicles; special covers. 
    A transporting vehicle shall have all openings closed and all doors or covers secured by an adequate latch or restraining mechanism to keep them closed while transporting solid waste. It shall be the responsibility of the driver of the transporting vehicle and the waste hauler (if different) to ensure that the available cover is in the proper position. Special covering shall be used where conditions require control of odor, vermin, liquids, dust or smoke. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10; Ord. No. 10-585, § 13, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 10-585, § 13 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-40. - Overloading of vehicles prohibited. 
    The solid waste carrying part of any transporting vehicle shall not be filled beyond its capacity and such vehicles shall otherwise be loaded in a manner to minimize the spillage of materials. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11; Ord. No. 10-585, § 14, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-41. - Duty of driver in case of spillage or intentional dumping of load. 
(a)  Where spillage occurs from any transporting vehicle, the material shall be picked up immediately, and the area suitably cleaned. 
(b)  Where solid waste is purposely dumped from a transporting vehicle due to hot load or fire, the fire shall be immediately extinguished by the most effective means and the area properly cleaned as soon as reasonably possible. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the driver or person in charge of a transporting vehicle to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 8-12; Ord. No. 10-585, § 15, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-42. - Disposal of solid waste and combustible waste. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of solid waste other than by means of an approved incinerator or approved garbage grinder, or by collection by a licensed waste hauler; provided, however, that any individual may dispose of solid waste from his own household: 
(1)  Upon the individual's own land, so long as the disposal does not create a nuisance or hazard to health, in accordance with section 11520(2) of the state Solid Waste Management Act (MCL 324.11520(2)); or 
(2)  By personally transporting the solid waste to an approved sanitary landfill, but only in accordance with rules and regulations pertaining thereto and the county solid waste management plan. No individual transporting any solid waste in accordance with this section shall fail to securely cover and secure the load so that no part of such load shall be lost while being transported. 
(b)  Commencing on the commercial operation date, all combustible waste collected or transported by waste haulers from a site of generation within the city shall be disposed of only in accordance with section 62-43. Prior to the commercial operation date, all combustible waste collected or transported by waste haulers from a site of generation within the city shall be disposed of only at disposal areas approved by the city manager, which may include solid waste processing plants, sanitary landfills, solid waste transfer stations, or other solid waste facilities, such as are consistent with the county solid waste management plan. 
(c)  All solid waste other than combustible waste collected or transported by waste haulers from a site of generation within the city shall be disposed of only at disposal areas approved by the city manager, which may include solid waste processing plants, sanitary landfills, solid waste transfer stations or other solid waste facilities, such as are consistent with the county solid waste management plan. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17; Ord. No. 95-470, § 13, 10-24-95; Ord. No. 10-585, § 16, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-43. - Delivery of combustible waste. 
(a)  Commencing on the commercial operation date and at all times thereafter, waste haulers shall: 
(1)  Deliver to the MBI all combustible waste collected or transported from a site of generation within the city; and 
(2)  Pay the tipping fee for delivery of such waste at the MBI, unless otherwise provided by contract between the city and the waste hauler. 
    Commencing on the commercial operation date and at all times thereafter, no waste hauler shall deliver combustible waste collected or transported from a site of generation within the city to any disposal site other than the MBI. 
(b)  Waste haulers shall deliver to the MBI all combustible waste regardless of whether the combustible waste is transported in the same load or vehicle as solid waste which is not combustible waste. This requirement shall be absolute and unconditional unless the board of public works, acting through its designated representatives, has made a prior written determination that a specific load of waste consists primarily of waste which would not be accepted for delivery at the MBI. Such a written determination of the board of public works shall not be applicable to waste collected from any site of generation, any load or vehicle, any waste hauler or any facts or circumstances other than those expressly identified in the written determination. 
(c)  Waste haulers shall not deliver combustible waste to a site for site separation of recyclable materials unless the board of public works, acting through its designated representatives, after request of the waste hauler, has made a prior written determination that such delivery does not violate this section. Such a written determination shall not be applicable to waste collected from any site of generation, any load or vehicle, any waste hauler, or any facts or circumstances other than those expressly identified in the written determination. A written determination pursuant to this section shall not relieve the waste hauler from the obligation to deliver to the MBI all combustible waste remaining in a load after site separation of recyclable materials. 
(d)  Waste haulers shall not deliver hazardous waste to the MBI. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, waste haulers shall not be prohibited from transporting combustible waste collected from a site of generation within the city for disposal at any disposal site located outside of the state. 
(Code 1976, § 8-18; Ord. No. 97-504, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 10-585, § 17, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-44. - Waste hauler operations. 
(a)  Each employee authorized to drive a waste hauler's transporting vehicle shall obtain and carry a valid driver's license for the type of vehicle they are driving. 
(b)  A waste hauler shall provide the service of collecting, transporting, hauling or removing solid waste at least once each week for each customer and shall have available at all times at least one extra vehicle which may be immediately brought into service in the city to ensure prompt service in the event of equipment failure. 
(c)  A waste hauler shall pay any judgment which may be obtained against the city and its officers and employees, alone or jointly with the waste hauler, because of any injury or damage to persons or property caused or alleged to have been caused by the waste hauler. The waste hauler shall intervene and defend any such suit or action upon written notice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-585, § 18, 5-24-10) 
Secs. 62-45-62-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTE HAULER LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 62-56. - Required; duration. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste in the city without first obtaining, in addition to a general business license as provided for in chapter 22, article I, a waste hauler license issued by the city clerk in accordance with sections 62-57 and 62-58. Commencing on July 1, 2009, all licenses shall authorize the operation of solid waste hauling from the date of issuance or the following January 1, whichever is later, until the following December 31. Thereafter, annual licenses shall be issued for the period of January 1 until December 31 (calendar year) and applicants for renewal of a license must submit applications by the preceding December 1. It shall be an express condition of any license issued that the waste hauler shall comply with all provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 8-13; Ord. No. 09-568, § 6, 3-9-09; Ord. No. 10-585, § 19, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-57. - Application. 
    Every person required to obtain a waste hauler license shall make application to the city clerk on forms provided by or prescribed by the city clerk. The application shall contain all pertinent information required under this article or such other information as shall be reasonably required by the city from time to time. At a minimum, the information shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the service to be rendered. 
(2)  Where the transporting vehicles used to provide waste hauling services will be parked at night. 
(3)  Copies of certificates of insurance which comply with the limits specified in this article. 
(4)  Identification of the ownership of the waste hauler, if not a natural person, including the names and addresses and other primary business affiliations of all persons with one percent or more ownership interest and the ultimate controlling natural persons and all of the officers and directors. 
(5)  An indication of whether the waste hauler, or any entity controlling the waste hauler, including any officer or major stockholder of a corporation, has been adjudged bankrupt, has had a waste hauler license revoked, or has been found guilty by any court or administrative agency of a felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude. The waste hauler shall further identify any such person or entity and fully explain the circumstances. 
(6)  A demonstration of the waste hauler's technical, legal and financial ability to operate the proposed service. 
(7)  A description of the physical assets to perform the services, including trucks and truck maintenance facilities, etc. 
(8)  Information as necessary to demonstrate compliance with all relevant requirements contained in this article. 
(9)  An affidavit of the waste hauler or its duly authorized officer, certifying, in a form acceptable to the city, the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application and acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments. 
(10)  In the case of a waste hauler with an existing license seeking a renewal, a demonstration that the waste hauler has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing license and with the applicable law. 
(Code 1976, § 8-14; Ord. No. 09-568, § 7, 3-9-09; Ord. No. 10-585, § 20, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-57.1. - Insurance. 
    No license shall be issued to a waste hauler unless the waste hauler demonstrates its ability to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each applicant for a waste hauler license shall obtain and maintain during the term of the license: 
a.  Contractor's motor vehicle insurance in the minimum amounts of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per accident for bodily injury, and $100,000.00 for property damage, or a combined single limit coverage of at least $300,000.00; 
b.  General comprehensive public liability insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers and employees, from any claims by any person or entity for any injury or death caused or alleged to have been caused by the waste hauler. The minimum liability coverage shall be $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and $3,000,000.00 in the aggregate; and, 
c.  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending, and saving harmless the city, its officers and employees, from any claims by any person or entity for property damage, specifically including any claims for environmental contamination or release of hazardous waste; or the unlawful disposal of any solid waste, caused or alleged to have been caused by the waste hauler. The minimum liability coverage shall be $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and $3,000,000.00 in the aggregate. 
The policy or policies described in subsections (1)b. and (1)c. shall list the city as an additional named insured and shall prohibit cancellation or revocation without a minimum 30 day advance written notice to the city. Certificates of the policy or policies shall extend through the full license period (through June 30) or be immediately renewed so as to avoid any lapse in coverage during the license period. Proof of renewal shall be furnished to the city at least ten days prior to the insurance expiration date. 
(2)  Each waste hauler licensed at the time of the effective date of this section shall comply with the requirements of subsection (1) above not later than December 31, of each year. Failure to comply with these insurance requirements on or before December 31, of each year, shall be sufficient grounds to revoke a waste hauler's license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-425, § 1, 9-15-93; Ord. No. 10-585, § 21, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-58. - Approval or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a waste hauler license and payment of a nonrefundable application fee established by resolution of the city commission, the city clerk shall forward the application to the city manager, who shall grant or deny the waste hauler license. If approved, the city clerk shall issue the waste hauler license upon payment of an annual fee established by resolution of the city commission. The city manager may deny the issuance of a waste hauler license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of the applicant to comply with this article or any other provision of this Code. 
(2)  Violations of this article or any other provision of this Code. 
(3)  Prior criminal convictions, other than minor traffic offenses, or prior license revocation, when such criminal conviction or license revocation bears on the ability of the applicant to serve the public as a waste hauler in a fair, honest, safe and lawful manner. 
(4)  Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the license. 
(b)  If the waste hauler license is denied, the city manager shall make written findings of fact in support of the denial based on the standards described in subsection (a). The applicant may appeal such denial to the city commission by filing a written request for an appeal with the city manager within five business days following receipt of notification of denial. In the event of an appeal, the city commission shall hold a public hearing on such denial and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the city manager. The city commission shall, in its determination, make written findings of fact supporting its decision and such reasons shall be based upon the standards described in this section. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 8-15; Ord. No. 10-585, § 22, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 62-59. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any waste hauler license granted pursuant to this article may be revoked by the city manager for any of the reasons for denial of such license in section 62-58. The city manager shall make written findings of fact in support of any license revocation. 
(b)  A person shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any license revocation by the city manager provided that a written request therefore is filed with the city manager within five business days after receipt of notice of such revocation. If such written request is filed with the city manager, the commission shall hold a public hearing on such revocation and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the city manager. The city commission shall, in its determination, make written findings of fact supporting its decision based on the same reasons required to be applied by the city manager. The determination of the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 8-16; Ord. No. 10-585, § 23, 5-24-10) 
Secs. 62-60-62-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL DUMPS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dump means a privately or publicly owned place where trash and other refuse is stored or disposed of and which is open to the public upon the payment of a fee. 
(Code 1976, § 8-34) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-82. - Access for inspection. 
    The fire chief or other city representative shall be permitted access to the premises of a dump at all reasonable times for purposes of inspection and to determine whether the terms of this article are being complied with. 
(Code 1976, § 8-35) 
Sec. 62-83. - Fences and gates. 
    A fence of sufficient height and quality to keep paper and other refuse from blowing off the dump premises shall be constructed and properly maintained at all points where a dump adjoins a public highway. Further fencing may be required by the city commission in a particular case, if it finds that such additional fencing is necessary to protect or preserve the public safety or the general welfare of the neighborhood. All dump entrances and exits shall be furnished with a gate, chain or other suitable device to prevent persons from entering the dump during hours when it is closed. The fire chief shall be furnished with a key to all entrances for use in the event of a fire. 
(Code 1976, § 8-36) 
Sec. 62-84. - Buildings or structures. 
    No building or structure of any type shall be constructed or occupied on any dump unless it and its use shall have been approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 8-37) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 62-85. - Prohibited dumping. 
    Under no circumstance shall the dumping of garbage, lumber, stumps or woodcuttings be permitted in any dump. 
(Code 1976, § 8-38) 
Sec. 62-86. - Fires. 
    No fire of any kind shall be started or permitted by the operator of any dump, except that a fire may be started at such places and at such times as the fire chief may approve. At no time shall any dump be left unattended while there is a fire at such dump. 
(Code 1976, § 8-39) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 62-87. - Areas of active use. 
    Dumping shall be permitted in only those areas of a dump which are designated by the operator and approved by the fire chief, which shall be arranged in an orderly manner so that only a reasonably sized area will be in active use and not filled over with suitable cover at any one time. 
(Code 1976, § 8-40) 
Sec. 62-88. - Areas of inactive use. 
    Areas of a dump upon which material has been dumped and which are not designated for active use will be filled over and kept covered by the operator with at least eight inches of packed dirt or sand. 
(Code 1976, § 8-41) 
Sec. 62-89. - Operator's duty to prevent public nuisance. 
    The operator of a dump shall take all steps necessary or required to prevent a dump from becoming a public nuisance or a source of disease because of the presence of rats or other vermin. Nothing shall be left unburied or on the surface of the ground which would constitute a nuisance by causing an offensive odor if left to decay or if it caught fire. 
(Code 1976, § 8-42) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 34-26 et seq. 
Sec. 62-90. - Notice to city clerk when fees or operating hours change. 
    When the operator of any dump licensed under this article proposes to change the fees to be charged for the use of the dump or the operating hours of the dump from those set out in the application for the license, the city clerk shall be notified of such change at least 20 days before it becomes effective. 
(Code 1976, § 8-43) 
Secs. 62-91-62-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 62-101. - Required. 
    No dump shall be established or operated within the city unless a current license therefor has been issued under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8-49) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 62-102. - Application generally. 
    Application for a license required by this article shall be filed with the city clerk by the owner or operator of the dump. Such application shall show the schedule of fees proposed to be charged to the public and the hours and days during which the dump will be opened to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 8-50) 
Sec. 62-103. - Fee. 
    Every application for a dump license or a renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a license fee in the amount of $150.00. 
(Code 1976, § 8-51) 
Sec. 62-104. - Commission action on application. 
    Every application for a license under this article shall be referred to the city commission for its approval or disapproval. The city commission shall cause notice of the application to be given, by reference thereto in the published minutes of its next regular meeting, and the commission shall not act upon such application until its first regular meeting held after such publication. 
(Code 1976, § 8-52) 
Sec. 62-105. - Issuance. 
    A license applied for under this article shall be issued by the city clerk upon approval of the application by the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 8-53) 
Sec. 62-106. - Revocation. 
    A license issued under this article may be revoked by the city commission at any time for violation of any provision of this article, if the operator fails or neglects to correct such violation within five days after written notice thereof is given to him by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-54) 
Chapter 66 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public improvements, ch. XIII. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq.; powers re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5. 

Sec. 66-1. - Resolution by city commission. 
    The city commission may, by resolution, determine the character of a public or special improvement proposed to be made including, without limitation, all improvements described in section 66-2. 
(Code 1976, § 15-1) 
Sec. 66-2. - Petition by landowners. 
    A petition may be filed with the city clerk, signed by the record owners of lands whose frontage constitutes at least 55 percent of the total frontage, requesting the following improvements: the construction and maintenance of sewers; the construction and maintenance of drains; the construction and maintenance of water mains or laterals; the improvement of public highways by grading, graveling, paving, repaving, curbing or draining such public highways, or constructing driveway approaches, overpasses or sidewalks thereon, or the installation of a boulevard or other light system on any street; establishment of a park; maintenance and improvement of parks; trimming and spraying of trees; fire protection or any other local or public improvement especially benefiting lands for which a special assessment might lawfully be levied, including, without limitation, special assessments to defray the cost of maintenance, security, promotion and continued operation of a redevelopment project within the city pursuant to Act No. 120 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 125.981 et seq., MSA 5.3533(1) et seq.), as amended from time to time. Such petition shall describe, in a general way, the improvement or improvements sought, and shall be subject to approval by resolution of the city commission. Record owners shall be determined from the records in the office of the register of deeds on the day of the filing of the petition and, in determining the sufficiency of the petition, lands not subject to special assessment and lands within public highways and alleys shall not be included in computing frontage. Any filed petition may be supplemented as to signatures by the filing of an additional signed copy thereof and in such case the validity of the signatures thereon shall be determined by such records in the office of the register of deeds on the day of filing the supplemental petition. No action, however, need be taken with respect to any such petition unless the petition, after filing, shall be approved by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 15-2) 
Sec. 66-3. - Cost estimate; plans and specifications. 
    In the event of a resolution adopted by the city commission under the provisions of section 66-1, which resolution shall direct the city clerk to procure estimates of cost with respect thereto on a fixed or periodic basis, as appropriate, or in the event of a petition and resolution of the city commission as provided by section 66-2, the city clerk shall proceed to procure, in writing, an estimate of the cost of such improvement on a fixed or periodic basis, as appropriate, together with specifications thereof and plans showing the improvement and the location thereof, and after procuring these shall report the same to the commission. If the nature of the improvement to be made is such that a periodic redetermination of costs will be necessary without a change in the special assessment district boundaries, the estimate of cost shall include any projected incremental increases. 
(Code 1976, § 15-3) 
Charter reference- Cost estimate mandatory, § 13.3. 
Sec. 66-4. - Initial determination as to method of financing; declaration of intent to make improvement; tentative designation of special assessment district. 
    After receiving the estimate of cost, specifications and plans with respect to an improvement, the city commission shall determine, by resolution, what portion, if any, of the expense of such improvement shall be defrayed by an assessment upon the owners of real estate to be benefited thereby and declare the amount, if any, of the cost of such improvement which shall be levied upon the city at large, and if the commission desires to proceed further with the improvement, it shall, by resolution, tentatively declare its intention to make such improvement and tentatively designate the special assessment district against which any portion or all of the cost of the improvement is to be assessed. 
(Code 1976, § 15-4) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 13.3. 
Sec. 66-5. - Public hearing; notice. 
(a)  If the city commission, by resolution adopted under section 66-4, tentatively declares its intention to make an improvement, the commission, by further resolution, shall fix a time and place when and where it will meet and hear any objections to the petition, to the improvement and to the special assessment district therefor, and to determine the necessity for such improvement, and shall cause notice of such hearing to be given by publication in a newspaper circulating in the city, at least ten days prior to the time of the hearing. Such notice shall state that the plans and estimates are on file with the city clerk for public examination and shall contain a description of the proposed special assessment district. The city clerk shall also give notice, by mail, to each person shown by the assessment rolls of the city to own any property which would be subject to assessment under the resolution of the city commission as provided in section 66-4, which notice shall give the date, place and time of the city commission meeting and indicate that the meeting is to consider an improvement, all or a portion of the cost of which will be borne by special assessment against properties, including the property of the addressee. If periodic redeterminations of cost will be necessary without a change in the special assessment district, the notice shall state that such redeterminations may be made without further notice to property owners or parties in interest in the property. The failure of the city clerk to give such notice by mail to a property owner shall not invalidate proceedings taken or any assessments made with respect to such improvement. 
(b)  At the time of the hearing provided for in this section, or any adjournment thereof, which may be without further notice, the city commission shall hear any objections to the petition, if there is a petition, to the improvement and to the special assessment district, and may revise, correct, amend or change the plans, estimate of cost or special assessment district, provided that no increase in the estimate of cost in excess of ten percent of the original estimate of cost shall be made, nor shall any property be added to the district, unless further notice is given and a hearing afforded as provided in this section. At such hearing, the commission shall consider the necessity of the improvement. If at any time during the term of the special assessment district an actual incremental cost increase exceeds the estimate of cost therefor by more than ten percent, notice shall be given and a hearing afforded as provided in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 15-5) 
Charter reference- Hearing mandatory, § 13.4. 
Sec. 66-6. - Final determination as to necessity; approval of costs, plans, etc.; creation of special assessment district. 
    After the hearing provided for in section 66-5, if the city commission then desires to proceed with the improvement, it shall, by resolution, make final determination of the necessity thereof and by resolution finally determine to proceed with the making of such improvement and shall approve the plans, estimate of cost and specifications as originally presented or as revised, corrected, amended or changed, and shall also determine the sufficiency of the petition for the improvement, if any petition therefor has been filed, and shall determine the special assessment district of the properties especially benefited by the improvement, if any portion of the cost thereof is to be raised by special assessment; provided, however, that no special assessment district shall be created nor shall any special assessment be levied, if the owners of more than one-half of the property in such proposed special assessment district, after notice of the proposal to create such district given as provided in section 66-5, object in writing to the creation of such special assessment district or to the levy of such special assessments and file such written objections with the city clerk at or prior to the hearing provided for by section 66-5. If the nature of the improvement to be made is such that a periodic redetermination of cost will be necessary without a change in the special assessment district boundaries, the city commission shall so state in the resolution, shall set the dates upon which such redeterminations shall be made and shall specify the term of the special assessment district. The cost and expense of making the estimates, plan specifications and assessments incidental thereto, the cost of engineering services and all expenses incidental to the proceedings for making the improvement and the financing thereof, and not to exceed one year's interest on any bonds to be issued to finance the same, may be determined by the commission to be a part of the cost of the improvement. 
(Code 1976, § 15-6) 
Charter reference- Provision for objection by more than half of property owners mandatory, § 13.3. 
Sec. 66-7. - Preparation of assessment roll. 
    The city commission, after finally determining the special assessment district, shall direct the city assessor to make a special assessment roll, in which shall be entered and described all of the parcels of land to be assessed, with the names of the respective owners thereof, if known, and the total amount to be assessed against each parcel of land, which amount shall be such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all parcels of land in the special assessment district as the benefit to such parcel of land bears to the total benefit to all parcels of land in the special assessment district. When the assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, he shall affix thereto his certificate stating that it was made pursuant to the resolution of the city commission adopted on a specified date and that, in making such assessment roll, he has, according to his best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in such resolution and to the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1976, § 15-7) 
Charter reference- Provision for making and completion of assessment roll mandatory, § 13.4. 
Sec. 66-8. - Filing and confirmation of assessment roll. 
(a)  When any special assessment roll has been reported by the assessor to the city commission, the special assessment roll shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Before confirming such assessment roll, the city commission shall appoint a time and place when it will meet and review the assessment roll and hear any objections thereto, and the city clerk shall cause notice of such hearing and the filing of such assessment roll to be given, by publication in a newspaper circulating in the city, at least ten days before such hearing, and shall further give notice, by mail, to each person assessed with respect to such improvement, at least ten days before such hearing, which notice by mail shall give the time, place and purpose of the hearing of the city commission with respect to such special assessment roll; provided, however, that the failure of the city clerk to give notice to any such person so assessed shall not invalidate the assessment or any of the proceedings taken with respect to the improvement. The hearing of the city commission upon such special assessment roll may be adjourned from time to time without further notice. Any person objecting to the assessment roll shall file his objection thereto in writing with the city clerk before the close of the hearing or within such further time as the city commission may grant. After such hearing, the city commission may confirm the special assessment roll, as reported to it by the assessor or as amended or corrected by it, or refer it back to the assessor for revision, or may annul it and direct the assessor to prepare a new roll. When a special assessment roll has been confirmed by the city commission, the city clerk shall endorse thereon the date of the confirmation. After such confirmation, the special assessment roll and all assessments thereon shall be final and conclusive, unless attacked in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days after the date of confirmation. 
(b)  The special assessment roll, as finally corrected and reviewed, shall be ratified and confirmed by the city commission by resolution and a copy of the resolution shall be attached to the special assessment roll. 
(Code 1976, § 15-8) 
Charter reference- Hearing on assessment roll mandatory, § 13.4. 
Sec. 66-9. - Correction of land description in assessment roll. 
    Whenever the city commission shall discover that any real estate on which any assessment remains unpaid has been so imperfectly or erroneously described that such real estate cannot, in its opinion, be located with certainty, or that the sale thereof would not convey to the purchaser a valid title to the real estate intended to be charged with such assessment by reason of the imperfect or erroneous description thereof, the city commission shall, by an order entered in its minutes, accurately describe such real estate intended to be charged with such tax or assessment, and shall direct the city treasurer to correct the assessment roll on file in his office containing such imperfect or erroneous description, so as to make it correspond with the accurate description contained in such order of the city commission; provided, that no such imperfect or erroneous description shall be corrected until the owner of the real estate shall be notified of such intended correction by a printed or written, or partly printed and partly written, notice, either served upon him personally or by leaving the notice at his place of abode with some person of proper age and discretion, at least ten days before such correction shall be made. If such owner is a nonresident of the city, such notice shall be published in a newspaper circulated in the city at least ten days before such correction shall be made and a notice shall be mailed to the owner at such address as may be shown for him upon the records in the office of the city treasurer. 
(Code 1976, § 15-9) 
Sec. 66-10. - Apportionment of assessment when property divided after confirmation of assessment and before collection. 
    Should any parcel of land be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and before the collection thereof, the city assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts between the several divisions thereof. The assessor shall thereupon give notice by mail to the owner of each of the several divisions of such property, insofar as the owners are known to him, and such apportionment by the assessor shall be final unless any of the owners shall file written objections thereto within 15 days thereafter, which written objections shall be filed with the city clerk and shall stand as an appeal of the apportionment to the city commission. In the event of any such appeal from the apportionment of the assessor, the city commission shall review the apportionment and either confirm the assessor's apportionment or make such other apportionment as shall to such commission appear to be equitable in the circumstances. 
(Code 1976, § 15-10) 
Sec. 66-11. - Reassessment following invalid assessment. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the city commission, be invalid by reason of irregularities or informalities in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the city commission shall, whether the improvement has been made or not and whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to proceed from the last step at which the proceedings were legal and cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the correction thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment and whenever an assessment, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the assessment has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment to that extent shall be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Code 1976, § 15-11) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 13.5. 
Sec. 66-12. - Delivery of assessment roll to treasurer for collection. 
    After a special assessment roll has been ratified and confirmed by the city commission pursuant to section 66-11, it shall be delivered by the city clerk to the city treasurer for collection and the city clerk shall take the receipt of the city treasurer therefor. At the time of the delivery of the assessment roll to the city treasurer, the mayor shall attach his warrant thereto, signed by the mayor, commanding the city treasurer to collect the assessments therein contained. 
(Code 1976, § 15-12) 
Sec. 66-13. - Separate account for each assessment. 
    A separate account shall be kept in the books of the city for each special assessment. 
(Code 1976, § 15-13) 
Charter reference- Keeping of account mandatory, § 13.4. 
Sec. 66-14. - Issuance of bonds in anticipation of collection of assessments. 
    The city commission may borrow money and issue bonds of the city therefor in anticipation of the collection of special assessments to defray the cost or part of the cost of any improvement made under this chapter after the special assessment roll therefor shall have been confirmed. Such bonds shall not exceed the amount of the special assessments in anticipation of the collection of which they are issued. Collections on special assessments, to the extent such collections are pledged for the payment of bonds, shall be set aside in a special fund for the payment of such bonds. The issuance of special assessment bonds shall be governed by the provisions of the general laws of the state applicable thereto. The city commission may make any such special assessment bonds the general obligation bonds of the city. Bonds issued under this chapter shall be executed by the mayor and city clerk and the interest coupons to be attached thereto shall be executed by such officials; provided, however, that facsimile signatures may be used on any such coupons. 
(Code 1976, § 15-14) 
Sec. 66-15. - Special improvement revolving fund in lieu of issuance of bonds. 
    The city commission may create and designate a fund to be known as the special improvement revolving fund and, in lieu of issuing bonds in anticipation of the collection of future installments of a special assessment roll, may finance the special assessment roll out of such revolving fund as the city commission, by its resolution, may determine. 
(Code 1976, § 15-15) 
Sec. 66-16. - Notice as to payment of assessment. 
    Upon receipt of the assessment roll, the city treasurer shall cause to be served on each person whose name appears on such roll a written or printed, or partly written and partly printed, notice specifying the amount of the assessment against such person, the time within which the assessment may be paid without interest or collection fee, and the time when interest and collection fees shall be chargeable with respect thereto. Such notice shall be served by sending the notice through the mails, with postage thereon prepaid, directed to the person in the same name and at the same address as assessed. The city treasurer shall attach his certificate to the roll showing the date and manner of such service. 
(Code 1976, § 15-16) 
Sec. 66-17. - Payment of assessment generally. 
    During the period of 30 days after the city treasurer shall first receive the assessment roll on an assessment, any person may pay the amount of his assessment in full without further interest or charge of any kind. Thereafter, interest will be charged and collection fees and penalties added thereto as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 15-17) 
Sec. 66-18. - Installment payment of assessment. 
(a)  Upon the confirmation of any special assessment roll, the city commission may provide that such assessment roll shall be payable in one or more approximately equal annual installments not exceeding 30. The amount of each installment, if more than one, need not be extended upon the special assessment roll until after confirmation. Subject to the provisions of section 66-5(b), the amount of installments for improvements subject to periodic cost revision may be extended upon the special assessment roll without additional public hearings or public notice, provided that additional property is not added to the special assessment roll. The first installment of a special assessment shall be due on or before such time after confirmation as the city commission shall fix, and the several subsequent annual installments shall be due at intervals of 12 months from the due date of the first installment or at such other dates as the city commission may fix. Except as payment of special assessments may be otherwise deferred by the city commission at the time of confirmation of the special assessment roll, all unpaid installments shall bear interest payable annually on each installment due date as set by the city commission at a rate not exceeding six percent per annum; provided, however, that within 30 days after an assessment first becomes payable, the assessment may be paid in full to the city treasurer without payment of any interest except such bond interest as may have been capitalized as part of the cost of the improvement. Future due installments of an assessment against any parcel of land may be paid to the city treasurer at any time and in full with interest accrued to the due date of the next installment. At the time of confirmation of a special assessment roll, although the lien shall attach at confirmation, the city commission may provide for deferment of the due date, and as a condition of such deferment, may provide for an annual interest rate not exceeding six percent to be charged and to be due and payable annually or at the time the assessment becomes due, as the city commission shall determine. 
(b)  On the second and subsequent installments of any assessment divided into installments, the city treasurer shall give notice in the manner prescribed in section 66-16 and add the collection fee and any penalty when such installment shall become due and payable in like manner as provided for the first installment. 
(Code 1976, § 15-18) 
Charter reference- Provisions for installment payments are mandatory, § 13.4. 
Sec. 66-19. - Assessments as lien upon property. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective parcels of land assessed. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree or any act of the city commission vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the premises or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 15-19) 
Sec. 66-20. - Collection fee and penalty for delinquent assessments. 
(a)  If a special assessment or any installment of a special assessment is not paid within 60 days after it is first due, the assessment shall be deemed to be delinquent and there shall be collected, in addition to interest thereon, a collection fee equal to four percent of the amount of the installment or assessment so due. 
(b)  If any special assessment or installment thereof which has been payable for more than 60 days shall be due and unpaid on June 1 in any year, there shall be added a penalty of four percent of the amount of the assessment or installment so due, without regard to interest, and the amount of the assessment or installment thereof, plus the accrued interest with respect thereto and the four percent penalty provided by this section shall be certified by the treasurer to the assessor for inclusion upon the city tax roll of such year in a column headed "Special Assessments" and the assessor shall include the same in the city tax roll to be prepared by him and thereafter the assessments shall be collected as the city taxes are collected, anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(c)  If the assessment roll has been divided into installments, then the collection fee and any penalties shall attach only to the first installment, in the first instance, and thereafter to the succeeding installments as they respectively fall due, and shall be computed with respect to the installments rather than the total amount of the assessment. 
(Code 1976, § 15-20) 
Sec. 66-21. - Return of delinquent assessments to county treasurer. 
    The assessments and charges placed upon the city tax roll as provided in section 66-20, with interest, penalties and charges which remain due and unpaid on March 1 following the date when the city tax roll was received by the treasurer, shall be returned to the county treasurer at the same time and in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the treasurer under the provisions of the Charter and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the state, and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed until paid. 
(Code 1976, § 15-21) 
Sec. 66-22. - Additional pro rata assessments to supply deficiency. 
    Should the assessments in any special assessment roll prove insufficient for any reason to pay for the improvement or that portion or percentage of an improvement for which they were made or to pay the principal and interest on the bonds issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments, then the city commission shall make such additional pro rata assessments to supply the deficiency as shall be necessary, provided that the total amount assessed against any parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement. 
(Code 1976, § 15-22) 
Sec. 66-23. - Disposition of surplus funds from assessments. 
    Should the total amount levied on special assessments prove larger than necessary by more than five percent of the original roll, then the surplus shall be prorated among the properties assessed in accordance with the amount assessed against each and applied toward the payment of the next city tax levied against such properties respectively, or such excess payments shall be refunded to the persons who are the respective record owners of the property on the date of the passage of the resolution ordering such refund. Any such surplus of five percent or less may be paid into the city general funds or disposed of as provided by this section, all as directed by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 15-23) 
Cross reference- Finance, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 66-24. - Effect of procedural mistakes; presumption as to validity of proceedings. 
    No mistake or error in the proceedings in regard to an improvement or the assessment or collection of costs or expenses thereof or any irregularity, informality, omission or want of any form or substance in the proceedings with respect to assessments under this chapter that does not prejudice the property rights of the person whose property is charged with an assessment under this chapter shall defeat the collection of the assessment or any installment thereof, but any such errors may be corrected upon equitable principles under the direction of the city commission, if discovered before action is brought thereon, or by the court after action is instituted, and the equitable amount due may be enforced as though no such error had occurred. All proceedings in assessing and levying taxes for special improvements and the correction of the assessments or installments thereof shall be presumed by all courts of this state to be legal until the contrary is affirmatively shown. The absence of any record of proceeding or the omission of any mention in any record of any vote or proceeding or of mention of any matter in any statement or certificate that should appear therein under the provisions of this chapter or any law of this state shall not affect the validity of the proceedings, tax or title depending thereon, provided the fact that such vote or proceeding was had or tax authorized is shown by any other record, statement or certificate made evidence by the terms of this chapter or any law of this state. No special assessment or proceeding leading up to such assessment or sale of property for such assessment shall be rendered or held invalid by showing that any record, statement, certificate, affidavit, paper or return cannot be found in the proper office, and unless the contrary is affirmatively shown, the presumption shall be that such record was made and such certificate, statement, affidavit, paper or return was duly made and filed. 
(Code 1976, § 15-24) 
Sec. 66-25. - City authorized to purchase land sold for unpaid assessments. 
    The city is hereby authorized and empowered to purchase any parcel of land which shall be sold for unpaid assessments made under the provisions of this chapter, and if such land is not redeemed as provided by law, to hold, occupy and enjoy, use, possess, lease and convey such land as the owner thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 15-25) 
Sec. 66-26. - Single lot special assessments. 
(a)  Report to commission. When the city incurs or anticipates incurring an expense in relation to a single lot or parcel, which expense is or may be chargeable against the lot or parcel pursuant to law, the amount of labor and material, and any other applicable expense, with a description of the lot or parcel for which the expense was or is anticipated to be incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the city commission. 
(b)  Determination of city commission. After reviewing the report, the city commission may determine by resolution what amount or part of such expense will be charged and the premises upon which the charge will be levied as a special assessment. The city commission will determine the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged, designate the premises upon which the special assessment may be levied, direct the preparation of a special assessment roll and fix the time and place when it will review the assessment roll, which meeting shall not be less than ten days after notice of the time and place has been mailed to the owner of or party in interest in the property to be assessed, whose name appears on the last city tax assessment records. As the city commission deems expedient, it may require that notice of the assessments be given to each owner of or party in interest in the property to be assessed whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records, by mailing by first-class mail addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records which notice shall also advise the owner(s) or party(ies) in interest of any hearing. 
(c)  Certificate of roll. When the assessment roll has been completed, it shall be filed with the city clerk who will present it to the city commission. 
(d)  Objections to roll. Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file his objections and protest in writing with the city clerk at or prior to the time of hearing, which objections shall specify how he is aggrieved. If the objections are timely and properly filed, the objecting person's appearance in person is not required at the hearing. 
(e)  Review of roll. The city commission shall review the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed and consider any objections. The city commission may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the minutes. 
(f)  Confirmation of roll. After the hearing, the city commission may confirm such special assessment roll, with any corrections that were made, and the city clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation and, upon confirmation, the roll shall be final and conclusive. Thereafter all charges and amounts confirmed shall be a lien on the property and collected pursuant to section 13.8 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 08-563, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Chapter 67 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 67-1. - Statutory authority and title. 
    This chapter is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, as amended, being MCL 117.1, et seq.; the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq.; the Land Division Act, as amended, being MCL 560.1, et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as amended, being MCL 141.101 et seq.; and the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, as amended, being MCL 324.101 et seq.; Section 401(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean Water Act), as amended, being 33 USC 1342(p) and 40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123 and 124; and other applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-2. - Findings. 
    The city finds that: 
(1)  Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within, and downstream of the city are at times subjected to flooding; 
(2)  Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a danger to the natural resources of the city and the region; 
(3)  Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport and deposition; 
(4)  Stormwater runoff produced by land development contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants; 
(5)  Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution have occurred as a result of land development, and cause deterioration of the water resources of the city and downstream municipalities; 
(6)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution, due to land development within the city, have resulted in a deterioration of the water resources of the city and downstream municipalities; 
(7)  Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes and the sediments and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development projects within the city will, absent reasonable regulation and control, adversely affect the city's water bodies and water resources, and those of downstream municipalities; 
(8)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff from development; 
(9)  Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of stormwater runoff; 
(10)  Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(11)  Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly degrade the city's water bodies and water resources. 
(12)  Illicit discharges enter the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) through either direct connections (e.g. wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm drains) or indirect connections (e.g. infiltration into the storm-drain system or spills connected by drain inlets). 
(13)  Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges and connections contained in this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-3. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives: 
(1)  To reduce artificially induced flood damage; 
(2)  To minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes from identified new land development; 
(3)  To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and bridges, and other structures; 
(4)  To encourage water recharge into the ground where geologically favorable conditions exist; 
(5)  To prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution; 
(6)  To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes; 
(7)  To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and streambed stability; 
(8)  To reduce erosion from development or construction projects; 
(9)  To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and runoff pollution; and, 
(10)  To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were developed without stormwater management controls meeting the purposes and standards of this chapter. 
(11)  To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies and, to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to protect water bodies from degradation resulting from changing land use where there are insufficient stormwater management controls; 
(12)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) from stormwater discharges; 
(13)  To prohibit illicit discharges and connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(14)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to endure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-4. - Applicability, exemptions and general provisions. 
(1)  This chapter shall apply to any development site (as defined in subsection 67-5(12) and subsection 67-5(14)) which requires approval of a plat, a site development plan, building permit, or any other permit for work which will alter stormwater drainage characteristics of the development site, provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  The installation or removal of individual mobile homes within a mobile home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to the construction, expansion, or modification of a mobile home park. 
(b)  Farm operations and buildings, except dwellings, directly related to farm operations. This exemption shall not apply to greenhouses and other similar structures. 
(c)  Plats with preliminary plat approval and other developments with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this chapter, where such approvals remain in effect. 
(2)  This chapter shall apply to all discharges entering the storm-drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-5. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Base flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(2)  Base flood elevation. The high-water elevation of the base flood, commonly referred to as the "100-year flood elevation". 
(3)  Base floodplain. The area inundated by the base flood. 
(4)  Best management practices (BMPs). A practice, or combination of practices and design criteria, that complies with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan Watersheds, or equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this chapter (including, but not limited to, minimizing stormwater runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into stormwater) as determined by the city engineer, and, where appropriate, the standards of the Kent County Drain Commissioner. 
(5)  Building opening. Any opening of a solid wall such as a window or door, through which floodwaters could penetrate. 
(6)  City. The City of Walker. 
(7)  City engineer. The city engineer of the City of Walker and any persons designated to act on behalf of the city engineer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(8)  Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC Sec 1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(9)  Construction site stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff from a development site following an earth change. 
(10)  Design engineer. Registered and licensed professional engineer responsible for the design of a drainage plan. 
(11)  Detention. A system which is designed to capture stormwater and release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate. 
(12)  Developed or development. The installation or construction of impervious surfaces on a development site that require, pursuant to state law or local ordinance, the city's approval of a site plan, plat, site condominium, special land use, planned unit development, rezoning of land, land division approval, private road approval or other approvals required for the development of land or the erection of buildings or structures; provided, however, that for purposes of article II only, developed or development shall not include the actual construction of, or an addition, extension or modification to, an individual single-family or a two-family detached dwelling. 
(13)  Developer. Any person proposing or implementing the development of land. 
(14)  Development site. Any land that is being or has been developed, or that a developer proposes for development. 
(15)  Discharger. Any person or entity who directly or indirectly discharges stormwater from any property. Discharger also means any employee, officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission which is or results in a violation of this chapter. 
(16)  Drain. Any drain as defined in the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1, et seq., other than an established county or inter-county drain. 
(17)  Drainage. The collection, conveyance, or discharge of groundwater and/or surface water. 
(18)  Drainageway. The area within which surface water or groundwater is carried from one part of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot or parcel or to adjacent land. 
(19)  Earth change. Any human activity which removes ground cover, changes the slope or contours of the land, or exposes the soil surface to the actions of wind and rain. Earth change includes, but is not limited to, any excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative roots. 
(20)  EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(21)  Erosion. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof. 
(22)  Exempted discharges. Discharges other than stormwater as specified in section 67-22 of this chapter. 
(23)  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The agency of the federal government charged with emergency management. 
(24)  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of water bodies or the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff from any source. 
(25)  Floodplain. Any land area subject to periodic flooding, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(26)  Floodproofing. Any structural and/or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures or property that reduce or eliminate flood damage to land, or improvements utilities and structures. 
(27)  Flood protection elevation (FPE). The base flood elevation plus one foot at any given location. 
(28)  Floodway. The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved to carry and discharge a base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth of a foot due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage. 
(29)  Grading. Any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
(30)  Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(31)  Illicit connection. Any method or means for conveying an illicit discharge into water bodies or the city's stormwater system. 
(32)  Illicit discharge. Any discharge to water bodies that does not consist entirely of stormwater, discharges pursuant to the terms of an NPDES permit, or exempted discharges as defined in this chapter. 
(33)  Impervious surface. Surface that does not allow stormwater runoff to slowly percolate into the ground. 
(34)  KCDC. Kent County Drain Commissioner. 
(35)  Lowest floor. The lowest floor or the lowest enclosed area (including a basement), but not including an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure which is usable solely for parking of vehicles or building access. 
(36)  MDEQ. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or its successor agency. 
(37)  MS4. The city's municipal separate storm sewer system, consisting of a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater (excluding combined sewers and sanitary sewers) 
(38)  NPDES. National pollution discharge elimination system. 
(39)  NPDES stormwater discharge permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC §1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
(40)  Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(41)  Overland flow-way. Surface area that conveys a concentrated flow of stormwater runoff. 
(42)  Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or any other legal entity. 
(43)  Plan. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, written standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these which contain information pursuant to this chapter. 
(44)  Pollutant. A substance discharged which includes, but is not limited to, the following: any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, dewatering effluent, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean Water Act. 
(45)  Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
(46)  Property owner. Any person having legal or equitable title to property or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any property. 
(47)  Retention. A system which is designed to capture stormwater and contain it until it infiltrates the soil or evaporates. 
(48)  Soil erosion. The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling formation of new sedimentary deposits. 
(49)  State of Michigan Water Quality Standards. All applicable state rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of section 3106 of part 31 of 1994 PA 451, as amended. 
(50)  Storm drain. A system of open or enclosed conduits and appurtenant structures intended to convey or manage stormwater runoff, groundwater and drainage. 
(51)  Stormwater permit. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(52)  Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to water bodies. 
(53)  Stormwater runoff. The runoff and drainage of precipitation resulting from rainfall or snowmelt or other natural event or process. 
(54)  Stormwater runoff facility. The method, structure, area, system, or other equipment or measures that are designed to receive, control, store, or convey stormwater. 
(55)  Stream. A river, stream or creek which may or may not be serving as a drain, or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. 
(56)  Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(57)  Water body. A river, lake, stream, creek or other watercourse or wetlands. 
(58)  Watershed. A region draining into a water body. 
(59)  Wetlands. Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or aquatic life. 
(60)  Drainage course. The area within which surface water or groundwater is conveyed from one part of a lot or parcel, to another part of a lot of parcel. Where the natural flow is from one lot or parcel across another lot or parcel, the higher land is the dominant tenement, and the lower land is the servient tenement. Owners of the dominant tenements have the right to drain water off their lands. Owners of servient tenements have the duty of not obstructing the natural flow. In areas where no approved drainage plan exists, the drainage course shall be understood to be the existing grade which allows for water from higher land to be discharged by surface flow to lower land in accordance with the laws of natural drainage. The definition of drainage course shall be understood to be consistent with references to natural drainage course or constructed drainage course. 

(61)  Flood prone area. Any land that is subject to periodic flooding, as identified by historical observation or may temporarily store water during rainfall events that surpass the capacity of the drainage course. 
(62)  Private easement for drainage. Any area which has been reserved in easement to allow for the flow of drainage from a private upstream land to a private downstream land. 
(63)  Public easement for drainage. Any area which has been reserved in easement to allow for the flow of drainage from a public upstream land to a private downstream land. These easements are generally understood to contain public stormwater and allow city access to ensure proper operation of the utility. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 12-609, §§ 3, 6, 8-18-12 ) 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER PERMITS 

Sec. 67-6. - Permit required. 
(1)  A developer shall not engage in any development without first receiving a stormwater permit from the city pursuant to section 67-7. 
(2)  The granting of a stormwater permit shall authorize only such development for which the permit is required, subject to the terms of the permit, and it shall not be deemed to approve other development or other land use activities. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-7. - Stormwater permit review procedures. 
    The city engineer shall grant a stormwater permit (which may impose terms and conditions in accordance with section 67-14) only upon compliance with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  The developer has submitted a stormwater plan complying with section 67-8. 
(2)  The stormwater plan contains a description of an adequate, temporary stormwater detention/retention system to prevent construction site stormwater runoff, satisfying the requirements of section 67-10, and the developer has obtained a soil erosion permit, if necessary. 
(3)  The developer provides a permanent on-site stormwater system with a restricted outlet designed to result in no net increase in stormwater runoff volume or rate onto any adjacent property in a 100-year storm event. 
(4)  The developer has paid or deposited the stormwater permit review fee pursuant to section 67-9. 
(5)  The developer has paid or posted the applicable financial guarantee pursuant to section 67-11. 
(6)  The developer provides all easements necessary to implement the approved stormwater plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter including, but not limited to, section 67-40. All easements shall be acceptable to the city in form and substance and shall be recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds. 
(7)  The stormwater plan is designed in conformity with the city's design and performance standards for drains and stormwater management systems, as set forth in article VIII of this chapter. 
(8)  All stormwater runoff facilities shall be designed in accordance with the then-current BMPs. 
(9)  The developer provides a stormwater pollution prevention plan and the required maintenance agreement for routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of all stormwater runoff facilities and in compliance with the approved stormwater plan and this chapter including, but not limited to, section 67-8. The maintenance agreement shall be acceptable to the city in form and substance and shall be recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-8. - Stormwater plan. 
    The developer shall provide a stormwater plan to the city engineer for review and approval by the city. The stormwater plan shall identify and contain all of the following: 
(1)  The location of the development site and water bodies that will receive stormwater runoff. 
(2)  The existing and proposed topography of the development site, including the alignment and boundary of the natural drainage courses, with contours having a maximum interval of one foot (using USGS datum). The stormwater plan shall include a sampling of the on-site soils to identify soil type(s). 
(3)  The development tributary area to each point of discharge from the development. 
(4)  Calculations for the final peak discharge rates. 
(5)  Calculations for any facility or structure size and configuration. 
(6)  A drawing showing all proposed stormwater runoff facilities with existing and final grades. 
(7)  The sizes and locations of upstream and downstream culverts serving the major drainage routes flowing into and out of the development site. Any significant off-site and on-site drainage outlet restrictions other than culverts should be noted on the drainage map. 
(8)  An implementation plan for construction and inspection of all stormwater runoff facilities necessary to the overall stormwater plan, including a schedule of the estimated dates of completing construction of the stormwater runoff facilities shown on the plan and an identification of the proposed inspection procedures to ensure that the stormwater runoff facilities are constructed in accordance with the approved stormwater plan. 
(9)  A plan to ensure the effective control of construction site stormwater runoff and sediment track-out onto roadways. 
(10)  The stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
(11)  Drawings, profiles, and specifications for the construction of the stormwater runoff facilities reasonably necessary to ensure that stormwater runoff will be drained, stored, or otherwise controlled in accordance with this chapter. 
(12)  A maintenance agreement, in form and substance acceptable to the city, for ensuring maintenance of any privately owned stormwater runoff facilities. The maintenance agreement shall include the developer's written commitment to provide routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of the facilities and, in the event that the facilities are not maintained in accordance with the approved stormwater plan, the agreement shall authorize the city or a contractor on behalf of the city to maintain any on-site stormwater runoff facility as reasonably necessary, at the developer's expense. 
(13)  The name of the engineering firm and the registered professional engineer that designed the stormwater plan. 
(14)  All design information must be compatible for conversion to Grand Valley Regional Geographic Information System (REGIS). 
(15)  Any other information necessary for the city to verify that the drainage plan complies with the city's design and performance standards for drains and stormwater management systems. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-9. - Stormwater permit review fees. 
    The developer shall pay the stormwater permit review fees as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-10. - Construction site runoff controls. 
    Prior to making any earth change on a development site regulated by this chapter, the developer shall first obtain a soil erosion permit issued in accordance with part 91 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, if such permit is required. The developer shall install stormwater runoff facilities and shall phase the development activities so as to prevent construction site stormwater runoff and off-site sedimentation. During all construction activities on the development site, the city engineer or his designee may inspect the development site to ensure compliance with the approved construction site runoff controls. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-11. - Financial guarantee. 
(1)  The city engineer shall not approve a stormwater permit until the developer submits to the city, in a form and amount satisfactory to the city, an irrevocable letter of credit or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city for the timely and satisfactory construction of all stormwater runoff facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved stormwater plan. The irrevocable letter of credit shall be accompanied by a detailed cost estimate provided by the developer. Upon certification by a registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor that the stormwater runoff facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved stormwater plan including, but not limited to, the provisions contained in section 67-8(8), and subject to final acceptance and approval by the city engineer, the city may release the irrevocable letter of credit, or other financial guarantee. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (3), the amount of the financial guarantee shall be in the amount of the cost estimate for the work provided by the developer, unless the city engineer determines that a greater amount is appropriate, in which case the basis for such determination shall be provided to the developer in writing. In determining whether a greater amount is appropriate, the city engineer shall consider the size and type of the development, the size and type of the on-site stormwater system, and the nature of the off-site stormwater runoff facilities the development will utilize. 
(3)  The city may reduce or waive the amount of the financial guarantee for a development that will not increase the percentage of impervious surface of the development site by more than ten percent. 
(4)  This section and this chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as relieving a developer of its obligation to pay all costs associated with on-site private stormwater runoff facilities as well as those costs arising from the need to make other drainage improvements in order to reduce a development's impact on a drain consistent with adopted design standards. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-12. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until stormwater runoff facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved stormwater plan and a final as-built plan certified by a professional engineer on a certification form provided by the city is submitted and accepted by the city engineer; provided, however, the city may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-13. - No change in approved facilities. 
    Stormwater runoff facilities, after construction and approval, shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the approved stormwater plan, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except in accordance with the approved stormwater plan, or in accordance with approved amendments or revisions in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-14. - Terms and conditions of permits. 
    In granting a stormwater permit, the city engineer may impose such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. A developer shall comply with such terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER SYSTEM, FLOODPLAIN, AND OTHER STANDARDS. 

Sec. 67-15. - Management of and responsibility for stormwater system. 
    The city is not responsible for providing drainage facilities on private property for the management of stormwater on said property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide for, and maintain, private stormwater runoff facilities serving the property and to prevent or correct the accumulation of debris that interferes with the drainage function of a water body. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-16. - Stormwater system. 
    All stormwater runoff facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-17. - Floodplain standards. 
(1)  All new buildings and substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be protected from flood damage up to the flood protection elevation (FPE) (when available) and shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and rules and regulations. Where the flood protection elevation (FPE) is not available, the developer's engineer shall determine the appropriate FPE, subject to review by the city engineer. Floodway alteration shall be permitted only upon review and approval by the city, in accordance with an approved stormwater plan. 
(2)  A stormwater plan providing for the filling or alteration of a floodway (designated or undesignated) may include provisions for maintaining stability of the banks of streams or other water bodies, by means of the establishment of buffer zones and other means of providing protection of the slopes and banks of water bodies. 
(3)  Within any required buffer zone, no earth change shall take place except in accordance with the approved stormwater plan. Such a plan may also include provisions for the replacement of floodplain storage volume, where such storage volume is lost or diminished as a result of approved development. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-18. - Building openings. 
(1)  No building opening shall be constructed below the following elevations: 
(a)  The flood protection elevation (FPE). 
(b)  The minimum building opening established at the time of plat or development approval and on file in the city engineering department. 
(c)  Three feet above the top of any downstream culvert. 
(d)  Four feet above the bottom of any permanent and defined drain. 
(2)  A waiver from elevations stated in subsection (1) may be granted by the city engineer following receipt of a certification from a registered professional engineer demonstrating that the proposed elevation does not pose a risk of flooding. 
(3)  Upon completion of construction of the structure's foundation and/or slab on grade, a registered land surveyor shall certify any minimum building opening elevation specified by this chapter. This certificate shall attest that the building opening elevation complies with the standards of this chapter. The permittee for the building permit shall submit the certificate to the city building official prior to the commencement of framing and/or structural steel placement. If the surveyor should find that the minimum building opening elevation is below the elevation specified in subsection (1)(b) or (c), that opening must be raised using a method that meets with the approval of the city. After reconstruction, a registered land surveyor or engineer shall recertify that the minimum building opening elevation complies with the standards of this chapter prior to the commencement of framing and or structural steel placement. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-19. - Building foundation drain connections to the storm sewer system. 
(1)  Whenever building foundation drains are required or utilized, a direct connection between the foundation drains and the storm sewer is permitted when a check valve system is installed between the footing drains and the storm sewer. The check valve system shall be installed on private property and maintained by the property owner. 
(2)  A stormwater lateral shall be provided for each parcel within a residential plat, site condominium, or planned unit development at the time of storm sewer construction. If a stormwater lateral does not exist, and it is technically feasible to construct one, the property owner may install one at their expense. If work within the right-of-way is required, a highway permit shall be obtained in accordance with the terms of this Code. 
(3)  The property owner assumes all risks associated with connecting directly into the storm sewer system. The requirements outlined in subsection (1) of this section are the minimum required for the city to allow a property owner to connect a foundation drain to the storm sewer system. Additional measures may be considered to reduce the risk of storm sewer backups, such as the inclusion of a physical air gap between the residential stormwater discharge line and the public storm sewer system. All backflow prevention devices shall be installed on private property and maintained by the property owner. 
(4)  None of the requirements of this section shall be interpreted to require a property owner to connect into the storm sewer system. 
(5)  If a storm sewer connection is not utilized, foundation drain outlets shall comply with the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03 ; Ord. No. 12-609, § 4, 8-18-12 ; Ord. No. 13-612, § 2, 2-11-13 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-609 , § 4, adopted August 18, 2012, changed the title of § 67-19 from "Sump pump discharge" to "Residential building foundation drain connections to the storm sewer system". 
Sec. 67-20. - Public health, safety and welfare. 
    Protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall be a primary consideration in the design of all stormwater runoff facilities. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 67-21. - Prohibited discharges and connections. 
(1)  [Prohibited discharges.] No person shall discharge to a water body, directly or indirectly, any substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge. Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively prevent pollutants from being discharged with the stormwater, except in accordance with best management practices (BMPs). 
(2)  [Pollution prevention measures.] The city is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution prevention measures, utilizing BMPs, necessary to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the MS4. 
(3)  [Pollutants prohibited.] No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except for discharges authorized by the city engineer as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(4)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(c)  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying wastewater to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(5)  [Exceptions.] The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-22. - Exempted discharges. 
    The following nonstormwater discharges shall be permissible, provided that they do not result in a violation of State of Michigan water quality standards: 
(1)  Water supply line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising groundwater; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains; 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(10)  Individual residential car washing; 
(11)  Dechlorinated swimming pool water; 
(12)  Street wash water; 
(13)  Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities; 
(14)  Discharges for which a specific federal or state permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-23. - Drainage obstructions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam, confine, pave, alter the course of, or otherwise interfere with any natural or constructed drain, ditch, swale, culvert, water body, floodplain, or flood prone area, without first submitting a stormwater plan to the city and receiving approval of that plan. Any deviation from the approved plan is a violation of this chapter. This section shall not prohibit, however, necessary emergency action so as to prevent or mitigate drainage that would be injurious to the environment, public health, safety, or welfare. 
(b)  For a natural or constructed drainage course: 
(1)  Fences are not permitted within designated drainage easements. 
(2)  Shrubs or trees shall not be planted in a manner that materially impedes the flow of stormwater. 
(3)  Structures which materially impede the flow of stormwater are not permitted. This prohibition includes items such as, but not limited to, above-ground pools, in-ground pools, sheds, and raised planting beds. 
(c)  The ground above an underground storm sewer and the easement within which the storm sewer has been installed shall be kept clear of any items which may interfere with the maintenance of or access to the underground storm sewer. Prohibited items include, but are not limited to, structures, fences, shrubs, and trees. The placement of dirt, debris, leaves, twigs, grass clippings, or other biodegradable substances in this area shall also be prohibited. 
(d)  No filling, blocking, or fencing shall take place within a natural or constructed floodplain or flood prone area. This prohibition includes the placement of dirt, debris, leaves, twigs, grass clippings, or other biodegradable substances. Vegetative plantings and structure supports that do not materially impact the floodplain or flood prone area are permissible. Federal Emergency Management Agency identified floodplains may be subject to additional regulations, which may take precedence over this ordinance. 
(e)  If a permitted object located within any of the locations listed in this section is required to be removed by the city for drain access or drain maintenance, its replacement is at the property owner's expense. Unpermitted objects shall not be replaced by a property owner unless a variance is granted by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 09-566, § 1, 2-23-09 ; Ord. No. 12-609, § 5, 8-18-12 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-609 , § 5, adopted August 18, 2012, changed the title of § 67-23 from "Interference with natural or constructed drains" to "Drainage obstructions". 
Sec. 67-24. - Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway. 
    Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store or stockpile within a drainageway any hazardous or toxic materials unless adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent any such materials from entering a drainageway. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-25. - Responsibility to implement best management practices 
    The owner and operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall each provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or water bodies through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
ARTICLE V. - INSPECTION, MONITORING, REPORTING, AND RECORDKEEPING 

Sec. 67-26. - Inspection and sampling. 
(1)  (a)  Since the discharge of stormwater runoff is a pervasively regulated activity under federal and state law and by this chapter, the city has the right and obligation to inspect connections and discharges to the MS4 in order to ensure compliance with state and federal law. 
(b)  The city engineer and other duly authorized agents or employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine compliance with this chapter. Any person who uses, applies to use or is connected to, or who discharges into the MS4 is hereby put on notice that inspections may be made in accordance with this chapter and the Michigan and United States Constitutions. 
(c)  A person who uses, applies to use, is connected to, or who discharges into the MS4 does so with the knowledge that inspections provided for in this chapter will be made to ensure compliance with the law, ordinances, and regulations in effect controlling the use of the MS4. Users of the MS4 shall have no reasonable expectation of privacy with respect to discharges or potential discharges into the MS4 and that announced and unannounced inspections may be conducted to the full extent provided for by federal and Michigan law. Inspections pursuant to this chapter will be conducted only for observation, sampling, monitoring, and measuring in order to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(2)  To assure compliance with the standards in this pervasively regulated area, the city may inspect and/or obtain stormwater samples from stormwater runoff facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the city's properly identified representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling. Unreasonable delays in allowing access to a discharger's facility is a violation of this chapter. The city or its properly identified representative may place on the discharger's property the equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-27. - Stormwater monitoring facilities. 
    A discharger of stormwater runoff shall provide and operate equipment or devices for the monitoring of stormwater runoff, so as to provide for inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water body or a stormwater runoff facility, when directed in writing to do so by the city engineer. The city engineer may require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects from or as a result of such discharges may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-28. - Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a water body any substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall immediately inform the city concerning the discharge. If the accidental discharge occurs during normal weekday business hours, the discharger shall immediately notify the city engineer or the city department of public works. At all other times, the discharger shall immediately notify the City of Walker Police Department. If such information is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the city within five days. The written report shall specify: 
(a)  The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof. 
(b)  The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge. 
(c)  All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrence. 
(d)  The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and the name of a person who may be contacted for additional information on the matter. 
(2)  A properly reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this chapter against a discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to obtain other relief as a result of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all the requirements of [subsection] (1). 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-29. - Recordkeeping requirement. 
    Any person subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on magnetic or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or stormwater runoff from any property. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 67-30. - Sanctions for violation. 
(1)  (a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 for a first offense, and not less than $5,000.00 for a subsequent offense, plus costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions as authorized under chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 and other applicable laws, including, without limitation, equitable relief; provided, however, that the violation stated in subsection (2) shall be a misdemeanor. Each day such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "subsequent offense" means a violation of the provisions of this chapter committed by the same person within 12 months of a previous violation of the same provision of this chapter for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be responsible. 
(c)  The city engineer authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations to any person alleged to be violating any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work order issued under section 67-31 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and such person shall also pay such costs as may be imposed in the discretion of the court. 
(3)  Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this chapter shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-31. - Stop work order. 
    Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or in part, a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city engineer is authorized to issue a stop work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations or adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or who are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop work order shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The city may also undertake or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures so as to prevent violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of noncompliance herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work, and such cost shall be a lien upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-32. - Failure to comply; completion. 
    In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city may, after the giving of reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of such work. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-33. - Emergency measures. 
    When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to protect public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury or damage to property, the city is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and shall promptly reimburse the city for all of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-34. - Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system. 
    A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the result of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to, or impairs a storm drain, or violates any of the provisions of this chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the EPA or MDEQ for violation of an NPDES permit, attorney fees, and other costs and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-35. - Collection of costs; lien. 
    Costs incurred by the city or the drain commissioner, or both, pursuant to sections 67-31, 67-32, 67-33, 67-34, and 67-37 shall be a lien on the premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended from time to time. Any such charges which are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises and the costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the city or the drain commissioner shall have all remedies authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-36. - Appeals. 
(1)  Any person to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied may appeal in writing, not later than 30 days after the action or decision being appealed from, to the city planning commission. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed and the basis for the appeal. The planning commission shall consider the appeal at a public hearing and shall affirm, reject, or modify the action or decision being appealed based on the standards of this section. The planning commission may impose reasonable conditions on an affirmative decision in an appeal. The planning commission shall make its decision in writing and shall furnish a copy of the decision to the person making the appeal. In considering an appeal, the planning commission may consider the recommendations of the city manager, the city engineer, the comments of other persons having knowledge of the matters, and interested members of the public. The planning commission may grant a variance form the terms of this chapter so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action or decision being appealed, but only upon finding that the applicant for the appeal has satisfied the following requirements: 
(a)  The application of the provisions of this chapter being appealed will present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development site; provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need for the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with the chapter; and 
(b)  The granting of the relief requested will not substantially prevent the goals and purposes sought to be accomplished by this chapter, nor result in less effective management of stormwater runoff. 
(2)  When an appeal is made under this section, notice of the public hearing before the planning commission shall be given in the same manner as notice pursuant to subsection 94-61(4) of the City Code. 
(3)  A person making an appeal pursuant to this section shall pay a fee for the appeal as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 05-537, § 1, 10-24-05) 
Sec. 67-37. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(1)  The city engineer may, without prior notice, suspend a person's discharge access to the MS4 when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. If the person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or the environment, or to minimize danger to persons. A person failing to comply with a suspension order pursuant to this section shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the result of such failure to comply. 
(2)  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city engineer will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. A person violates this chapter if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-38. - Public nuisance. 
    The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance subject to abatement by the equitable power of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER EASEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS. 

Sec. 67-39. - Applicability of requirements. 
    The requirements of this article concerning stormwater easements and maintenance agreements shall apply to all persons required to submit a stormwater plan to the city for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-40. - Stormwater management easements. 
    The developer shall provide all stormwater management easements necessary to implement the approved stormwater plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter in form and substance required by the city and shall record such easements as directed by the city. The easements shall assure access for proper inspection and maintenance of stormwater runoff facilities and shall provide adequate emergency overland flow-ways. If the stormwater runoff facilities convey stormwater from properties other than the development site, the easements shall be granted to the city when the city engineer determines that an easement to the city is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter as set forth in section 67-3. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-41. - Maintenance agreements. 
    The developer shall provide all stormwater maintenance agreements necessary to implement the approved stormwater plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter in form and substance as required by the city, and shall record such agreements as directed by the city. The maintenance agreements shall, among other matters, assure access for proper inspection and maintenance of stormwater runoff facilities and adequate emergency overland flow-ways. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-42. - Establishment of county drains. 
    Prior to final approval, all stormwater management facilities for platted subdivisions shall be established as county drains, as authorized in section 433, chapter 18 of the Michigan Drain Code (P.A. 40 of 1956, as amended) for longterm maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS. 

Sec. 67-43. - Performance standards. 
    In order to achieve the goals and purposes of this chapter, the following three stormwater management zones (zones A, B and C) are hereby established. The zones are shown on the map attached as appendix A and made a part of this chapter. 
(1)  Zone A represents areas which require the most protective stormwater management regulations. The goal of this zone is to preserve the natural condition of water bodies included in it, in whole or in part. Zone A is usually located in environmentally sensitive areas in the upper reaches of the watershed. Zone A has, in general, little impervious surface area and few stormwater facilities. In this zone, when site conditions permit, infiltration of stormwater runoff shall be required, rather than the directed flow of stormwater runoff into water bodies. This stormwater management practice provides greater protection for surface water quality, and also assists in augmenting stream base flow, reduction of flash storm flows and prevention of stream bank erosion. Section 67-44 specifies design criteria for zone A, in order that the volume and rate of stormwater runoff are controlled at predevelopment levels. 
(2)  Zone B represents developed areas that have significant impervious surfaces and stormwater runoff facilities in place. The goal of zone B is the control of stormwater runoff in order to prevent further destabilizing of streams and other water bodies. In this zone, the use of detention ponds, the maintenance and enhancement of buffer strips and other measures to reduce directly connected impervious areas are specified in section 67-44 for the achieving of the stormwater management standards applicable to zone B. The management practices for this zone are intended to maintain existing water quality and to alleviate adverse downstream impact on water bodies. 
(3)  Zone C consists of highly urbanized areas, or areas where there has been significant modification of drainageways. The amount of impervious surface area in zone C is generally greater than 25 percent. Among the measures required in zone C, as stated in section 67-44, are the use of sediment basins, the maintenance and enhancement of buffer strips along water bodies and the reduction of impervious surface areas that are directly connected to water bodies. An important element of stormwater management practice in zone C is the control and prevention of sedimentation, in order to reduce pollution of water bodies. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-44. - Design standards. 
    The design standards for stormwater runoff facilities for zones A, B and C, as described in section 67-43, are the following: 
Zone A Zone B Zone C Criteria High quality waters. Meets water quality standards. Less than 10% imperviousness. Degraded physical, biological, or water quality indicators. 10% to 25% imperviousness. Heavily degraded physical, biological, or water quality indicators. Greater than 25% imperviousness. Stormwater management standards Use infiltration basins, infiltration trenches, extended detention basins, and/or constructed wetlands. Maintain and enhance buffer strips. Use detention ponds; maintain and enhance buffer strips, and reduce directly connected impervious area. Use sediment basins, maintain and enhance buffer strips, and reduce directly connected impervious area. Water quality control Detain the first 0.5" of runoff from the contributing watershed, with detention per zone B and infiltration where conditions permit, or provide equivalent treatment. Detain the first 0.5" of runoff from the contributing watershed for 24 hours or provide equivalent treatment. Provide sedimentation control within the drainage system. Bank erosion control Rate of release shall be limited to 0.05 cfs/acre for a two-year storm event. None. Stormwater runoff shall not exceed the capacity of the downstream conveyance system. Flood control Detention with infiltration when conditions permit. Release rate of 0.13 cfs/acre per KCDC rules. Release rate of 0.13 cfs/acre per KCDC rules. Direct conveyance of stormwater runoff within the capacity of downstream system.  
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-45. - Resolution to implement performance and design standards. 
    The city commission of the city may adopt a resolution establishing more detailed design and performance standards for stormwater runoff facilities, consistent with the terms of this chapter, and in order to further implement its goals and purposes. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
ARTICLE IX. - OTHER MATTERS. 

Sec. 67-46. - Interpretation. 
    Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases defined in section 67-5 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given in that section. Technical words and technical phrases that are not defined in this chapter but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical usage shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-47. - Catchline headings. 
    The catchline headings of the articles and sections of this chapter [are] intended for convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting the meaning or interpretation of the text of the articles or sections to which they may refer. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 67-48. - Other ordinances. 
    This chapter shall be in addition to other provisions of the City Code, and shall not be deemed to repeal or replace other ordinances or parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 03-500, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; requirements for commercial and industrial driveways, § 18-39; street grade to be obtained prior to building construction, § 18-40; address numbers, § 18-141 et seq.; access to public roadways for mineral mining sites, § 34-295; onsite roads for mineral mining sites, § 34-296; parks and recreation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 58; approval of public works, § 58-37; special assessments, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 74; streets and subdivisions, § 74-86; street names and subdivisions, § 74-87; marginal access streets in subdivisions, § 74-88; access to public street required for parcels of land, § 74-114; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REPAIR WORK, LOCATION OF UTILITIES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 86. 

Sec. 70-26. - Work on public rights-of-way requiring highway permit. 
(a)  No person shall engage in building, replacing or repairing any sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, driveway culvert, curb or curbcut within the public right-of-way of the city, nor shall any person install, repair or replace any connection to or conduit attaching to a water main, storm sewer or sanitary sewer within the public right-of-way of the city, without first obtaining a highway permit from the department of public works. No highway permit shall be issued unless there has been compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Applications for highway permits shall be submitted on forms provided by the department of inspection services. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a highway permit, a fee as specified in regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article shall be paid to the department of inspection services. 
(d)  If any job, installation, construction or development covered by the fees set forth in this section is commenced before a permit is obtained, an amount equivalent to 200 percent of the appropriate fee shall be paid before a permit is issued. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-16; Ord. No. 99-537, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 70-27. - Proper license, bond and insurance required for issuance of permits; highway construction license required for persons receiving compensation for work done. 
    No person shall be issued a highway permit to perform work in the public right-of-way unless that person is properly licensed, bonded and insured. 
(1)  Any contractor or other person who is compensated in any manner for performing any of the work specified in section 70-26 must first obtain a highway construction license from the city clerk. 
a.  Application for an annual highway construction license shall be submitted on forms provided by the city clerk. 
b.  The highway construction license shall be valid for one year and all licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
c.  The fee for an annual highway construction license shall be as specified in regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
d.  No highway construction license shall be issued unless the applicant shall comply with the bonding and insurance provisions of this article, all other applicable provisions of this article and all applicable provisions of any regulations adopted by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Any person who performs any of the work specified in section 70-26 must file a bond with the city department of inspection services. 
a.  The bond shall be conditioned upon performance of the conditions of the highway permit as specified in the article and in the regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
b.  The bond shall be in the amount of $2,000.00 minimum. 
c.  The form for such bond shall be as specified in regulations adopted by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
d.  Such bond may be an annual bond in the amount of $10,000.00 minimum for the calendar year to cover all such work to be performed in that calendar year or may be an individual bond for the work to be performed under a single highway permit. 
(3)  Any person who performs any of the work noted in section 70-26 must file a certificate of insurance with the department of inspection services evidencing insurance coverage in the amount of $300,000.00 to $500,000.00 public liability and $100,000.00 property damage protecting the city and its agents against any and all claims for damage arising from the operations covered by the highway permit. The certificate shall provide that the insurance may not be canceled without ten days' written notice to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-17) 
Sec. 70-28. - Application for highway permit to be accompanied by descriptions and plans of proposed work. 
    No highway permit for any work within the public right-of-way as specified in section 70-26 shall be issued unless the application is accompanied by a description of the proposed work. In addition, any application relating to driveways to be constructed in a commercial or industrial zone or to be used in conjunction with any use other than a single-family or two-family residence must be accompanied by one set of plans of the proposed work to be reviewed by the department of inspection services. 
(1)  Plans submitted pursuant to this section for the construction of driveways shall be drawn to scale and shall show the following: 
a.  The location of the proposed work in relation to property lines, corners, existing drives and curb cuts, drainage and utility structures and trees, any of which may affect the work in the area within 100 feet of the proposed work. 
b.  Surface features such as sidewalks, existing curb and gutter and direction of drainage flow in the area within 100 feet of the proposed work. 
(2)  Three working days will be allowed for review of descriptions and plans submitted for approval. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-18) 
Sec. 70-29. - Staking and grading to be performed by city engineer. 
    All staking and grading must be performed by the city engineer or his designated representative. Fees for such work shall be as specified in regulations adopted by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-19) 
Sec. 70-30. - Work to be performed according to city regulations. 
    All work specified in section 70-26 shall be performed according to the city standard construction specifications, details, and conditions, as set forth in regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-20) 
Sec. 70-31. - Permit required from Michigan Department of State Highways for work on state truckline. 
    A permit from the Michigan Department of State Highways (MDSH) must be obtained prior to beginning any work within the public right-of-way of any street in the city designated as a state truckline. All such work must conform to all applicable MDSH regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-21) 
Sec. 70-32. - Utility line permits, fee; bond; insurance. 
    No person shall construct, repair, install or replace telephone lines, electrical power lines, gas lines or cable television lines within the public right-of-way in the city, whether aboveground or underground, without first obtaining a utility line permit from the department of inspection services. 
(1)  Application for utility line permits shall be submitted on forms approved by the department of inspection services. 
(2)  All work shall conform and comply with all specifications and locational requirements as specified in regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Fees as specified in regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article shall be paid to the department of inspection services. Such fees shall not be collected prior to the issuance of the utility line permit but utility line permit holders shall be invoiced for the applicable fees on a monthly basis. 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of a utility line permit, any person who seeks to perform any of the work specified in this section shall file a bond with the department of inspection services unless exempted by this article. 
a.  The bond shall be conditioned upon performance of the conditions of the utility line permit as specified in this article and in the regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
b.  The bond shall be in the amount of $2,000.00 minimum. 
c.  The form for such bond shall be as specified in regulations adopted by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
d.  The bond may be an annual bond in the amount of $10,000.00 minimum for the calendar year to cover all such work performed in that calendar year or may be an individual bond for the work to be performed under a single utility line permit. 
e.  Utility companies regulated by the state public service commission are exempt from the bonding requirement of this subsection (4) if the work specified in this section is performed by their employees. However, if such utility companies contract for the performance of such work, the contractor must comply with the bonding requirements of this subsection (4). 
(5)  No utility line permit shall be issued unless there is on file with the department of inspection services a copy of a certificate of insurance protecting the city and its agents against any and all claims for damages arising from the operations covered by this permit, unless such requirement is waived pursuant to exemptions granted by this article. 
a.  The amount of the insurance shall be $300,000.00 to $500,000.00 public liability and $100,000.00 property damage. 
b.  Every insurance policy required under this subsection (5) shall extend for the period to be covered by the permit. The certificate shall provide that the insurance may not be canceled without ten days' written notice to the city. 
c.  Utility companies regulated by the state public service commission are exempt from the insurance requirement of this subsection (5) if the work specified in this section is performed by their employees. However, if such utility companies contract for the performance of such work, the contractors must comply with the insurance requirements of this subsection (5). 
(6)  An annual utility line permit permitting the holder of such permit to perform limited activities without the necessity of obtaining a regular utility line permit for each individual activity is hereby authorized subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The fee for such permit shall be as authorized in regulations promulgated by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
b.  Activities permissible under the annual utility line permit shall be limited to the hookup of individual properties to any telephone lines, electrical power lines, gas lines, or cable television lines already existing within the public right-of-way and to the erection or replacement of telephone or electric power poles within the public right-of-way. 
c.  Holders of such permit shall comply with all other provisions of this article, including notice requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-22) 
Sec. 70-33. - Notification concerning time work is to begin; work subject to inspection; revocation of permit. 
    At least three days prior to the day on which any work regulated by this article is to begin, the department of inspection services shall be notified, by telephone or in person, of the time at which the work is to begin. An inspection of the work may be made at the discretion of the department of inspection services. If the work does not comply with the provisions of the permit, this article, or the regulations adopted by the city commission pursuant to this article, the department of inspection services may revoke the highway permit or utility line permit and may refuse to issue any additional permits. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-23) 
Sec. 70-34. - Compliance with other city ordinances. 
    Approval of plans and the issuance of a highway or utility line permit does not relieve a person from compliance with any other applicable building, zoning, subdivision or any other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-24) 
Sec. 70-35. - Granting of variance. 
    Variances from the strict interpretation of this article may be granted in writing by the city engineer if the city engineer determines that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Peculiar physical conditions not ordinarily existing in similar districts in the city, or due to the nature of the business or operation of the property served. 
(2)  Public safety and convenience are not adversely affected to an appreciable extent. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or tenants. 
(4)  Strict application of this article will work unnecessary hardship on the property owner or tenant. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-25) 
Sec. 70-36. - Promulgation of regulations by city commission. 
    The city commission shall promulgate, by resolution, such regulations as are necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-26) 
Sec. 70-37. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article (article II) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code, except that as used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this article (i) committed by a person within any six-month period and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(c)  The department of public works director and the city engineer are each hereby designated as an authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 171/2-27; Ord. No. 94-450, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 99-537, § 2, 8-23-99) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Secs. 70-38-70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SNOW REMOVAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled, including farm tractors. 
(Code 1976, § 16-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-62. - Compliance with article. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or other equipment for the purpose of moving, removing or plowing snow or ice in the city, except in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 16-2) 
Sec. 70-63. - Lights for snowplows. 
    In addition to any equipment required by the laws of the state, each motor vehicle used to plow snow shall be equipped with lights mounted in such position as to be clearly visible to any approaching or following traffic or pedestrians, but not such as to blind or confuse such traffic or pedestrians. Such lights shall be turned on and be operating at all times during any time such vehicle is used for snowplowing. Vehicles shall be equipped with a top-mounted, yellow, revolving warning light. 
(Code 1976, § 16-3) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
Sec. 70-64. - Snow removed from private property not to be deposited on street or sidewalk. 
    No snow or ice shall be removed from private property and be deposited upon or plowed across any public street or sidewalk. The plowing of snow into the street and spreading of snow within the street is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 16-4) 
Sec. 70-65. - Snow not to be plowed into or left on property of another. 
    No snow or ice shall be plowed into or left upon the property, sidewalk, driveway or parkway of another property. 
(Code 1976, § 16-5) 
Sec. 70-66. - Obstructing fire hydrants; banks of snow. 
    Contractors may not obstruct fire hydrants or mailboxes with snow plowed from driveways and sidewalks. In distributing piles or banks of snow, contractors may not create any visual obstruction which would impair safe use of streets and sidewalks. Snow and ice shall not be piled more than three feet high. 
(Code 1976, § 16-6) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 70-67. - Metal tracks or studs. 
    Vehicles with metal tracks or studs are not permitted on streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 1976, § 16-7) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
Sec. 70-68. - Sidewalks to be cleared. 
(a)  (1)  Duty to clear . The owner or occupants of any lot located within the city shall clear any accumulations of ice or snow from the public sidewalks adjoining the lot within 24 hours of the accumulation or placement of snow or ice on the sidewalks. In cases where a multiuse trail is located where a sidewalk existed prior to installation of the multiuse trail, a five-foot pathway shall be cleared on the side furthest away from the road. Notwithstanding the condition outlined above, removal of snow and ice is not required along any other sections of multiuse trail. 
(2)  Exemption . An owner or occupant of any property located within the city may apply to the city manager or their designee seeking an annual exemption from the standards of subsection (1) above. 
The city manager or their designee shall decide whether to approve or deny an annual exemption request based on the following criteria: 
a.  Physical hardship due to age, disability or illness 
b.  Location of the subject lot on a priority pedestrian route, as determined based on the current City of Walker Sidewalk Master Plan, Parks and Recreation Master Plan or the overall City of Walker Master Plan. 
c.  Connectivity to existing or planned sidewalks. 
d.  Practical natural limitations on the ability to develop or improve the subject lot. 
e.  Location of the subject lot on a major street. 
f.  Location of the subject lot in relation to schools, transit stops, institutional and civic uses, places of employment and commercial or service uses. 
The grounds for denial of an exemption under this subsection shall be provided to the applicant in writing, stating the basis for the denial. Any exemption approved under this subsection will expire 365 days after the date of issuance. The owner or occupants of lot where an exemption is sought must apply annually for an exemption. Issuance of an annual exemption does not ensure that future exemptions will be granted. A person may not claim an exemption in an enforcement proceeding under this section unless the person has applied for and obtained the exemption from the city manager or his designee prior to the date of any violation of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation and order to abate. Any person determined by the building official to be in violation of section 70-68(a) shall be given notice of the violation and ordered to abate the violation, as follows: 
(1)  Service of notice and order. The notice and order may be served by any one of the following means: 
a.  In writing, by first-class mail, addressed to the owner of the property at the last known address as shown by the city tax records. The notice and order shall at the same time also be mailed to the occupants of the property, if different than the owner. If the notice and order are served by mail, they shall be deemed received by the addressee two mail delivery days after deposit in the United States mail. 
b.  In writing, posted at the property. The notice and order shall be deemed to have been served to the owner and/or occupant, as applicable, at the time the notice and order is posted at the property. 
c.  By providing the notice and order orally, either in person or by telephone. The oral notice and order shall be deemed to have served to the owner and/or occupant, as applicable, at the time the oral notice and order are given. A written confirmation of the oral notice and order shall be mailed by the city to the person served within five days of the oral notice and order, provided that the failure to do so shall not affect the person's obligation to comply with oral notice and order and shall not constitute a defense to a violation of section 70-68(a). 
(2)  Contents of notice and order. To the extent known by the city, and as applicable under the circumstances, a notice and order under this section shall include: 
a.  The date and time the notice was served. 
b.  The name and address of the person (or persons) responsible for the violation. 
c.  A description of the nature and location of the violation, and the provisions of this section violated. 
d.  The minimum corrective actions required to abate the violation. 
e.  A statement that the violation must be abated within 48 hours from the time notice was served. 
f.  An order to abate the violation by the time specified in the order (which shall be 48 hours from the time notice and order are deemed to have been received as provided by this section). 
g.  The applicable fines or other consequences for failure to abate the violation by the time specified in the notice and order. 
h.  A statement indicating that if the violation is not abated as ordered, then the city may unilaterally act to abate the violation; that the costs to the city of any action by the city to abate the violation, plus an administrative fee and any applicable fines, shall be a personal debt of the person to the city which may be assessed by the city as a lien against the property until paid; and that the refusal to allow the city to abate an uncorrected violation shall constitute a separate and additional violation of this section. 
(3)  Abatement required. Any person served with a notice and order, as provided by this section shall abate the violation as specified by the order. 
(c)  Noncompliance with order; abatement by city. 
(1)  Abatement by city. If a person served with a notice and order fails or refuses to abate the violation as required by the order under this section within 48 hours of being notified of the violation, the city or its authorized representatives may enter the property and take any reasonable actions necessary to remove the ice and snow from the sidewalks and abate the violation. 
(2)  Costs of abatement; delinquent payments; lien. The costs, including an administrative fee of $25.00, as incurred by the city in abating the violation shall be immediately due and payable to the city by the owner of the property where the violation occurred. The city shall notify the property owner that the costs are due and owing by certified mail (return receipt requested), addressed to the property owner's last known address as shown by city tax records. If the costs are not paid in full within 30 days of mailing the notification, they shall be delinquent. The amount of the costs plus any administrative fee shall be certified by the treasurer to the assessor for inclusion upon the next city tax roll. The amount included in the city tax roll shall be a lien against the property which may be enforced and discharged by the city in the same manner as a tax lien. The costs of abatement, if any, recovered by the city shall be in addition to any civil fines, damages, expenses or costs payable to the city as a result of a violation. 
(3)  Abatement by city not defense to violation. The abatement by the city of a violation of this section and subsequent recovery of abatement costs incurred by the city shall not be a defense to any action by the city against any person for the violation, including, without limitation, any action by the city to collect civil fines, damages, expenses or costs as authorized by law. 
(d)  Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this section, including, without limitation, the failure or refusal to abate a violation following service of a notice and order, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines provided as provided in section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. The building official is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the City of Walker Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) for violations under this section as provided by this Code. 
(e)  Nuisance per se; injunctive relief. A violation of this section is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In addition to any other remedy available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person, to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 91-401, § 1, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 94-437, § 1, 5-10-94; Ord. No. 96-488, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 10-582, § 1, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 13-614, § 1, 6-10-13 ) 
Secs. 70-69-70-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE FOR COMMERCIAL VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 

Sec. 70-81. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle for the purpose of moving, removing or plowing snow or ice in the city, unless a current snowplow license and business license has been issued for each such vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this division and chapter 22, article I; provided that, no snowplow license or business license shall be required with respect to plowing or removing snow or ice from premises owned by or leased to the person operating such vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 16-16; Ord. No. 09-58, § 8, 3-9-09) 
Charter reference- Authority of city commission relative to licenses, § 2.9. 
Sec. 70-82. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license required by this division shall file an application with the city clerk on a form approved by the city commission, which application shall contain the applicant's full name, address and telephone number, insurance information, and the number, make, model and state license number of the motor vehicle to be licensed. 
(Code 1976, § 16-17) 
Sec. 70-83. - Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. 
    In addition to the grounds set forth elsewhere in this article, any of the following shall be grounds for denial of a license or for suspension or revocation of a license once issued: 
(1)  Any violation of a provision of this article or any of the rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to the authority granted by this article. 
(2)  Failure to repair damage to either public or private property resulting from snowplow operations or the use of equipment involved in snowplow operations. 
(Code 1976, § 16-17.1) 
Sec. 70-84. - Applicant's insurance. 
    Each applicant for a license under this article shall file, along with the application, certificates of insurance for public liability and property damage insuring both the applicant and the city in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00/$100,000.00 for public liability and $25,000.00 for property damage caused by the operation of the motor vehicle to be licensed. The termination date of such policy shall not be earlier than May 1 following. 
(Code 1976, § 16-18) 
Sec. 70-85. - Fee. 
    The applicant for a license under this article shall pay an annual license fee for the first motor vehicle and for each additional such vehicle to be operated, in the amounts established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 16-19) 
Sec. 70-86. - License tag or decal. 
    For each vehicle for which a license fee has been paid under this article, a license tag or decal shall be issued by the city clerk. Such license tag or decal shall have a number which shall correspond to the number assigned to such vehicle by the city clerk. Such license tag or decal shall be affixed by the applicant to the vehicle in a position so as to be readily seen. 
(Code 1976, § 16-20) 
Charter reference- City clerk to issue all licenses required by ordinance, § 8.3. 
Sec. 70-87. - Identification requirements. 
    Any snowplowing vehicle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be identified as follows: 
(1)  The name of the licensee shall be plainly displayed on both sides of the vehicle in a place and color clearly visible in figures of at least three inches in height. 
(2)  The tag, insignia, license plate or number issued by the city clerk shall be prominently displayed on the vehicle in a place that can be readily seen and read at all times when the vehicle is being used for snowplowing. 
(Code 1976, § 16-20.1) 
Sec. 70-88. - Revocation. 
    Violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued under this division, in addition to any other penalty imposed for such violation. 
(Code 1976, § 16-21) 
ARTICLE IV. - VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 70-89. - Purpose. 
(a)  Under the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, video service providers may obtain a franchise to provide video services in the city using a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. This form includes the right to use the public rights-of-way to provide such service but does not contain right-of-way management and related provisions. 
(b)  The city's cable television consent agreement with its current cable operator predates the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and has right-of-way management and related provisions. However, that Act states that, as of January 1, 2007, "any provisions" of such an agreement "inconsistent with or in addition to" the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC are deemed unreasonable and unenforceable. 
(c)  Telecommunications providers who obtain a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement generally will have previously obtained from a municipality a permit under the Metro Act to construct and maintain their telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way. Such Metro Act permits set forth the terms and conditions for such right-of-way usage, standard forms of such permits were agreed to in a collaborative process between municipalities and providers that was initiated by the MPSC, and such standard forms have since been approved by the legislature and the MPSC. 
(d)  Because telecommunications providers typically provide video services over combined video and telecommunications facilities, Metro Act permits generally provide adequate public right-of-way protections for the city and the public when such providers are providing video services. 
(e)  Other video service providers, in particular new providers or existing cable operators, may not have a Metro Act permit issued by the city. 
(f)  The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement require video service providers with such an agreement to comply with all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the public rights-of-way in the delivery of video services, including the police powers of the franchising entity, and makes such right-of-way usage subject to the laws of the state and the police powers of the franchising entity. 
(g)  The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement state that franchising entities shall provide video service providers with open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral access to the public rights-of-way, and may not discriminate against a video service provider for the authorization or placement of a video service or communications network in the public rights-of-way. 
(h)  The Michigan Constitution reserves reasonable control of their highways, streets, alleys and public places to local units of government, which may exercise such authority through their police powers. 
(i)  The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare and exercise reasonable control over the public rights-of-way by regulating the use and occupation of such rights-of-way by video service providers that lack a Metro Act permit from the city. This article does so by setting forth terms and conditions for such usage and occupation from the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC and approved by the legislature in section 6(1) of the Metro Act, thus providing open, comparable, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral access to the public rights-of-way and not discriminating against a video service provider for the authorization or placement of a video service or communications network in public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-90. - Consistent interpretation. 
    This article shall be interpreted and applied to be consistent with the Metro Act and corresponding provisions of the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC, including applicable MPSC, Metro Authority and court decisions and determinations relating to same. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-91. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply to this article, including Sections 70-89 and 70-90 above: 
(a)  Act means the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, Act No. 480 of the Public Acts of 2006, MCL 484.3301 and following, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Cable operator shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
(c)  City means the City of Walker. 
(d)  Claims shall have the meaning set forth in section 70-95(a). 
(e)  Facilities means the lines, equipment and other facilities of a permittee which use or occupy the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services in the city. 
(f)  Franchise agreement means the franchise agreement entered into or possessed by a video service provider with the city as required by section 3(1) of the Act, if it is the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. 
(g)  Manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
(h)  Metro Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, being Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, MCL 484.3101 and following. 
(i)  Metro Act permit means a permit to use the public rights-of-way issued by the city under chapter 81 of the city's Code of Ordinances, which implements the Metro Act, after a provider's application for same to the city as set forth in such chapter. 
(j)  Metro authority shall have the same meaning as "authority" in the Metro Act. 
(j)  MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act and the Metro Act. 
(k)  Permittee means a video service provider without a currently valid Metro Act permit but with either (a) a pre-existing agreement, or (b) a currently valid franchise agreement. Upon obtaining a Metro Act permit from the city, a video service provider is not a permittee and is no longer required to comply with this article. A video service provider is also not a permittee and is not required to comply with this article if it and the city enter into a voluntary franchise agreement as described in section 70-99. 
(m)  Person means an individual, corporation, association, partnership, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, 
(n)  Pre-existing agreement means a cable television consent agreement predating the effective date of the Act, January 1, 2007, which has not expired or been terminated. 
(o)  Public rights-of-way shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
(p)  Street construction and street resurfacing shall have the meanings set forth in section 7-94(i). 
(q)  Video service shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
(r)  Video service provider shall have the same meaning as in the Act, and shall include an "incumbent video provider" as referred to in section 5(2) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-92. - Applicability to permittees. 
    All permittees shall comply with this article, except that a permittee need not comply with the insurance provisions of section 70-96 if it is maintaining the insurance required by section II. J of the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC (which in accordance with the Act states that incumbent video providers shall comply with the terms which provide insurance for right-of-way related activities that are contained in its last cable franchise or consent agreement from the franchising entity entered into before the effective date of the Act). 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-93. - Contacts, maps and plans. 
(a)  Permittee contacts. Permittee shall provide the manager with the names, addresses and the like for engineering and construction related information for permittee and its facilities as follows: 
(1)  The address, e-mail address, phone number and contact person (title or name) at permittee's local office (in or near the city). 
(2)  If permittee's engineering drawings, as-built plans and related records for the facilities will not be located at the preceding local office, the location address, phone number and contact person (title or department) for them. 
(3)  The name, title, address, e-mail address and telephone numbers of permittee's engineering contact person(s) with responsibility for the design, plans and construction of the facilities. 
(4)  The address, phone number and contact person (title or department) at permittee's home office/regional office with responsibility for engineering and construction related aspects of the facilities. 
(5)  Permittee shall at all times provide manager with the phone number at which a live representative of permittee (not voice mail) can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of a public emergency. 
(6)  Permittee shall notify the city in writing pursuant to the notice provisions of its franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement (whichever is then in effect) of any changes in the preceding information. 
(b)  Route maps. Within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new facilities in the city, permittee shall submit route maps showing the location of the facilities to the city, in the same manner and subject to the same provisions as apply to telecommunications providers under section[s] 6(7) and 6(8) of the Metro Act, MCL 484.3106(7) and (8). 
(c)  As-built records. Permittee, without expense to the city, shall, upon 48 hours' notice, give the city access to all "as-built" maps, records, plans and specifications showing the facilities or portions thereof in the public right-of-way. Upon request by the city, permittee shall inform the city as soon as reasonably possible of any changes from previously supplied maps, records, or plans and shall mark up maps provided by the city so as to show the location of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-94. - Use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Overlashing. Permittee shall not allow the wires or any other facilities of a third party to be overlashed to permittee's facilities without the city's prior written consent. The city's right to withhold written consent is subject to the authority of the MPSC under section 361 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, MCL § 484.2361. 
(c)  No burden on public rights-of way. Permittee, its contractors, subcontractors, and the facilities shall not unduly burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public rights-of-way. Permittee's aerial cables and wires shall be suspended so as to not endanger or injure persons or property in or about the public rights-of-way. If the city reasonably determines that any portion of the facilities constitutes an undue burden or interference, due to changed circumstances, permittee, at its sole expense, shall modify the facilities or take such other actions as the city may determine is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and permittee shall do so within a reasonable time period. The city shall attempt to require all occupants of a pole or conduit whose facilities are a burden to remove or alleviate the burden concurrently. 
(d)  No priority. This article does not establish any priority of use of the public rights-of-way by permittee over any present or future permittees or parties having agreements with the city or franchises for such use. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public rights-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to the city, the third priority to the state and its political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and thereafter as between other permit, agreement or franchise holders, as determined (except as otherwise provided by law) by the city in the exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the state. 
(e)  Restoration of property. Permittee, its contractors and subcontractors shall immediately (subject to seasonal work restrictions) restore, at Permittee's sole expense, in a manner approved by the City, any portion of the Public Rights-of-Way that is in any way disturbed, damaged, or injured by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the Facilities to a reasonably equivalent (or, at Permittee's option, better) condition as that which existed prior to the disturbance. In the event that Permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to make such repair within a reasonable time, the City may make the repair and Permittee shall pay the costs the City incurred for such repair. 
(f)  Marking. Permittee shall mark its facilities installed after the effective date of this article as follows: aerial portions of the facilities shall be marked with a marker on permittee's lines on alternate poles which shall state permittee's name and provide a toll-free number to call for assistance. Direct buried underground portions of the facilities shall have: 
(1)  A conducting wire placed in the ground at least several inches above permittee's cable (if such cable is nonconductive); 
(2)  At least several inches above that, a continuous colored tape with a statement to the effect that there is buried cable beneath; and 
(3)  Stakes or other appropriate above ground markers with permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that there is buried cable below. 
Bored underground portions of the facilities shall have a conducting wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be required to provide the continuous colored tape. Portions of the facilities located in conduit, including conduit of others used by permittee, shall be marked at its entrance into and exit from each manhole and handhold with permittee's name and a toll-free telephone number. 
(g)  Tree trimming. Permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the facilities, consistent with any standards adopted by the city. Permittee shall dispose of all trimmed materials. Permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to that essential to maintain the integrity of the facilities. Except in emergencies, all trimming of trees in the public rights-of-way shall have the advance approval of manager. 
(h)  Installation and maintenance. The construction and installation of the facilities shall be performed pursuant to plans approved by the city. The open cut of any public right-of-way shall be coordinated with the manager or manager's designee. Permittee shall install and maintain the facilities in a reasonably safe condition. If the existing poles in the public rights-of-way are overburdened or unavailable for permittee's use, or the facilities of all users of the poles are required to go underground then permittee shall, at its expense, place such portion of its facilities underground, unless the city approves an alternate location. Permittee may perform maintenance on the facilities without prior approval of the city, provided that permittee shall obtain any and all permits required by the city in the event that any maintenance will disturb or block vehicular traffic or are otherwise required by the city. 
(i)  Pavement cut coordination. Permittee shall coordinate its construction and all other work in the public rights-of-way with the city's program for street construction and rebuilding (collectively "street construction") and its program for street repaving and resurfacing (except seal coating and patching) (collectively, "street resurfacing"). 
(1)  The goals of such coordination shall be to encourage permittee to conduct all work in the public rights-of-way in conjunction with or immediately prior to any street construction or street resurfacing planned by the city. 
(2)  Permittee shall comply with all valid and enforceable federal and state statutes and regulations; and all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the public rights-of-way, including the police powers of the city; regarding the construction, installation, and maintenance of its facilities, now in force or which hereafter may be promulgated. Before any installation is commenced, permittee shall secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from the city or other governmental entity as may be required by law, including, without limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits. The city shall not unreasonably delay or deny issuance of any such permits, licenses or approvals. Permittee shall comply in all respects with applicable codes and industry standards. Permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as may exist or may hereafter be amended. This section does not constitute a waiver of permittee's right to challenge laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations now in force or established in the future. 
(3)  If the city vacates or consents to the vacation of public rights-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation necessitates the removal and relocation of permittee's facilities in the vacated public rights-of-way, permittee shall consent to the vacation and remove its facilities at its sole cost and expense when ordered to do so by the city or a court of competent jurisdiction. Permittee shall relocate its facilities to such alternate route as the city and permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. 
(4)  If the city requests permittee to relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its facilities because of street or utility work, or other public projects, permittee shall relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense, including where necessary to such alternate route as the city and permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. The work shall be completed within a reasonable time period. 
(5)  The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig up or otherwise destroy facilities of permittee if such action is necessary because of a public emergency. If reasonable to do so under the circumstances, the city shall attempt to provide notice to permittee. Public emergency shall be any condition which poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property caused by any natural or manmade disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, water main breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. Permittee shall be responsible for repair at its sole cost and expense of any of its facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the city. 
(6)  If eligible to join, permittee shall subscribe to and be a member of "MISS DIG," the association of utilities formed pursuant to Act 53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, MCL 460.701 et seq., and shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(7)  If Permittee has its facilities on poles of Consumers Energy or another electric or telecommunications provider and Consumers Energy or such other electric or telecommunications provider relocates its system underground, then permittee shall relocate its facilities underground in the same location at permittee's sole cost and expense. 
(8)  All personnel of permittee and its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing permittee's name, their name and photograph. Permittee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public, such as by a magnetic sign with permittee's name and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-95. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Indemnity. Permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions from any and all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings, and expenses of any nature (collectively "claims") (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees) arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns, but only to the extent such acts or omissions are related to permittee's use of or installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way and only to the extent of the fault or responsibility of permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors and assigns. 
(b)  Notice, cooperation. The city shall notify permittee promptly in writing of any such claims and the method and means proposed by the city for defending or satisfying any such claims. The city shall cooperate with permittee in every reasonable way to facilitate the defense of any such claims. The city shall consult with Permittee respecting the defense and satisfaction of such claims, including the selection and direction of legal counsel. 
(c)  Settlement. The city shall not settle any claim subject to indemnification under the preceding two sections without the advance written consent of permittee, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Permittee shall have the right to defend or settle, at its own expense, any claim against the city for which permittee is responsible hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-96. - Insurance. 
(a)  Coverage required. Prior to beginning any construction in or installation of permittee's facilities in the public rights-of-way, permittee shall obtain insurance as set forth below and file certificates evidencing same with the city. Such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect until the end of the term of its franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement, (whichever is then in effect). In the alternative, permittee may satisfy this requirement through a program of self-insurance, acceptable to the city, by providing reasonable evidence of its financial resources to the city. The city's acceptance of such self-insurance shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including completed operations liability, independent contractors liability, contractual liability coverage, railroad protective coverage and coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage, in an amount not less than $5,000,000.00. 
(2)  Liability insurance for sudden and accidental environmental contamination with minimum limits of $500,000.00 and providing coverage for claims discovered within three years after the term of the policy. Pursuant to the 2006 MPSC decision in case U-14720, permittee need not comply with the preceding sentence until such time after the effective date of this article that it decides to place any new or existing facilities underground within the public rights-of-way in the city. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(4)  Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance with statutory limits, and any applicable federal insurance of a similar nature. 
(5)  The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of underlying (primary) and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. If more than one insurance policy is purchased to provide the coverage amounts set forth above, then all policies providing coverage limits excess to the primary policy shall provide drop down coverage to the first dollar of coverage and other contractual obligations of the primary policy, should the primary policy carrier not be able to perform any of its contractual obligations or not be collectible for any of its coverages for any reason during the term of the franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement (whichever is then in effect), or (when longer) for as long as coverage could have been available pursuant to the terms and conditions of the primary policy. 
(b)  Additional insured. The city shall be named as an additional insured on all policies (other than workers' compensation and employer's liability). All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled, modified or not renewed unless the insurance carrier provides 30 days prior written notice to the city. Permittee shall annually provide the city with a certificate of insurance evidencing such coverage. All insurance policies (other than environmental contamination, workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance) shall be written on an occurrence basis and not on a claims-made basis. 
(c)  Qualified insurers. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers licensed to do business by the state or by surplus line carriers on the Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(d)  Deductibles. If the insurance policies required by this article are written with retainages or deductibles in excess of $50,000.00, they shall be approved by manager in advance in writing. Permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the city from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished hereunder. 
(e)  Contractors. Permittee's contractors and subcontractors working in the public rights-of-way shall carry in full force and effect commercial general liability, environmental contamination liability, automobile liability and workers' compensation and employer liability insurance which complies with all terms of this section. In the alternative, Permittee, at its expense, may provide such coverages for any or all its contractors or subcontractors (such as by adding them to permittee's policies). 
(f)  Insurance primary. Permittee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with respect to the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions (collectively "them"). Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them shall be in excess of permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to it (where "insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them" includes any contract or agreement providing any type of indemnification or defense obligation provided to, or for the benefit of them, from any source, and includes any self-insurance program or policy, or self-insured retention or deductible by, for or on behalf of them). 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-97. - Performance bond or letter of credit. 
    The city may require permittee to post a bond (or letter of credit), in the amount provided in section 15(3) of the Metro Act, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-98. - Removal. 
(a)  Removal; underground. As soon as practicable after the later of the term of its franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement expires, permittee or its successors and assigns shall remove any underground cable or other portions of permittee's facilities from the public rights-of-way which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the public rights-of-way; permittee shall not remove any underground cable or other portions of the facilities which requires trenching or other opening of the public rights-of-way except with the prior written approval of manager. All removals shall be at permittee's sole cost and expense. For purposes of this subsection, "cable" means any wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire. 
(b)  Removal; above ground. As soon as practicable after the later of the expiration of the term of its franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement, permittee, or its successor or assigns at its sole cost and expense, shall, unless waived in writing by manager, remove from the public rights-of-way all above-ground elements of its facilities, including but not limited to poles, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and lines attached to or suspended from poles. 
(c)  Schedule. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval by manager. Unless extended by manager, removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the expiration of the later of the term of a franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement. Portions of permittee's facilities in the public rights-of-way that are not removed within such time period shall be deemed abandoned and, at the option of the city, exercised by written notice to permittee at the address provided for in the franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement (whichever was last in effect), title to the portions described in such notice shall vest in the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 70-99. - Other items. 
(a)  Duties. Permittees shall faithfully perform all duties required by this article. 
(b)  Different terms. The Act allows local units of government and video service providers to enter into voluntary franchise agreements that include terms and conditions which are different from those required under the Act or which are different from those in the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. The Metro Act allows municipalities and providers to mutually agree to Metro Act permit terms differing from those in the standard forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC. Current or prospective permittees who desire terms different from those in this article, as applied to them, should request such a voluntary franchise agreement or a mutually agreed to Metro Act permit from the city. 
(c)  Interpretation and severability. The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the public, and should any provision or section of this article be held unconstitutional, invalid, overbroad or otherwise unenforceable, such determination/holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining conditions of this article. If any provision in this article is found to be partially overbroad, unenforceable, or invalid, permittee and the city may nevertheless enforce such provision to the extent permitted under applicable law. 
(d)  Violations. A permittee who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $5,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as follows: 
First repeat offense Not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00 Second and subsequentrepeat offense Not less than $2,000.00 and not more than $20,000.00  
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a permittee of this article. 
(e)  Authorized officials. The manager, or his or her designee, is hereby designated as the authorized official of the city to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations of this article as provided by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-557, § 1, 6-9-08) 
CHAPTER 74 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2005, amended Ch. 74 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 74 derived from Code 1976, §§ 18-1-18-7, 18-19-18-23, 18-34-18-37, 18-48-18-53, 18-64-18-68, 18-70, and 18-71; Ord. No. 94-427, §§ 1, and 2, adopted Jan. 25, 1994; Ord. No. 94-442, §§ 1-7, adopted Sept. 13, 1994; Ord. No. 96-482, § 1, adopted Feb. 27, 1996; and Ord. No. 05-29, § 1, adopted May 23, 2005. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; erosion and sedimentation prevention, § 34-206 et seq.; floods, ch. 42; planning, ch. 58; powers and duties of planning commission relative to subdivisions, § 58-41; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 86; water service laterals required prior to approval of plats, § 86-30; connection to sewage disposal system required prior to approval of plat, § 86-75; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the subdivision regulation ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-2. - Authority. 
    The subdivision regulations of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Land Division Act, being Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), and the Municipal Planning Commission Act, being Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the requirements of the city with respect to the subdivision or platting of land within the city and to further promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city by providing for the orderly development of land within the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a strip of land over which there is a right-of-way, public or private, providing secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by actual or platted streets, waterways or other definite boundaries, or a combination thereof. 
    City engineer means the engineer of the city or a duly authorized representative designated by the city commission. 
    Cul-de-sac (dead-end street) means a street having one terminus open for vehicular or pedestrian access and the other terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner for the use of a strip or parcel of land by the public or by public utilities or for private use. 
    Floodplain means that area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other similar body of water which will be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for that region. 
    Improvements means any or all of the following: street pavements, curb and gutter, sidewalks, water mains, hydrants, sanitary sewers, and their laterals and services, storm drains and drainage facilities, bridges, culverts, topsoil between curb and sidewalks, street trees, grading, street signs and crosswalks; and may also include walkways, streetlights or any other items normally considered public improvements. 
    Land Division Act means Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended. 
    Local street means a street which serves primarily to provide access to abutting properties. 
    Lot means a measured portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land which is intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development. 
    Major street or highway means a street serving large volumes of through traffic, and so designated by the major street plan. 
    Major street plan means that part of the master plan relating to the major street system of the city which has been adopted by the planning commission and is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Marginal access street means a minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Master plan means that master, comprehensive or other entitled plan, or any part or amendments thereto, adopted by the planning commission and which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Pedestrian way means a walkway to provide pedestrian access to schools, playgrounds or other community facilities. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission created by section 58-26 of this Code under the Municipal Planning Commission Act, being Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended. 
    Proprietor means the applicant or owner of the land being platted or subdivided, or the sponsor of any plat, or his agents and representatives appointed or selected to act legally in his behalf. 
    Public utility means all persons or municipal or other public authorities providing gas, electricity, water, steam, sewer, telephone or other services of a similar nature. 
    Street means a platted or actual right-of-way dedicated to public use, or a private right-of-way serving more than one ownership. 
    Subdivision, plat or subdivide shall have the same meaning as defined in the Land Division Act. 
    Substandard right-of-way means any right-of-way which has a width less than the standard width established in the master street plan. 
    Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended, or any new zoning ordinance which may be adopted by the city commission, and shall include all new ordinances relating to zoning restrictions and districts which may be adopted under the provisions of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.,), as amended, and all amendments to any of the ordinances mentioned in this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-5. - Survey and plat required. 
    For every subdivision there shall be a survey and plat complying with the requirements of the Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-6. - Compliance with law required. 
    No subdivision or plat shall be approved unless the subdivision or plat is in conformance with the statutes of the state, the ordinances of the city, the master plan of the city and the subdivision regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Secs. 74-7-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 

Sec. 74-31. - Required approval. 
    Preliminary plats of proposed subdivisions shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission, the city engineer and the city commission in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-31.1. - Optional prepreliminary plat meeting. 
    The proprietor may request that a preapplication review meeting take place by submitting a written request to the chairperson of the county plat board and submitting copies of a concept plan for the preliminary plat to the city and to each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113 to 118 of the Land Division Act. A preapplication meeting shall take place not later than 30 days after the written request and concept plan are received. The meeting shall be attended by the proprietor, representatives of each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113, 114, and 118 of the Land Division Act, and a representative of the city. Representation of each agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 115 to 117 of the Land Division Act shall be informed of the meeting and may attend. The purpose of the meeting is to conduct an informal review of the proprietor's concept plan for the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-32. - Submission for approval; filing fee. 
(a)  The submission of a preliminary plat for a proposed subdivision shall be filed with the city clerk. Ten copies of the proposed plat shall be filed, at least 15 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission, accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by resolution of the city commission. The submission for tentative or final approval of a preliminary plat shall contain all necessary information required for a complete review, including the following: 
(1)  Name of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Legal description of the property to be subdivided. 
(3)  Proposed means of water supply. 
(4)  Proposed method of sewage disposal. Percolation test results must be submitted if a public sewer is not available. 
(5)  Proposed method of storm drainage and, at least for submissions for final approval of a preliminary plat, an indication of inlet and outlet capacities. 
(6)  Name and address of the owner of record. 
(7)  Name and address of the developer. 
(8)  Name and address of the technical author. 
(9)  A list of the area in square feet for each individual lot. 
(b)  Prior to submission of the preliminary plat, applicants are encouraged to prepare sketched plans and discuss them with the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-33. - Filing; scale; contents. 
    Six copies of the preliminary plat of a subdivision, at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch, showing the following shall be submitted with the application referred to in section 74-32: 
(1)  Proposed title. 
(2)  Date, scale and cardinal point. 
(3)  The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract to be subdivided. 
(4)  The proposed division of the land, drawn to scale, in sufficient detail on a topographic map to enable a determination of whether the proposed subdivision meets the requirements set forth in this chapter and other related ordinances. 
(5)  The location, widths and names of any existing streets which may affect the location of a proposed street, and the location of any existing easements and their purpose. 
(6)  The location of all proposed drains, drainage ditches, ravines, culverts, changes in grade, and other natural or artificial drainage facilities or improvements, including, without limitation, a drainage plan showing the general flow of surface water from each lot within the plat to any adjacent lot or to an approved drainage course. 
(7)  Any floodplain affecting the proposed subdivision shall be shown. 
(8)  The location of all proposed easements and their purpose. 
(9)  The location, widths and names of proposed streets, parks, lots and walkways in the area proposed to be subdivided and which are proposed to be dedicated for public or private use. 
(10)  When only a portion of a tract owned by the proprietor is proposed to be subdivided, a general layout of the remaining area shall be shown, if such proposed future layout has been determined by the proprietor, at the time of the submission of the application and preliminary plat. 
(11)  A location map, at a scale of no greater than 400 feet to the inch, showing sufficient detail to enable the relating of the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-34. - Preliminary plat; tentative approval-Procedures. 
(a)  Upon a determination that the required information has been submitted, the proposed plat shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission. The planning commission shall also refer the plat to the city engineer. 
(b)  The planning commission and the city engineer shall review the proposed plat. If all requirements of this chapter and other ordinances have been met, the planning commission and the city engineer shall recommend tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the city commission. 
(c)  The planning commission and the city engineer shall give their recommendation to the city commission not more than 60 days after submission of the preliminary plat or not more than 45 days after submission of the preliminary plat if a preapplication review meeting was conducted under section 74-31.1. These time periods may be extended with the consent of the applicant. 
(d)  Following the review and recommendation of the planning commission and city engineer, the city commission shall review the preliminary plat and shall tentatively approve, approve with conditions, or reject said plat. If the preliminary plat meets all requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, the city commission shall tentatively approve the preliminary plat or tentatively approve it subject to conditions and shall record its tentative approval (and conditions, if any) on the plat and return one copy of the proprietor. If the preliminary plat does not meet all requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, the city commission shall reject the preliminary plat and shall set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and if approval is possible, the requirements for tentative approval. The city commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or reject the preliminary plat, within the following time period, as applicable: 
(1)  Within 60 days after it was submitted to the city clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was conducted under section 74-31.1 
(2)  Within 90 days after it was submitted to the city clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was not conducted under section 74-31.1. 
The review periods set forth above may be extended with the consent of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-35. - Same-Effect. 
    Tentative approval of a preliminary plat by the city commission under section 74-34 shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of one year from the date of approval, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation, street layout, and application of the then-current subdivision regulations. Tentative approval of a preliminary plat may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city commission in writing. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-36. - Requirements following tentative approval. 
    The proprietor, following tentative approval of a preliminary plat from the city commission, shall: 
(1)  Submit copies of a preliminary plat to each officer or agency entitled to receive those copies under sections 113 to 118 of the Land Division Act for their simultaneous review and action with the 30-day time period prescribed by sections 113 to 118. 
(2)  Submit a list to the city clerk of all authorities required by sections 113 through 119 of the Land Division Act to review the preliminary plat, certifying that the list shows all authorities as required by sections 113 to 119. 
(3)  Submit all written approvals to the city clerk. 
(4)  Following a determination that all required approvals have been secured, the clerk shall forward the approved copies of the preliminary plat together with all communications from the reviewing agencies to the planning commission not less than seven days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-37. - Planning commission review of preliminary plat; final approval. 
    The planning commission and the city engineer shall review the preliminary plat and comments of the appropriate authorities and shall make a recommendation to the city commission as to final approval or rejection of the preliminary plat, including reasons for its recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-38. - City commission review of preliminary plat; final approval. 
    The city commission, upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission and the city engineer, shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Consider and review the preliminary plat at its next meeting, or within 20 days from the date of submission, and give final approval of the preliminary plat if the proprietor has met all conditions laid down by the city for approval of the preliminary plat under this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
(2)  Instruct the city clerk to promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing, and if rejected to give the reasons. 
(3)  Instruct the city clerk to note all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting which minutes shall be open for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-39. - Approval not considered final acceptance of plat or approval of future layout. 
    Tentative or final approval of a preliminary plat shall not be considered as final acceptance of a subdivision plat, nor shall it imply approval of any future layout shown on the plat pursuant to subsection 74-33(10). 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-40. - Rights conferred by approval. 
    Final approval of a preliminary plat of a subdivision by the city commission under section 74-38 shall confer upon the proprietor, for a period of two years from the date of approval, the conditional right that the general conditions and terms under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended, if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city commission in writing. Written notice of any such extension shall be sent by the city to the other approving authorities. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Secs. 74-41-74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINAL PLATS 

Sec. 74-61. - Required; filing. 
    One true copy of the final plat of a subdivision shall be prepared and filed with the city clerk for submission to the city commission and with each of the officers and agencies described in section 161(2) of the Land Division Act for their simultaneous review and action within the time periods prescribed in sections 163 to 167a of the Land Division Act and any other statutory requirements. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-62. - Filing and recording fee; payment of costs incurred by city. 
    When the final plat is submitted to the city clerk, the proprietor shall deposit the filing and recording fee, as required by section 241 of the Land Division Act, and, in addition thereto, shall pay to the city clerk all costs incurred by the city during the construction of the plat. These costs shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Inspection charges by the county road commission; 
(2)  Inspection charges by the City of Grand Rapids, including testing and chlorinating; and 
(3)  Any other costs that shall be incurred by the city during the construction of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-63. - To be accompanied by evidence of title. 
    The proprietor submitting a final subdivision plat for approval shall furnish to the city commission an abstract of title, certified to the date of the proprietor's certificate, to establish recorded ownership interest, and any other information deemed necessary to ascertain whether the proper parties have signed the plat. In lieu of an abstract, a policy of title insurance currently in force covering all of the land included within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision may be furnished. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-64. - Approval or disapproval. 
(a)  At its next regular meeting following the filing of a final subdivision plat in accordance with this article, or at a meeting called within 20 days after the date of receiving the plat under section 161(2)(c) of the Land Division Act, the city commission shall do one of the following: 
(1)  Approve the plat, if it conforms to all of the provisions of the Land Division Act and this chapter, and instruct the city clerk to notify the proprietor of the city commission's approval and certify the commission's approval, showing the date thereof, the approval of the health department, when required, and the date thereof, as shown on the approved preliminary plat; or 
(2)  Reject the plat and instruct the city clerk to give the reasons in writing as set forth in the minutes of the meeting and return the plat to the proprietor. 
(b)  The city commission shall instruct the city clerk to record all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which minutes shall be open for public inspection, and to send a copy of the minutes to the county plat board. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-65. - Consistency with approved drainage plan required. 
(a)  A building permit required by the City Code for the excavation, construction, erection, conversion or repair of any land, building or structure proposed for a lot within a subdivision for which a final subdivision plat has been approved shall not be issued until a permit applicant accompanied by a site plan has been submitted showing that the effect of the proposed work is substantially consistent with the drainage plan approved for the final plat regarding the flow of surface water from the lot to any adjacent lot or to an approved drainage course. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy required by the City Code for the use or occupancy of any building or structure on a lot shall not be issued unless the building official determines that the work completed on the lot pursuant to a building permit issued by the city is substantially consistent with the drainage plan approved for the final plat regarding the flow of surface water from the lot to any adjacent lot or to an approved drainage course. 
(c)  The requirements of subsections (a) and (b) shall be clearly and legibly reproduced verbatim in the plat restrictions for the subdivision recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds. A copy of the plat restrictions shall also be filed with the building official. If there are no plat restrictions for the subdivision, the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) shall be clearly and legibly reproduced verbatim on all final plat maps. 
(d)  No work shall be conducted on a lot except in compliance with the drainage plan approved for the subdivision, and conditions on the lot after completion of the work shall be maintained at all times in compliance with the approved plan. 
(e)  This section applies only to platted lots within subdivisions for which a drainage plan has been approved for the final plat as provided by this chapter. Any platted lot within a subdivision for which a drainage plan has not previously been approved under this chapter is subject to the drainage requirements in chapters 18 and 67 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 13-612, § 3, 2-11-13 ) 
Secs. 74-66-74-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 74-86. - Streets generally. 
    The following provisions shall be complied with in relation to streets in subdivisions: 
(1)  Major streets. Major streets shall conform to the master street plan. 
(2)  Relation to adjoining street system. Provisions shall be made for the continuation and extension of principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, unless a variation therefrom is approved by the planning commission and the city commission. 
(3)  Access to property. To ensure adequate means for fire protection, every subdivision shall have a dedicated street right-of-way. 
(4)  Street intersections. Streets shall intersect one another at right angles or as nearly at right angles as conditions permit. Street jogs with offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. Wherever more than two streets would coverage at one point, an appropriate design solution must be presented for approval by the city engineer and the planning commission. 
(5)  Culs-de-sac or dead-end streets. Every permanent dead-end street shall have a circular terminal area with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet. Such dead-end streets shall not be approved if they exceed 800 feet in length; provided that this length may be exceeded or extended by the planning commission and the city commission in order to prevent waste of land. 
(6)  Streets in relation to railroads. Whenever a subdivision is adjacent to or contains a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street which is approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, so as to restrict the number of grade crossings. 
(7)  Street widths. All local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 66 feet. The width for major streets shall conform to the width designated by the major street plan, provided that the developer shall only be required to dedicate at his expense not more than 100 feet in width of right-of-way unless the connecting street is of greater width, in which case he shall be required to provide the greater width. 
(8)  Street grades. Profiles may be required on all streets at the discretion of the city engineer. The minimum grade shall be four-tenths of one percent for concrete surfaces and five-tenths of one percent for all other surfaces. The maximum grade shall be six percent on major streets and seven percent on local streets, provided that these grades may be exceeded to meet special conditions subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(9)  Substandard rights-of-way. Wherever there exists, adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a dedicated or platted substandard street right-of-way, additional width shall be platted to bring the street right-of-way up to the standards established in the major street plan, provided that the developer shall not be required to dedicate at his expense more than 50 feet to meet the standards established in the major street plan. 
(10)  Plans. Plans shall be submitted for grading, drainage and construction, which plans shall have been prepared and sealed by a civil engineer registered in the state. 
(11)  Bridges and culverts. Bridges and culverts shall be provided or provision therefor made where necessary. 
(12)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed in subdivisions as required by the city. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards and specifications adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-87. - Street and subdivision names. 
    All proposed streets in subdivisions which, if extended in either direction, would align or nearly align with another street already existing and named must bear the same name. Duplication of proposed subdivision and street names with those already existing in the county will not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-88. - Marginal access streets. 
    Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets adjacent to such major streets where proposed lots front on such major streets. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-89. - Residential blocks. 
    Residential blocks in subdivisions shall be no more than 1,320 feet long, nor less than 200 feet in width, unless review of physical conditions by the planning commission indicates such restrictions to be unfeasible. Where blocks are more than 800 feet long, a ten-foot pedestrian sidewalk easement may be required by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-90. - Lots. 
    The following provisions shall be complied with in relation to lots in subdivisions: 
(1)  Size of lots. Lots shall conform in width and area to the zoning ordinance, included as chapter 94 of this Code, as amended. 
(2)  Through lots. Through lots (also referred to as "double frontage lots"), meaning lots, other than corner lots, with frontage on more than one street as depicted in figure 1 under the definition of "lot types" in section 94-5 of this Code, shall be prohibited in the A, A-2, SA, S, AA, ARM, ARM district one, RPUD-1 and RPUD-2 zoning districts (and for lots used for residential purposes in the MPUD zoning district), except as provided by section 94-354 of this Code. 
(3)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines, where practicable, shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the right-of-way lines of the street on which the lot abuts. 
(4)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient size to permit compliance with the setback requirements of the zoning ordinance on both rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-90.1. - Street trees. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to preserve and enhance the quality of life of city residents through the creation of landscaped parkways, boulevards and curbside environmentals. Street trees provide several benefits to the community at large, including: 
(1)  Reducing noise, heat and air pollution; 
(2)  Creating a buffered space for pedestrians and bicycle riders; 
(3)  Improving the appearance of property within or abutting public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Increasing or preserving the value of nearby property; 
(5)  Preventing soil erosion and depletion; 
(6)  Promoting stormwater retention and absorption; 
(7)  Improving the appearance of the community. 
(b)  General requirements. 
(1)  Following final plat approval of any subdivision (or part thereof) for single-family residential development and before the issuance of any building permits, the developer shall pay a fee established by resolution of the city commission for each street tree within the subdivision required by subsection (b)(2) below. The fee shall cover the costs of the city for the purchase and planting of street trees within the subdivision, the maintenance and replacement of said street trees for at least one year after planting, and related administrative costs. 
(2)  Street trees shall be planted within or along the right-of-way of any public street within any subdivision (or part thereof) for single-family residential development. One street tree per approved platted lot shall be planted except that corner lots and through lots, as defined by the section 94-5 of the City Code, require the planting of two trees. The city will be responsible for purchasing and planting the street trees at an appropriate time based on seasonal conditions and for replacing trees within one year after planting. 
(c)  Specifications. 
(1)  At the time of installation, all street trees shall be of a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches measured at chest height. 
(2)  No street trees, other than those with a mature height of less than 25 feet, shall be planted within ten feet of any overhead utility wire. 
(3)  No street tree shall be planted over or within five lateral feet of any underground water, sewer, storm sewer or electrical lines (excluding telephone, cable television and individual service lines). 
(4)  No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to a fire hydrant, utility pole or street light. 
(5)  No street tree shall be planted within 15 feet of a street intersection. 
(6)  The final placement of street trees shall be determined by the city based on the criteria in this subsection. 
(d)  Maintenance. The owner of the abutting platted lot is responsible for the ongoing maintenance of the street tree after planting. In addition to regular tree maintenance (e.g., fertilizing, watering, staking, etc.) to be performed by the abutting lot owner, the city department of public works may prune or remove street trees that impair street visibility, snow removal, utility lines, pedestrian movements or otherwise negatively affect the public health, safety and welfare. The city department of public works will notify lot or unit owners at least 24 hours in advance of street tree pruning or removal. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-91. - Required improvements and costs thereof. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of any subdivision to provide for the installation and construction of such improvements as are required, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, sanitary sewer, and public water. All improvements shall be subject to the design standards and specifications as prepared by the city engineer and adopted by the city commission. 
(b)  Improvement costs on major streets in excess of those for normal local street improvements shall be borne by the city at large. 
(c)  Sanitary sewers shall be required where a connection is available within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the proposed subdivision. Where such a connection is not available, the proprietor shall have the following options: 
(1)  Install sanitary sewers and pay the entire cost; or 
(2)  Develop the land for septic tank use. This option shall be available only when approved by the health department. 
(d)  Public water service shall be required where a connection is available within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. Where such a connection is not available, the proprietor shall have the following options: 
(1)  Install a public water system and pay the entire cost; 
(2)  Install a private water system; or 
(3)  Develop the subdivision with water to be supplied by private wells. 
(e)  The city may require a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, or surety bond acceptable to the city commission, covering the estimated cost of construction to ensure the faithful performance of the agreement. The proprietor shall receive, in the form of a rebate, as the work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Secs. 74-92-74-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DIVISION OF PLATTED LOTS 

Sec. 74-111. - Authority. 
    The partitioning or dividing of a single platted lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat within the city is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-112. - Application. 
    Before division of a platted lot or parcel is made, written application therefor shall be made to the city assessor as follows: 
(1)  The application shall be signed by all parties in interest showing the legal description of the parcels resulting from the requested real estate division. 
(2)  Two plot plans shall be submitted showing dimensions of the parcels resulting from the proposed division. The city assessor shall have authority to require that the plot plan be prepared by a registered land surveyor whenever in the judgment of the city assessor the proposed courses and measurements may be difficult to verify and ascertain. 
(3)  The application shall be accompanied by a certificate from the city treasurer showing that a fee of $5.00 has been paid for each of the parcels resulting from the division and certifying as to the tax status of the property proposed to be divided. 
(4)  An opinion of title signed by an attorney at law or a policy of title insurance of current date evidencing that the persons signing the application for division represent all parties interested in the real estate proposed to be divided shall be furnished. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-113. - Compliance with state act required; limitation on number of parcels. 
    No division of a platted lot or parcel shall be permitted in violation of the Land Division Act or which results in more than four resultant parcels. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-114. - Access to public street or right-of-way required. 
    No division of a platted lot or parcel shall be made which creates a parcel of land not having reasonable access to a public street or dedicated right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-115. - Payment of property taxes required. 
    No division of a platted lot or parcel shall be permitted while there remain due and unpaid real estate taxes with respect thereto. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-116. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
(a)  Required. Upon submission of a proper application, the city assessor may, in accordance with the provisions of this article, permit division of a platted lot or parcel into two, three or four parts, when the resulting parcels each satisfy the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning ordinance, included as chapter 94 of this Code. 
(b)  Exception by board of zoning appeals. If division of a single platted lot or outlot would result in parcels which do not meet the minimum requirements for a lot under the zoning ordinance of the city, the board of zoning appeals, after a report and recommendation from the city planning commission, may approve such division upon making a finding that: 
(1)  There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship; and 
(2)  Either the proposed division would allow the development of the land in such a manner as to be compatible with the spirit and purpose of the zoning chapter or the property is presently developed and the proposed division creates parcels conforming to existing development and use. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Sec. 74-117. - Approval to be noted upon application. 
    When division of a platted lot or parcel has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this article, such approval shall be noted upon the application filed with the city assessor. 
(Ord. No. 05-536, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Chapter 75 - LAND DIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 75-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the Land Division Ordinance of the City of Walker, Chapter 75 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the provisions of the Michigan Land Division Act (1967 PA 288, as amended, formerly known as the Subdivision Control Act) (the "Land Division Act"), to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with this chapter, chapter 94 of the City Code and all other provisions of the City Code, and the Land Division Act, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain orderly development of the city, and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the city by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  Any words or terms used in this chapter which are not defined in this section or other provisions of this chapter shall be defined according to its common or standard definition, except that those terms defined in the Land Division Act shall have the same meaning in this chapter. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter certain terms and words used shall have the following meanings: 
    Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
    Assessor means the city assessor and includes other persons designated by the city commission to carry out the enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
    Divided or division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or for building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of Sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act. 
    Exempt split or exempt division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor, or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Secs. 75-4-75-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR LAND DIVISIONS 

Sec. 75-20. - Prior approval requirement for land divisions. 
(a)  Land in the city shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the assessor in accordance with this chapter and the Land Division Act. 
(b)  The following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
(1)  A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to chapter 74 of the City Code and the Land Division Act. 
(2)  The partitioning or dividing of a platted lot, outlet, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat in accordance with article V of chapter 74 of the City Code. 
(3)  An exempt split as defined in this chapter and as provided in the Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-21. - Application for land divisions. 
    An applicant shall file all of the following with the assessor for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development: 
(a)  A completed application form, on the form provided by the city. 
(b)  Identity of the person who has fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided. 
(c)  An adequate and accurate legal description of each proposed parcel resulting from the division. 
(d)  A survey map, as follows: 
(1)  A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared pursuant to the survey map requirements of Act No. 132 of 1970, as amended, (MCL 54.211 et seq.) by a registered engineer or a land surveyor licensed by the State of Michigan, and drawn to scale which shall be not less than one inch equals 40 feet for parcels under three acres and not less than one inch equals 100 feet for parcels of three acres or more. The survey map shall contain the legal descriptions of the existing parcel and the parcels proposed to be created by the division(s) and shall show the area, dimensions, parcel lines, public utility easements, the location of all existing structures and other land improvements, and the accessibility of each proposed parcel. 
(2)  If the assessor finds that there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances and that a map other than a survey map as required by subsection (1) otherwise complies with all requirements of the Land Division Act and this chapter, the assessor may, in his discretion, permit the applicant to file such other map. An adequate and accurate legal description of all the proposed parcels, however, shall at all times be required. 
(e)  Proof that all standards and requirements of the Land Division Act and this chapter have been met. 
(f)  The history and specifications of any previous divisions of land of which the proposed division was a part. The history and specification must be sufficient to establish that the parcel to be divided was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997, the effective date of the Land Division Act. 
(g)  Proof that all due and payable taxes or installments of special assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided are paid in full. 
(h)  If transfer of division rights are proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer. 
(i)  An application fee, as may be established and modified from time to time by resolution of the city commission for land division reviews pursuant to this chapter to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this chapter and the Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-22. - Review of applications for land divisions. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete land division application, the assessor shall, within 45 days, approve, approve with reasonable conditions to assure compliance with applicable ordinances and the protection of public health, safety and general welfare, or disapprove the land division, and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decisions and the reasons for any denial. If the application and other submitted information does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and the Land Division Act, the assessor shall return the application to the applicant for completion and refiling in accordance with this chapter and the Land Division Act. 
(b)  Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the assessor may, within 30 days of the decision, apply to the board of zoning appeals for a variance as provided in chapter 94 of the City Code. 
(c)  A decision approving a land division is effective for 90 days, after which it shall be considered revoked unless within such period a document is recorded with the county register of deeds office and filed with the assessor accomplishing the approved land division or transfer. 
(d)  The assessor shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers. 
(e)  Approval of a land division does not grant approval for the use of any resulting parcel. Any resulting parcel must comply with chapter 94 of the City Code and all other applicable ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-23. - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
    A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(a)  Except as provided in section 75-24, all the parcels to be created by the proposed land division fully comply with the requirements of chapter 94 of the City Code, including, but not limited to, minimum lot width, minimum street frontage, minimum lot area, and minimum set-backs for existing building or structures. 
(b)  The proposed land division complies with all requirements of the Land Division Act and this chapter. 
(c)  All parcels created by the land division (except parcels larger than ten acres) shall have a ratio of depth to width of not more than four to one. The depth of a parcel created by the land division shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting right-of-way to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of commencement of the measurement, excluding access roads, easements or nonbuildable parcels created under section 75-24, and other parcels within that tract of land. The width of a parcel created by the land division shall be measured as provided in subsection 94-188(b)(15) of the City Code. For corner lots, the width shall be measured along the shorter of the two lot lines abutting the street right-of-way line. Upon application to the board of zoning appeals, the board may permit a depth to width ratio of greater than four to one if the board finds that the following standards are met: 
(i)  Exceptional topographic or physical conditions on the land or the dimensions or layout of the parent parcel make compliance impractical. 
(ii)  The greater depth to width ratio will be compatible with and not adversely affect surrounding lands. 
(iii)  The need for the greater depth to width ratio is not self-created. 
(iv)  The greater depth to width ratio for the particular parcel will not materially impair the intent and purpose of this article. 
(v)  The proposed parcel otherwise complies with all applicable city ordinances and federal, state, and county laws, rules and regulations. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall consider the application and conduct a hearing on the application in the same manner as a variance application pursuant to chapter 94 of the City Code. The board of zoning appeals may impose reasonable conditions or a greater depth to width ratio approved by the board including, but not limited to, a condition that the applicant preserve in an undeveloped state that portion of the parcel exceeding the depth to width ratio of four to one. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 97-505, § 1, 11-24-9; Ord. No. 06-542, § 1, 2-13-067) 
Sec. 75-24. - Other land divisions; appeals and variances. 
    The assessor may approve a proposed land division which does not fully comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter, or chapter 94 of the City Code where the applicant executes and records an affidavit or deed restriction with the county register of deeds, in a form acceptable to the city, designating the parcel as "not buildable". Any such parcel shall not be granted a variance or other relief from the applicable lot, area or other requirements. The parcel shall not be developed with any building or structure exceeding four feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-25. - Transfer of division rights; notices. 
    A proprietor transferring the right to make a division under the Land Division Act shall, within 45 days, give written notice of the transfer to the Assessor as required by Section 109(2) of the Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Secs. 75-26-75-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 75-30. - Noncompliance. 
    Any parcel created in noncompliance with this chapter shall not be eligible for any building permits or other plan approvals, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the assessment roll. In addition, violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to other penalties and enforcement actions stated in this section and as may otherwise be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-31. - Penalties. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), a person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as provided in section 1-11(2) of this Code. 
(b)  Misdemeanor violations. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person who makes a knowing false statement, representation, or certification in an application, report, record, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or other state or federal law. A misdemeanor is punishable upon conviction by a fine of not to exceed $500.00 (plus other costs), imprisonment for a term of not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  Nuisance. The creation of a division of land in violation of this chapter is hereby determined to be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents, property owners, and other persons within the city, and is deemed a public nuisance. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a basis for injunctive relief against the violator to restrain and prohibit the violator from continuing the violation, in addition to any other relief or penalty provided by this chapter or allowed by law. 
(d)  Continuing offenses. Each day on which a violation of this chapter continues, constitutes a separate or repeat offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate or repeat offense. 
(e)  Parties liable. Any person who violates any of the provisions contained in this chapter, whether as owner, lessee, permittee, licensee, agent, servant, employee or in any other capacity shall be liable as a principal. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 75-32. - Enforcement. 
    The assessor is hereby authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-497, § 1, 8-25-97) 
Secs. 75-33-75-40. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General taxation, ch. X. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; special assessments, ch. 66; payment of propery taxes required prior to division of land, § 74-115. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Payment of city, school taxes, and other taxes; collection fee (property tax administration fee). 
    The payment of city taxes on the city tax roll due on July 1 in the fiscal year when levied, the payment of any school taxes due on such date, and the payment of any other taxes due on such date, may be made during normal business hours on or before September 14 with a one percent collection fee (property tax administration fee) to be collected by the treasurer. The treasurer shall collect on all such taxes paid after September 14: 
(1)  A collection fee (property tax administration fee) to the same extent imposed on taxes paid on or before September 14; 
(2)  An additional four percent collection fee (property tax administration fee), except that for taxes paid after September 14 and on or before September 30, the additional collection fee (property tax administration fee) pursuant to this subsection (2) shall be one percent; and 
(3)  An additional charge of one percent per month to be added on October 1 and the first day of each month thereafter that such taxes remain unpaid until return is made to the county treasurer by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1976, § 19-1; Ord. No. 92-415, § 1, 12-22-92; Ord. No. 95-465, § 1, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 05-532, § 1, 6-27-05) 
Charter reference- Specific authority to fix collection fee, § 10.17. 
Sec. 78-2. - Payment of county, school, and other taxes; property tax administration fee and late penalty charge prescribed. 
    The payment of county taxes, the payment of any school taxes, and the payment of any other taxes due on December 1 of the fiscal year when levied may be made during normal business hours at the office of the city treasurer on or before February 14 with a one percent property tax administration fee to be collected by the treasurer. On all such taxes paid on or after February 15, the treasurer shall collect a property tax administration fee to the same extent imposed on taxes paid before February 15 and a three percent late penalty charge; provided, however, that if the statements for such taxes shall not have been mailed before December 31, the treasurer shall not collect a late penalty charge on taxes paid on or after February 15. Property tax administration fees and late penalty charges shall be collectible in the same manner as taxes, assessments and charges to which they are added. 
(Code 1976, § 19-2; Ord. No. 05-532, § 2, 6-27-05) 
Charter reference- State, county and school taxes, § 10.18. 
Sec. 78-3. - Payment of fees and charges into general fund. 
    All fees and charges provided for in this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the city, except as otherwise required by law. 
(Code 1976, § 19-3) 
Charter reference- Provision required, § 10.17. 
Sec. 78-4. - Delinquent personal property taxes. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, the city shall not enter into any contract with, or grant any permits or approvals of whatever nature to, any person or entity owning delinquent personal property taxes to the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-493, § 1, 2-24-97) 
Secs. 78-5-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY INCOME TAX 

Sec. 78-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Uniform City Income Tax Ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1) 
Sec. 78-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the official designated by the city to administer this article or the duly authorized agent or representative of that official. 
    Business means an enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted or ordinarily conducted for profit or gain by any person, including the operation of an unrelated business by a charitable, religious or educational organization. 
    Capital gains and capital losses mean those terms as defined for federal income tax purposes. 
    City means the City of Walker, Michigan. 
    Compensation means salary, pay or emolument given as compensation or wages for work done or services rendered, in cash or in kind, and includes but is not limited to the following: salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, fees, tips, incentive payments, severance pay, vacation pay and sick pay. 
    Corporation means a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the United States, this state, or any other state, territory, or foreign country or dependency. 
    Doing business means the conduct of any activity with the object of gain or benefit, except that it does not include: 
(1)  The solicitation of orders by a person or his representative in the city for sales of tangible personal property, which orders are sent outside the city for approval or rejection and, if approved, are filled by shipment or delivery from a point outside the city. 
(2)  The solicitation of orders by a person or his representative in the city in the name or for the benefit of a prospective customer of a person, if orders by the customer to such person to enable the customer to fill orders resulting from the solicitation are orders described in subsection (1). 
(3)  The mere storage of personal property in the city in a warehouse neither owned nor leased by the taxpayer. 
    Employee means a person from whom an employer is required to withhold for either federal income or federal social security taxes. 
    Employer means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, nonprofit organization, governmental body or unit or agency including the state, or any other entity whether or not taxable under this article, that employs one or more persons on a salary, bonus, wage, commission or other basis, whether or not the employer is in a business. 
    Federal Internal Revenue Code means the internal revenue code of the United States in effect on the last day of the taxpayer's tax year. 
    Financial institution means a bank, industrial bank, trust company, building and loan or savings and loan association, credit union, safety and collateral deposit company, regulated investment company as defined in section 851 and the following sections of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, under whatever authority organized, and any other association, joint stock company or corporation at least 90 percent of whose assets consist of intangible personal property and at least 90 percent of whose gross income consists of dividends or interest or other charges resulting from the use of money or credit. 
    Fiscal year means an accounting period of 12 months ending on any day other than December 31. Only fiscal years accepted by the internal revenue service for federal income tax purposes may be used for city tax purposes. 
    Net profits means the net gain from the operation of a business, profession or enterprise, after provision for all costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined on either a cash or accrual method, on the same basis as provided for in the Federal Internal Revenue Code for federal income tax purposes, excluding items exempted under this article, but without deduction of federal and city taxes based on income and without deduction of net operating loss carryover or capital loss carryover sustained prior to the effective date of this tax, except that net operating losses and capital losses sustained after the effective date of this tax may be carried over to the same extent and on the same basis as under the Federal Internal Revenue Code but shall not be carried back to prior years. 
    Nonresident means an individual domiciled outside the city. 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, fiduciary, association, corporation or other entity. When used in any provision imposing a criminal penalty, person as applied to an association means the parties or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, the officers thereof. 
    Predominant place of employment means that city imposing a tax under a uniform city income tax ordinance other than the city of residence, in which the employee estimates he will earn the greatest percentage of his compensation from the employer, which percentage is 25 percent or more. 
    Resident means an individual domiciled in the city; "domicile" means a home and principal establishment to which, whenever absent therefrom, he intends to return, and domicile continues until another permanent establishment is established. If an individual, during the taxable year, being a resident becomes a nonresident or vice versa, taxable income shall be determined separately for income in each status. 
    Taxable year means the calendar year, or the fiscal year, used as the basis on which net profits and other income subject to tax under this article are to be computed, and, in the case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which the return is required to be made. 
    Taxpayer means a person required under this article to file a return or to pay a tax. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-3-6-9; Ord. No. 97-495, §§ 1, 2, 6-9-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-33. - Excise tax on incomes. 
(a)  Rates. Subject to the exclusions, adjustments exemptions and deductions provided in this article, an annual tax of one percent on corporations and resident individuals and of one-half of one percent on nonresident individuals for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed as an excise on income earned and received on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Application to resident individuals. The tax imposed by this section shall apply on the following types of income of a resident individual to the same extent and on the same basis that the income is subject to taxation under the Federal Internal Revenue Code: 
(1)  On a salary, bonus, wage, commission and other compensation. 
(2)  On a distributive share of the net profits of a resident owner of an unincorporated business, profession, enterprise, undertaking or other activity, as a result of work done, services rendered and other business activities wherever conducted. 
(3)  On dividends, interest, capital gains less capital losses, income from estates and trusts and net profits from rentals of real and tangible personal property. 
(4)  On other income of a resident individual. 
(c)  Application to nonresident individuals. The tax imposed by this section shall apply on the following types of income of a nonresident individual to the same extent and on the same basis that the income is subject to taxation under the Federal Internal Revenue Code: 
(1)  On a salary, bonus, wage, commission and other compensation for services rendered as an employee for work done or services performed in the city. Income that the nonresident taxpayer receives as the result of disability and after exhausting all vacation pay, holiday pay, and sick pay is not compensation for services rendered as an employee for work done or services performed in the city. Vacation pay, holiday pay, sick pay and a bonus paid by the employer are considered to have the same tax situs as the work assignment or work location and are taxable on the same ratio as the normal earnings of the employee for work actually done or services actually performed. 
(2)  On a distributive share of the net profits of a nonresident owner of an unincorporated business, profession, enterprise, undertaking or other activity, as a result of work done, services rendered and other business activities conducted in the city. 
(3)  On capital gains less capital losses from sales of, and on the net profits from rentals of, real and tangible personal property, if the capital gains arise from property located in the city. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-10-6-12) 
Sec. 78-34. - Taxable net profits of corporation. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall apply on the taxable net profits of a corporation doing business in the city, being levied on such part of the taxable net profits as is earned by the corporation as a result of work done, services rendered and other business activities conducted in the city, as determined in accordance with this article. "Taxable net profits" of a corporation means federal taxable income as defined in section 63 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code but taking into consideration all exclusions and adjustments provided in this article. No deduction shall be allowed for: 
(1)  Net operating losses and net capital losses sustained prior to the effective date of the tax. 
(2)  The city income tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  A corporation may deduct income, war profits and excess profits taxes imposed by a foreign country or possession of the United States, allocable to income included in taxable net income, any part of which would be allowable as a deduction in determining federal taxable income under the applicable provisions of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 78-35. - Unincorporated business, profession; sole proprietorship, partnership. 
    An unincorporated business, profession or other activity conducted by one or more persons subject to the tax under this article as either a sole proprietorship or partnership shall not be taxable as such. The persons carrying on the unincorporated business, profession or other activity are liable for income tax only in their separate and individual capacities and on the following bases: 
(1)  A resident proprietor or partner is taxable upon his entire distributive share of the net profits of the activity, regardless of where the activity is conducted. 
(2)  A nonresident proprietor or partner is taxable only upon his distributive share of the portion of the net profits of the activity which is attributable to the city under the allocation methods provided in this article. 
(3)  In the hands of a proprietor or partner of an unincorporated activity, the character of any item of income taxable under this article is determined as if such item were realized by the individual proprietor or partner directly from the source from which it is realized by the unincorporated activity. In computing his taxable income for a taxable year, a person who is required to file a return shall include therein his taxable distributive share of the net profits for any partnership year ending within or with his taxable year. 
(Code 1976, § 6-14) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 78-36. - Unincorporated business, profession, or activity-Filing of annual information return required. 
    An unincorporated business, profession or other activity owned by two or more persons shall file an annual information return setting forth: 
(1)  The entire net profit for the period covered by the return and the taxable portion of the net profit attributable to the city. 
(2)  The names and addresses of the owners of the unincorporated activity and each owner's taxable distributive share of the total net profit and each nonresident owner's share of the taxable net profit attributable to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-15) 
Sec. 78-37. - Same-Election to pay tax. 
(a)  At the election of an unincorporated business, profession or other activity, the entity, on behalf of the owners, may compute and pay the tax due with respect to each owner's share of the net profit of the activity after giving effect to exemptions to which each owner is entitled. This election is available to all unincorporated business entities having two or more owners, regardless of the residence of the owners. The tax thus paid by the entity shall constitute all taxes due with respect to each owner's distributive share of the net profits of the unincorporated business, profession or other activity. 
(b)  If the unincorporated business, profession or other activity elects under this section to file a return and pay the tax on behalf of its owners, the election and filing are deemed to meet the requirements of this article for the filing of a return for each owner who has no other income subject to the tax. However, a return is required from any such owner having taxable income other than his distributive share of the net profits of the entity. In such case the entire income subject to the tax shall be included in return and credit taken thereon for the tax paid in his behalf by the unincorporated activity. 
(c)  If the unincorporated business, profession or other activity elects to pay the tax on behalf of the owners, then the unincorporated business, profession or other activity assumes the status of a taxpayer and is liable to interest and penalty if payment is not made by the due date, in accordance with the calendar or fiscal year used by the unincorporated business, profession or other activity. 
(Code 1976, § 6-16) 
Sec. 78-38. - Partial business activity in city, apportionment of net profit. 
    When the entire net profit of a business subject to the tax imposed by this article is not derived from business activities exclusively within the city, the portion of the entire net profit earned as a result of work done, services rendered or other business activity conducted in the city shall be determined under either subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
(1)  Separate accounting method. The taxpayer may petition for and the administrator may grant approval of, or the administrator may require, the separate accounting method. If such method is petitioned for, the administrator may require a statement explaining the manner in which the apportionment will be made, in sufficient detail to determine whether the net profits attributable to the city will be apportioned with reasonable accuracy. 
(2)  Business allocation percentage method. The business allocation percentage method shall be used if such taxpayer is not granted approval to use the separate accounting method of allocation. The entire net profits of such taxpayer earned as a result of work done, services rendered or other business activity conducted in the city shall be ascertained by determining the total in-city percentages of property, payroll and sales. In-city percentages of property, payrolls and sales, separately computed, shall be determined in accordance with this subsection. 
a.  Percentage of average net book value; gross rental value of real property. First, the taxpayer shall ascertain the percentage which the average net book value of the tangible personal property owned and the real property, including leasehold improvements, owned or used by it in the business and situated within the city during the taxable period is of the average net book value of all of such property, including leasehold improvements, owned or used by the taxpayer in the business during the same period, wherever situated. Real property shall include real property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be deemed to be eight times the annual gross rental thereon. "Gross rental of real property" means the actual sum of money or other consideration payable, directly or indirectly, by the taxpayer for the use or possession of real property, and includes but is not limited to: 
1.  An amount payable for the use or possession of real property or any part thereof, whether designated as a fixed sum of money or as a percentage of sales, profits or otherwise. 
2.  An amount payable as additional rent or in lieu of rent such as interest, taxes, insurance, repairs or other amount required to be paid by the terms of a lease or other arrangement. 
b.  Percentage of compensation paid employees. Second, the taxpayer shall ascertain the percentage which the total compensation paid to employees for work done or for services performed within the city is of the total compensation paid to all the taxpayer's employees within and without the city during the period covered by the return. For allocation purposes, compensation shall be computed on the cash or accrual basis in accordance with the method used in computing the entire net income of the taxpayer. If an employee performs services within and without the city, the following examples are not all inclusive, but may serve as a guide for determining the amount to be treated as compensation for services performed within the city: 
1.  In the case of an employee compensated on a time basis, the proportion of the total amount received by him which his working time within the city is of his total working time. 
2.  In the case of an employee compensated directly on the volume of business secured by him, such as a salesman on a commission basis, the amount received by him for business attributable to his efforts in the city. 
3.  In the case of an employee compensated on other results achieved, the proportion of all total compensation received which the value of his services within the city bears to the value of all his services. 
c.  Percentage of gross revenue. Third, the taxpayer shall ascertain the percentage which the gross revenue of the taxpayer derived from sales made and services rendered in the city is of the total gross revenue from sales and services wherever made or rendered during the period covered by the return. 
1.  For the purposes of this section, sales made in the city means all sales where the goods, merchandise or property is received in the city by the purchaser, or a person designated by him. In the case of delivery of goods in the city to a common or private carrier or by other means of transportation, the place at which the delivery has been completed is considered as the place at which the goods are received by the purchaser. The following examples are not all inclusive but may serve as a guide for determining sales made in the city: 
i.  Sales to a customer in the city with shipments to a destination within the city from a location in the city or an out-of-city location are considered sales made in the city. 
ii.  Sales to a customer in the city with shipments to a destination within the city directly from the taxpayer's in-city supplier or out-of-city supplier are considered sales made in the city. 
iii.  Sales to a customer in the city with shipments directly to the customer at his regularly maintained and established out-of-city location are considered out-of-city sales. 
iv.  Sales to an out-of-city customer with shipments or deliveries to the customer's location within the city are considered sales made in the city. 
v.  Sales to an out-of-city customer with shipments to an out-of-city destination are considered out-of-city sales. 
2.  In the case of public utilities or businesses furnishing transportation services, gross revenue for the purposes of this section may be measured by such means as operating revenues, vehicle miles, revenue miles, passenger miles, ton miles, tonnage, or such other method as shall reasonably measure the proportion of gross revenue obtained in the city by such business. 
3.  If the business of the taxpayer involves substantial business activities other than sales of goods and services, such other method or methods of allocation shall be employed as shall reasonably measure the proportion of gross revenue obtained in the city by such business. 
d.  Business allocation percentage. Fourth, the taxpayer shall add the percentages determined in accordance with subsections (2)a., b. and c. and divide the total by three, and the result obtained is the business allocation percentage. In determining this percentage, a factor shall be excluded from the computation only when the factor does not exist anywhere insofar as the taxpayer's business operation is concerned and, in such case, the total of the percentages shall be divided by the number of factors actually used. The business allocation percentage shall be applied to the entire net profits, wherever derived, of the taxpayer subject to the tax to determine the net profits allocable to the city. 
(3)  Substitute methods. An alternative method of accounting shall be used if the payer or the administrator demonstrates that the net profits of the taxpayer allocable to the city cannot be justly and equitably determined under the separate accounting method or the business allocation percentage method, or if undue expense to the taxpayer would result from complying therewith because of the taxpayer's manner of operations and methods of accounting. In such case the administrator, upon application of the taxpayer or upon his own initiative, may approve or specify factors or methods of determination as will effect a just, nondiscriminatory and reasonable result. Application to the administrator to substitute other factors in the formula or to use a different method to allocate net profits shall be made in writing and state the specific grounds on which the substitution of factors or use of a different method is requested and the relief sought. No specific form need be followed in making the application. Once a taxpayer has filed under a substitute method, he shall continue so to file until given permission by the administrator to change. 
(Code 1976, § 6-24) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 78-39. - Capital gains and losses, determination. 
(a)  Capital gains and capital losses, other than gains and losses on securities issued by the government of the United States, shall be included in income only to the extent of that portion of the gains or losses which occur after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. In determining the amount of gain or loss, the taxpayer may use net proceeds from the sale or exchange less fair market value as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The fair market value of property shall be determined by an appraisal or similar reliable evidence. The fair market value of a security shall be the last quoted price on the last business day prior to the effective date. For a security traded over the counter the last quoted price shall be the last bid price on the last business day prior to the effective date. The taxpayer may determine the gain or loss on a transaction in the same manner as for federal income tax purposes, taking into account only that portion thereof which occurs after the effective date. The portion of that gain or loss includable in computing taxable income will be the same proportion of the total gain or loss as the period of time the property was held after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived bears to the total time the property was held. 
(b)  If capital losses exceed capital gains in a taxable year, the unused portion may be utilized to the same extent and on the same basis as under the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1976, § 6-25) 
Sec. 78-40. - Estates or trusts, deemed nonresidents. 
    An estate or trust is not subject to tax under this article, except that it shall be treated as a nonresident individual for purposes of section 78-33 to the extent income of the estate or trust described in section 78-33 is not includable in the return of a resident individual as income from estates and trusts. A resident individual shall include income from estates and trusts in his income subject to tax under this article without regard to the situs of the estate or trust. For this purpose, an estate means the estate of a deceased person during the period of administration or settlement, and a trust means an inter vivos or testamentary trust created by an individual for the benefit of one or more persons. 
(Code 1976, § 6-26) 
Sec. 78-41. - Income from estates and trusts. 
(a)  Income from estate means income as defined in section 643(b) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, properly paid, credited or distributed but not in excess of the resident individual's share of the distributable net income of the estate decreased by the amount of depreciation or depletion allowed the resident individual as a deduction under section 642 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. The exceptions set forth in this subsection with respect to trusts are also applicable to income from estates. Income from trusts means the amount of income as defined in section 643(b) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, distributed or required to be distributed under section 652(a) or 662(a)(1) of the Federal InternalRevenue Code, decreased by the amount of depreciation or depletion allowed the resident individual as a deduction by section 642 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Dividends on stock of state and national banks and trust companies. 
(2)  Interest from obligations of the United States, the states or subordinate units of government of the states. 
(b)  Income received by a resident individual from a fiduciary shall retain the character it held in the hands of the fiduciary. With respect to trusts where the income is taxed to the grantor or some other person under subpart E of subchapter J of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, the grantor or other person shall include in his return all items of income and deductions allowed by this article. 
(c)  An individual shall include income from estates and trusts in his return in the same year as provided in the Federal Internal Revenue Code with respect to distributions of income from estates and trusts. The amount of income included in the return for the first tax year of a resident individual, with respect to estates and trusts, shall be computed as though the tax year of the estate or trust for federal income tax purposes began on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and ended with the end of the tax year of the estate or trust for federal income tax purposes which ends next following the effective date. 
(Code 1976, § 6-27) 
Sec. 78-42. - Personal exemptions; limitations. 
(a)  An individual taxpayer in computing his taxable income is allowed a deduction of $750.00 for tax years 1988 through 2009, $375.00 for the first half of tax year 2010, $300.00 for the second half of tax year 2010, for a total of $675.00 for tax year 2010, and $600.00 for tax year 2011 and all tax years thereafter for each personal and dependency exemption under the rules for determining exemptions and dependents as provided in the Federal Internal Revenue Code. The taxpayer may claim his spouse and dependents as exemptions, but if the taxpayer and the spouse are both subject to the tax imposed by this article, the number of exemptions claimed by each of them when added together shall not exceed the total number of exemptions allowed under this article. 
(b)  An additional exemption is allowed under subsection (a) for a taxpayer who is 65 years of age or older, or who is blind as defined in section 504 of the Income Tax Act of 1967, Act No. 281 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 206.504 et seq.) or if the taxpayer is both 65 years of age or older and blind, two additional exemptions are allowed under subsection (a). 
(c)  An exemption is allowed under subsection (a) for a person with respect to whom a deduction under section 151 of the Internal Revenue Code is allowable to another federal taxpayer during the tax year and is therefore not considered to have a federal personal exemption under subsection (a). 
(Code 1976, § 6-28; Ord. No. 10-587, § 1, 5-10-10) 
Sec. 78-43. - Payments and benefits not subject to tax. 
    The following payments and benefits received by any person are not subject to the tax: 
(1)  Gifts and bequests. 
(2)  Proceeds of insurance, annuities, pensions and retirement benefits. Amounts received for personal injuries, sickness or disability are excluded from taxable income only to the extent provided by the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Welfare relief, unemployment benefits including supplemental unemployment benefits, and workmen's compensation or similar payments from whatever source de- rived. 
(4)  Amounts received by charitable, religious, educational and other similar nonprofit organizations which are exempt from taxation under the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  Amounts received by supplemental unemployment benefit trusts or pension, profit sharing and stock bonus trusts qualified and exempt under the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(6)  Interest from obligations of the United States, the states or subordinate units of government of the states, and gains or losses on the sales of obligations of the United States. 
(7)  Net profits of financial institutions and insurance companies. 
(8)  Amounts paid to an employee as reimbursement for expenses necessarily and actually incurred by him in the actual performance of his services and deductible as such by the employer. 
(9)  Compensation received for service in the armed forces of the United States. 
(Code 1976, § 6-29) 
Sec. 78-44. - Deductions. 
(a)  Ordinary, necessary, reasonable and unreimbursed expenses paid or incurred by an individual in connection with the performance by him of services as an employee may be deducted from gross income in determining income subject to the tax under this article to the extent the expenses are limited to the following: 
(1)  Expenses of travel, meals and lodging while away from home. 
(2)  Expenses as an outside salesman, away from his employer's place of business. 
(3)  Expenses of transportation. 
(4)  Expenses under a reimbursement or other expense allowance arrangement with his employer, where the reimbursement of allowance has been included in total compensation reported. 
(b)  The following expenses paid or incurred by an individual may be deducted from gross income in determining income subject to tax to the extent the expenses are applicable to income taxable under this article: 
(1)  An individual may deduct alimony, separate maintenance payments and principal sums payable in installments, to the extent includable in the spouse's adjusted gross income under the Federal Internal Revenue Code, but only to the extent deductible by the individual under the Federal Internal Revenue Code. A nonresident individual may deduct only that proportion of his alimony, separate maintenance or principal sums payable in installments that his income taxable under this article bears to his total federal adjusted gross income. 
(2)  An employee or self-employed individual may deduct moving expenses to the extent provided in section 217 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  A self-employed individual may deduct payments to a qualified retirement plan to the extent provided in section 404 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  An individual may deduct payments to an individual retirement account established pursuant to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 USC 1001 to 1381, to the extent provided in section 219 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-29.1, 6-30) 
Sec. 78-45. - Returns. 
(a)  Every corporation doing business in the city and every other person having income taxable under this article in any year shall make and file with the city an annual return for that year, on a form furnished or approved by the city, on or before the last day of the fourth month for the same calendar year, fiscal year or other accounting period, that has been accepted by the Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax purposes for the taxpayer. 
(b)  The annual return shall set forth: 
(1)  The number of exemptions, place of residence, place of employment and other pertinent information as shall reasonably be required. 
(2)  The aggregate amount of compensation, dividends, interest, net profit from rentals, capital gains less capital losses, net profits from business and other income subject to the tax. 
(3)  The total amount of the tax imposed by this article. 
(4)  The amount of the tax previously withheld or paid. 
(5)  Credits provided in this article. 
(6)  The balance of the tax due or to be refunded. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-31, 6-32; Ord. No. 97-495, § 3, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-46. - Tax payment; refund. 
(a)  A balance of the tax that is due the city at the time of filing an annual return shall be paid with the return unless the balance is less than $1.00, in which case payment is not required. 
(b)  If the annual return reflects an overpayment of the tax, the declaration of the overpayment on the return constitutes a claim for refund. Subject to subsection (e), if the city agrees that a claim is valid, the city shall apply the overpayment first to a delinquent tax liability under this article of the taxpayer to the city. The city shall apply any remaining overpayment against a subsequent tax liability under this article or, at the election of the taxpayer and if indicated on the return, shall refund the overpayment. However, the city shall not pay a refund of less than $1.00. 
(c)  If a valid claim for a refund of taxes, except a refund under section 78-51, due for the taxable year 1992 or a taxable year after 1992 is filed, interest at the rate established in section 30(3) of Act No. 122 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941 (MCL 205.30, MSA 7.657(30)), as amended, shall be added to the refund beginning 45 days after the claim is filed or 45 days after the date established under this article for the filing of the return, whichever is later. 
(d)  If the claim for refund is reflected on a joint tax return, the administrator shall allocate to each joint taxpayer his or her share of the refund. The amount allocated to each taxpayer shall be applied to his or her respective liabilities under this article. 
(e)  If the administrator determines that all or a portion of a refund claimed on a joint tax return is subject to application to a liability of an obligated spouse, the administrator shall notify the joint taxpayers by first class mail sent to the address shown on the joint return. The notice shall be accompanied by a nonobligated spouse allocation form. The notice shall state all of the following: 
(1)  That all or a portion of the refund claimed by the joint taxpayers is subject to interception to satisfy a liability or liabilities of one or both spouses. 
(2)  The nature of the liability and the name of the obligated spouse or spouses. 
(3)  That a nonobligated spouse may claim his or her share of the refund by filing a nonobligated spouse allocation form with the city not more than 30 days after the date the notice was mailed. 
(4)  The statement of the penalties under subsection (h). 
(f)  A nonobligated spouse who wishes to claim his or her share of a tax refund shall file with the city a nonobligated spouse allocation form. The nonobligated spouse allocation form shall be in a form specified by the administrator and shall require the spouse to state the amount of income or other tax base and all adjustments to the income or other tax base, including all subtractions, additions, deductions, credits, and exemptions, stated on the joint tax return that is the basis of the claimed refund, and an allocation of those amounts between the obligated and nonobligated spouse. In allocating these amounts, all of the following apply: 
(1)  Individual income shall be allocated to the spouse who earned the income. Joint income shall be allocated equally between the spouses. 
(2)  Each spouse shall be allocated the personal exemptions he or she would be entitled to claim if separate federal returns had been filed, except that dependency exemptions shall be prorated according to the relative income of the spouses. 
(3)  Adjustments resulting from a business shall be allocated to the spouse who claimed income from the business. 
(4)  Ownership of other assets relevant to the allocation shall be disclosed upon request of the administrator. 
(g)  A nonobligated spouse allocation form shall be signed by both joint taxpayers. However, the form may be submitted without the signature of the obligated spouse if his or her signature cannot be obtained. The nonobligated spouse shall certify that he or she has made a good faith effort to obtain the signature of the obligated spouse and shall state the reason that the signature was not obtained. 
(h)  A person who knowingly makes a false statement on a nonobligated spouse allocation form is subject to a penalty of $25.00 or 25 percent of the excessive claim for his or her share of the refund, whichever is greater, and other penalties as provided in this article. 
(i)  A nonobligated spouse to whom the administrator has sent a notice under subsection (e), who fails to file a nonobligated spouse allocation form within 30 days after the date of the notice was mailed, shall be barred from commencing any action against the city to recover an amount withheld to satisfy a liability of the obligated spouse to which a joint tax refund is applied under this section. The payment by the city of any amount applied to a liability of a taxpayer under this section shall release the city and the administrator from all liability to the obligated spouse, the nonobligated spouse, and any other person having or claiming any interest in the amount paid. 
(j)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Nonobligated spouse" means a person who has filed a joint city income tax return and who is not liable for an obligation of his or her spouse described in this article. 
(2)  "Obligated spouse" means a person who has filed a joint city income tax return and who is liable for an obligation described in this article for which his or her spouse is not liable. 
(Code 1976, § 6-33; Ord. No. 92-403, § 1, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 97-495, §§ 4, 5, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-47. - Federal income tax return; elimination. 
    Where total income, total deductions, net profits, or other figures are derived from the taxpayer's federal income tax return, any item of income not subject to the city income tax and unallowable deductions shall be eliminated in determining net income subject to the city tax. The fact that a taxpayer is not required to file a federal income tax return does not relieve him from filing a city tax return. 
(Code 1976, § 6-34) 
Sec. 78-48. - Net profits; consolidated returns. 
    For the purpose of determining net profit allocable to the city under this article, a corporate taxpayer may elect to file a consolidated return including subsidiaries whose voting stock is more than 50 percent owned by the taxpayer, if such return will more properly reflect the net profits and activities of the taxpayer in the city. The city may require a consolidated return if necessary to properly determine net profits of the taxpayer allocable to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-35) 
Sec. 78-49. - Amended return; change of method of accounting. 
    An amended return shall be filed with the city, on a form obtainable from the city, if necessary to report additional income and pay an additional tax due, or to claim a refund or tax overpaid. Within 90 days from final determination of a federal tax liability that also affects the computation of a taxpayer's city income tax liability, the taxpayer shall prepare and file with the city an amended city income tax return showing income subject to the city tax based upon the final determination of federal income tax liability, and pay any additional tax shown due on the return or make a claim for refund of an overpayment. A taxpayer shall not change the method of accounting or apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original return, or any extensions for the filing of the original return. 
(Code 1976, § 6-36; Ord. No. 97-495, § 6, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-50. - Tax withholdings-Generally. 
(a)  Rates. An employer doing business or maintaining an establishment within the city shall withhold from each payment to the employer's employees the tax on their compensation subject to the tax, after giving effect to exemptions, as follows: 
(1)  Residents: 
a.  At a rate equal to the rate to be levied against resident individuals under this article of all compensation paid to the employee who is a resident of the city, if the employee is not subject to withholding in any other city levying the tax. 
b.  At a rate equal to the difference in the percentage rate of tax on resident individuals to be levied under this article less the percentage rate of tax levied by any other city in which the employee works, on all compensation earned by the resident in another city. 
(2)  Nonresidents. At a rate equal to the rate to be levied under this article on nonresidents but not to exceed 50 percent of the percentage rate imposed on resident individuals of the compensation paid to the employee for work done or services performed in the city designated by the employee as the employee's predominant place of employment. The withholding rate shall be applied to the percentage of the employee's total compensation equal to the employee's estimated percentage of work to be done or services to be performed in the city for that employer, but no withholding shall be required if the estimated percentage of work is less than 25 percent. 
(b)  Employer as trustee. An employer withholding the tax is deemed to hold the tax as a trustee for the city. 
(c)  Liability for taxes; penalties, interest. An employer who is required to withhold and who fails or refuses to deduct and withhold is liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld. The liability shall be discharged upon payment of the tax by the employee but the employer is not relieved of penalties and interest provided in this article for this failure or refusal. 
(d)  Payments excepted. Employers shall not withhold any tax from the following payments: 
(1)  Compensation paid to domestic help. 
(2)  Compensation paid to a person who is not an employee, including an independent contractor. 
(3)  An amount allowed and paid to an employee as reimbursement for expenses necessarily and actually incurred by him in the actual performance of his services and deductible by the employer. 
(e)  Payment by employee or employer. If the tax is not withheld, an employee is not excused from filing a return and paying the tax on his compensation. If the tax is withheld but an employer fails to pay the tax to the city, the employee is not liable for the tax so withheld. 
(f)  Exemptions claimed; percentage of work done at predominant place of employment. An employee with compensation subject to tax shall file with his employer a form on which the employee shall state the number of exemptions claimed, the city of residence, the predominant place of employment, and the percentage of work done or services performed in the predominant place of employment. The percentage shall be expressed as "less than 25 percent," "40 percent," "60 percent," "80 percent," or "100 percent." The employer shall retain the form and rely on the information therein for withholding purchases unless directed by the city to withhold on another basis. If information submitted by the employee is not believed to be true, correct and complete, the city shall be so advised. 
(g)  Revised form, time for filing. An employee shall file with his employer a revised form within ten days after his number of exemptions decreases or he changes his residence from or to a taxing city. The employee may file a revised form by December 1 of each year, if his predominant place of employment or his estimate of the percentage of work done or services to be rendered in the city will change for the ensuing year. Revised withholding certificates shall not be given retroactive effect. 
(h)  Refusal to furnish withholding certificate, rate of tax. If an employee refuses to furnish a withholding certificate upon the request of his employer, the employer shall withhold a percentage of the employee's total compensation equal to the percentage rate of tax on resident individuals to be levied under this article, and report and pay the withholding on the basis of the best information in the possession of the employer. 
(i)  Withholding tables; first compensation taxable. 
(1)  The city shall provide withholding tables establishing the amounts to be withheld for various tax rates, wage brackets, numbers of exemptions and pay periods. An employer who uses the tables fully discharges his duty to withhold. An employer may elect not to use the tables, in which case to discharge fully his duty to withhold he shall withhold the applicable percent of taxable compensation after provision for exemptions. 
(2)  The first compensation paid an employee on or after the effective date of the tax levy is subject to withholding on either of the following bases at the option of the employer: 
a.  On the full amount of compensation paid. 
b.  On the proportion of compensation paid for work done or services performed on or after the effective date of the levy. 
(j)  Over-withheld tax, refund. If an employer withholds more than the apparent tax liability of an employee due to an increase in the number of exemptions claimed during the year, or due to the actual percentage of work performed in the city by a nonresident being less than the estimated percentage, or due to a change of residence during the year to or from a taxing city, or due to any reason other than the employer's error, the employer shall neither refund the excess to the employee nor offset the excess by under-withholding in a subsequent period. The employee shall claim his refund from the city on his annual return. 
(k)  Correction of error, refund. Correction of an over- or an under-withholding as a result of an employer's error shall be made as follows: 
(1)  If the error is discovered in the same quarter in which it is made, the employer shall make the necessary adjustment on a subsequent pay and include only the corrected amount on the quarterly return. 
(2)  If the error is discovered in a subsequent quarter of the same calendar year, the employer shall make the necessary adjustment on a subsequent pay and report it as an adjustment on the quarterly return. 
(3)  If the error is discovered in the following calendar year, or if the employer-employee relationship has terminated, the procedure shall be as follows: 
a.  The employee or former employee shall apply to the city for a refund in case of an over-withholding. Upon proper verification the city shall refund to him the amount of the over-withholding. 
b.  If a deficiency is discovered, the employer shall notify the city and the employee or former employee, who shall pay the city the additional tax due in his annual return. 
(l)  Return; payment. An employer shall file a return, furnished by or obtainable on request from the city, and pay to the city the full amount of the tax withheld on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, except that if during any calendar month other than the last month of a calendar quarter the amount withheld exceeds $100.00, the employer shall deposit the amount withheld with the city treasurer before the end of the next calendar month. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-37-6-46) 
Sec. 78-51. - Same-Employer's reconciliation of quarterly returns; deficiency; refund; information return; cessation of business. 
(a)  Duty of employer; refunds. An employer shall file with the city a reconciliation of quarterly returns on or before the last day of February following each calendar year in which the employer has withheld from an employee's compensation. A deficiency is due when the reconciliation is filed. If the employer made quarterly payments in excess of the amount withheld from an employee's compensation, the city upon proper verification shall refund the excess to the employer. 
(b)  Information return. In addition to the reconciliation, the employer shall file with the city an information return for each employee from whom the city income tax has been withheld and each employee subject to withholding under this article, setting forth his or her name, address and social security number, the total amount of compensation paid him or her during the year, and the amount of city income tax withheld. The information return shall be on a copy of the federal W-2 form or on a form furnished or approved by the city. A copy of the information return shall be furnished to the employee. 
(c)  Cessation of business. If an employer goes out of business or otherwise ceases to be an employer, reconciliation forms and information return forms shall be filed with the city by the date the final withholding return and payment are due. 
(Code 1976, § 6-47; Ord. No. 97-495, § 7, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-52. - Declaration of estimated tax not withheld-Filing. 
(a)  A person who anticipates taxable income from which the city income tax will not be withheld shall file with the city a declaration of estimated tax on a form furnished by or obtainable on request from the city. A calendar year taxpayer shall file a declaration on or before each April 30. A taxpayer on a fiscal year basis or other accounting period shall file a declaration within four months after the beginning of each fiscal year or other accounting period. 
(b)  If a taxpayer has not previously been required to file, the declaration shall be filed on or before the first date for making a quarterly payment which occurs after the taxpayer becomes subject to the requirement to file a declaration. A taxpayer shall file a declaration for the same calendar year, fiscal year or other accounting period that has been accepted by the Federal Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax purposes. A declaration by an individual or unincorporated entity is not required if the total estimated tax, less any credits applicable to the tax, does not exceed $100.00. A declaration by a corporation is not required if the total estimated tax, less any credits applicable to the tax, does not exceed $250.00. A declaration by or on behalf of an estate or trust is not required. 
(Code 1976, § 6-48; Ord. No. 97-495, § 8, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-53. - Same-Computation, payment of tax. 
(a)  A taxpayer's annual return for the preceding year may be used as the basis for computing a tax declaration of estimated tax for the current year, or the taxpayer may use the same figures used for estimating federal income tax adjusted to exclude any income or deductions not taxable or permissible under this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, the estimated tax may be paid in full with the declaration or in four equal installments on or before the last day of the fourth, sixth, ninth and 13th months after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year. 
(c)  An amended declaration may be filed when making a quarterly payment, and the unpaid balance shown due shall be paid in equal installments over the remaining payment dates. 
(Code 1976, § 6-49; Ord. No. 97-495, § 9, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-54. - Annual return; filing, extension of time; failure to file; penalty. 
(a)  The filing of a declaration of estimated tax does not excuse the taxpayer from filing an annual return even though there is no change in the declared tax liability. An annual return shall be filed with the city by the end of the fourth month of the year following that for which the declaration was filed. Upon written request of a taxpayer, the administrator may extend the time for filing the annual return for a period not to exceed six months. The administrator may require a tentative return and payment of the estimated tax. 
(b)  A penalty or interest shall not be assessed if the return is filed and the final tax paid within the extended time and all other filing and payment requirements of this article are satisfied, and the estimated tax paid equals 70 percent or more of the tax shown due on the final return or 70 percent or more of the tax shown due on the taxpayer's return for the preceding taxable year. 
(Code 1976, § 6-50; Ord. No. 97-495, § 10, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-54A. - File a final return when person sells business, stock of goods or quits business. 
(a)  If a person liable for the tax imposed under this article sells a business or the stock of goods of a business or quits a business, the person shall make a final return to the city within 15 days after the date of the business of stock of goods is sold or the person quits the business. The purchaser or succeeding purchasers, if any, who purchase a going or closed business or stock of goods of a going or closed business shall escrow sufficient money to cover the amount of taxes, interest, and penalties that may be due and unpaid until the former owner produces a receipt from the administrator that shows that the taxes due have been paid, or a certificate that states that taxes are not due. If the owner provides a written waiver of confidentiality, the administrator may release to a purchaser a business's known tax liability for the purposes of establishing an escrow account for the payment of taxes. If the purchaser or succeeding purchasers of a business or stock of goods of a business fail to comply with the escrow requirements of this subsection, the purchaser is personally liable for the payment of the taxes, interest, and penalties accrued and unpaid by the business of the former owner. The purchaser's or succeeding purchaser's personal liability is limited to the fair market value of the business less the amount of any proceeds applied to balances due on secured interests that are superior to any lien provided for in this article. 
(b)  If a corporation that is liable for the tax imposed under this article fails for any reasons to file the required returns or to pay the tax due, any officers of the corporation that have control or supervision of, or who are charged with the responsibility for, making the returns or payments are personally liable for the failure to file or pay. The signature of any corporate officer on a return or negotiable instrument submitted in payment of a tax is prima facie evidence of the officer's responsibility for making the returns and payments. The dissolution of a corporation does not discharge an officer's liability for a prior failure of the corporation to make a return or remit a tax due. The sum due for a liability may be assessed and collected under this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-495, § 11, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-55. - Credit for city income tax paid another city. 
    An individual who is a resident of the city and received net profits from a business, profession or rental of real or tangible personal property, gains from the sale or exchange of real or tangible personal property, or salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation for work done or services performed or rendered, in each case outside the city, and is subject to and has paid an income tax on this income to another municipality, shall be allowed a credit against the city income tax for the amount to the other municipality. The credit shall not exceed the amount of taxes which would be assessed under this article on the same amount of income of a nonresident. 
(Code 1976, § 6-51) 
Sec. 78-56. - Computation of fractional part of a cent. 
    In withholding the tax due under this article, a fractional part of a cent shall be disregarded unless it amounts to one-half cent or more, in which case it shall be increased to one cent. For tax years after the 1996 tax year in paying the tax due under this article if any amount other than the whole dollar amount is used, the administrator shall disregard the fractional part of the dollar unless the fractional part amounts to one-half dollar or more, in which case the amount shall be increased by one dollar. 
(Code 1976, § 6-52; Ord. No. 97-495, § 12, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-57. - Rules and regulations; adoption, enforcement; forms; collection of tax. 
(a)  The administrator may adopt, amend and repeal rules and regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of this article, subject to the approval of the city commission. The rules and regulations, amendments and repeals, after approval by the city commission, shall become effective when published in the official newspaper of the city. 
(b)  The administrator shall enforce this article and the rules and regulations approved as provided in subsection (a). The administrator shall prepare, adopt and make available to taxpayers, employers and all other persons all forms necessary for compliance with this article. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall collect all taxes and payments due under this article and deposit them in a designated city depository. 
(Code 1976, § 6-53; Ord. No. 97-495, §§ 13, 14, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-58. - Special ruling appeal to income tax board of review. 
    A taxpayer or employer desiring a special ruling on a matter pertaining to this article or rules and regulations shall submit in writing to the administrator all the facts involved and the ruling sought. A taxpayer or employer aggrieved by a special ruling may appeal the special ruling in writing to the income tax board of review within 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 6-54) 
Sec. 78-59. - Examination of books and records; witnesses. 
(a)  If a taxpayer or employer fails or refuses to make a return or payment as required, in whole or in part, or if the administrator has reason to believe that a return made does not supply sufficient information for an accurate determination of the amount of tax due, the administrator may obtain information on which to base an assessment of the tax. The administrator may examine the books, papers and records of any person, employer, taxpayer or agent or representative of any person, employer, or taxpayer, or audit the accounts of any person, employer or taxpayer or any other records pertaining to the tax, to verify the accuracy and completeness of a return filed, or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax, withholding, penalties or interest due under this article. 
(b)  The administrator may examine any person, under oath, concerning income which was or should have been reported for taxation under this article, and for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers and records and the attendance of all parties before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, if he or she believes those persons have knowledge of such income. 
(Code 1976, § 6-55; Ord. No. 97-495, § 15, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-60. - Information confidential; divulgence, penalties. 
(a)  Information gained by the administrator, city treasurer or any other city official, agent or employee as a result of a return, investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by this article is confidential, except for official purposes in connection with the administration of this article and except in accordance with a proper judicial order. 
(b)  Any person who divulges confidential information as described in subsection (a), except for official purposes, is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a period of not exceeding 90 days, or both, for each offense. In addition, an employee of the city who divulges confidential information is subject to discharge for misconduct. 
(Code 1976, § 6-56) 
Sec. 78-61. - Submission to examination. 
(a)  A person shall furnish, within ten days following a request of the administrator or his duly authorized agent, the means, facilities and opportunity for making such reasonable examinations and investigation as are authorized by this article, and shall present himself for examination under oath when so ordered by the administrator. The request or order of the administrator or his duly authorized agent may be made verbally. However, a person may require that the request or order be addressed in writing to him, and if the request relates to interest, or presumed taxpayer, that it adequately identify him. 
(b)  Refusal by any person to submit to such examination or investigation, when requested or ordered by the administrator, is a violation of this article, punishable by such penalties as are provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-57) 
Sec. 78-62. - Payment of tax; interest; penalty for delay. 
(a)  All taxes imposed in a taxable year before the 1992 taxable year on a taxpayer and money withheld by an employer under this article and remaining unpaid after the taxes or money withheld are due shall bear interest from the due date at the rate of one-half of one percent per month until paid. For the 1992 taxable year and each subsequent taxable year before the 1997 taxable year, all taxes imposed on a taxpayer and money withheld by an employer under this article and remaining unpaid after the taxes or money withheld are due bear interest from the due date at the current monthly rate of one percentage point above the adjusted prime rate per annum per month until the tax or money is paid. For taxable years after the 1996 taxable year, if the amount of a tax paid is less than the amount that should have been paid or an excessive claim for credit has been made, the deficiency and interest on the deficiency at the current monthly interest rate of one percentage point above the adjusted private rate per annum from the time the tax was due, and until paid, are due and payable after a final assessment as provided in section 78-65. A deficiency in an estimated payment required by this article shall be treated in the same manner as a tax due and is subject to the same current monthly interest rate of one percentage point above the adjusted prime rate per annum from the time the payment was due, until paid. The term "adjusted prime rate" means the average predominant prime rate quoted by not less than three commercial banks to large businesses, as determined by the department of treasury. For tax years before the 1997 tax year, the adjusted prime rate is to be based on the average prime rate charged by not less than three commercial banks during the 12-month period ending on September 30. One percentage point shall be added to the adjusted prime rate, and the resulting sum shall be divided by 12 to establish the current monthly interest rate. The resulting current monthly interest rate based on the 12-month period ending September 30 becomes effective on January 1 of the following year. For tax years after the 1996 tax year "adjusted prime rate" means that term as defined in and determined under Section 23(2) of Act No. 122 of the Public Acts of 1941, MCL 205.23. 
(b)  A person who fails to file a return, pay the tax or remit withholding when due is liable, in addition to the interest, to a penalty of one percent of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction of a month, not to exceed a total penalty of 25 percent of the unpaid tax. If a return is filed or remittance is paid after the time specified and it is shown to the satisfaction of the city that the failure was due to reasonable cause and not to wilful neglect, the penalty shall be waived by the administrator. If the total interest or interest and penalty to be assessed is less than $2.00, the administrator shall instead assess $2.00. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (d), if any part of the deficiency or an excessive claim for credit is due to negligence, but without intent to defraud, a penalty of $10.00 or ten percent of the total amount of the deficiency in the tax, whichever is greater, plus interest as provided in subsection (a), shall be added. The penalty becomes due and payable after a final assessment is issued as provided in section 78-65. If a taxpayer subject to a penalty under this subsection demonstrates to the satisfaction of the administrator that the deficiency or excess claim for credit was due to reasonable cause, the administrator shall waive the penalty. 
(d)  If any part of the deficiency or an excessive claim for credit is due to intentional disregard of this article, but without intent to defraud, a penalty of $25.00 or 25 percent of the total amount of the deficiency in the tax, whichever is greater, plus interest as provided in subsection (a), shall be added. The penalty becomes due and payable after final assessment is issued as provided in section 78-65. If a penalty is imposed under this subsection and the taxpayer subject to the penalty successfully disputes the penalty, the administrator shall not impose a penalty prescribed by subsection (c) to the tax otherwise due. 
(e)  If any part of the deficiency or an excessive claim for credit is due to fraudulent intent to evade the tax imposed under this article, or to obtain a refund for a fraudulent claim, a penalty of 100 percent of the deficiency, plus interest as provided in subsection (a), shall be added. The penalty becomes due and payable after a final assessment is issued as provided in section 78-65. 
(Code 1976, § 6-58; Ord. No. 92-403, § 2, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 97-495, § 16, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-63. - Additional tax assessment; when interest and penalty not imposed. 
(a)  Interest or a penalty shall not be imposed on an additional tax assessment if, within 90 days from final determination of a federal tax liability which also affects the computation of the taxpayer's city income tax liability, the taxpayer prepares and files an amended city income tax return showing income subject to the city tax based upon the final determination of federal income tax liability, and pays the additional tax shown due thereon or makes claim for refund of an overpayment. Interest shall not be allowed on a refund of the city income tax resulting from a final determination of federal tax liability. 
(b)  Interest and a penalty shall not be imposed for underestimating the tax if the total amount of tax withheld and paid by declaration equals at least 70 percent or more of the tax shown due on the final return or 70 percent or more of the tax shown on the taxpayer's return for the preceding taxable year. 
(c)  An employee shall not be penalized because of the failure of his employer to report or pay tax withheld from the employee when the employer has in fact withheld the proper amount of tax. 
(Code 1976, § 6-59) 
Sec. 78-64. - Due and unpaid assessment; determination, procedure. 
(a)  For the tax years before the 1997 tax year and for tax years after the 1996 tax year, if the administrator determines that a taxpayer or an employer subject to the provisions of this article has failed to pay the full amount of the tax due or tax withheld, he or she shall issue a proposed assessment showing the amount due and unpaid, together with interest and penalties that may have accrued thereon. The proposed assessment shall be served upon the taxpayer or employer in person, or by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the taxpayer or employer. Proof of mailing the proposed assessment is prima facie evidence of a receipt of the proposed assessment by the addressee. 
(b)  A taxpayer or employer has 30 days after receipt of the proposed assessment within which to file a written protest with the administrator, who shall then give the taxpayer or employer or his or her duly authorized representative an opportunity to be heard and present evidence and arguments in his or her behalf. 
(Code 1976, § 6-60; Ord. No. 97-495, § 17, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-65. - Final assessment; protest. 
(a)  After the hearing as provided in section 78-64, the administrator shall issue a final assessment setting forth the total amount found due in the proposed assessment and any adjustment he or she may have made as a result of the protest. The final assessment shall be served in the same manner as a proposed assessment. Proof of mailing of the final assessment is prima facie evidence of a receipt of the final assessment by the addressee. 
(b)  If a protest under sections 78-64 or 78-59 is not filed in respect to a proposed assessment, a taxpayer or employer is considered to have received a final assessment 30 days after receipt of the proposed assessment. 
(Code 1976, § 6-61; Ord. No. 97-495, § 18, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-66. - Return without payment of tax; demand by administrator. 
    If an employer or taxpayer files a return showing the amount of tax or withholding due the city, but fails to pay the amount to the city, the administrator is not required to issue a proposed assessment, or a final assessment. The administrator shall issue a ten-day demand for payment, and if no payment or satisfactory evidence of payment is made in the ten days the administrator may recover the tax with interest and penalties thereon in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction as other debts are recoverable, or prosecute for violation of this article under section 78-75, or both. 
(Code 1976, § 6-62; Ord. No. 97-495, § 19, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-67. - Jeopardy assessment; procedure. 
(a)  If the administrator believes that collection of the tax withheld from an employee's compensation as imposed under this article will be jeopardized by delay, the administrator, whether or not the time otherwise prescribed by this article for making the return and paying or depositing the tax has expired, shall immediately assess the tax and interest and additions provided by this article. The tax, interest and additions shall become immediately due and payable, and the administrator shall make an immediate notice and demand for payment, notwithstanding when the withheld tax is otherwise due and payable. 
(b)  If the administrator finds that a person liable for the tax administered under this article intends to quickly depart from the city or to remove property from this city, to conceal the person or the person's property in the city, or to do any other act tending to render wholly or partly ineffectual proceedings to collect the tax unless proceedings are brought without delay, the administrator shall give notice of the findings to the person, together with a demand for an immediate return and immediate payment of the tax. A warrant or warrant-notice of levy may issue immediately upon issuance of a jeopardy assessment. When the warrant or warrant-notice is issued, the tax shall become immediately due and payable. If the person is not in default in making a return or paying a tax described by this article, and furnishes evidence satisfactory to the administrator that the return will be filed and the tax to which the finding relates will be paid, then the tax shall not be payable before the time otherwise fixed for payment. 
(Code 1976, § 6-63; Ord. No. 97-495, § 20, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-68. - Statute of limitations-Waiver; payment of tax. 
(a)  Except in case of fraud, failure to file a return, failure to comply with the withholding provisions of this article, or omission of substantial portions of income subject to the tax, an additional assessment shall not be made after four years from the date the return was due, including extensions, or from the date the return was filed, or the tax was paid, whichever is later. An omission of more than 25 percent of gross income is considered a substantial omission of income. Under this section a declaration of estimated tax is not considered a return. 
(b)  If the Federal Internal Revenue Service and a taxpayer execute a waiver of the federal statute of limitations as to a taxable year, the expiration of the period within which an additional assessment may be made by the administrator or a claim for refund filed by the taxpayer for such taxable year for city income tax purposes shall be six months from the date of expiration of the waiver. 
(Code 1976, § 6-64; Ord. No. 97-495, § 21, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-69. - Same-Refund. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, a tax erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund is made within four years from the date the payment was made or the original final return was due including extensions thereof, whichever is later, unless the administrator and the taxpayer mutually agree to extend the time for assessment or refund. Under this section a declaration of estimated tax is not considered a return. Upon denial of a refund a taxpayer may follow the same procedure for appeal as is provided in the case of a deficiency assessment. 
(b)  A tax deficiency as finally determined and interest or penalties thereon shall be paid within 30 days after receipt of a final assessment if no appeal is made. 
(Code 1976, § 6-65; Ord. No. 97-495, § 22, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-70. - Income tax board of review-Appointment; officers; hearing procedure; quorum; record of proceedings; information available to public; public hearing. 
(a)  The city commission shall appoint an income tax board of review consisting of three residents of the city who are not city officials or city employees. 
(b)  The income tax board of review shall elect a chairperson, secretary, and such other officers as the board considers necessary, and shall adopt rules governing the procedure for hearings and other procedures. The rules shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by an interested person. A copy of the rules shall be furnished on request to an interested person. 
(c)  A majority of the members of the income tax board of review shall constitute a quorum for an action by or hearing before the board, or for any other purpose. A member of the board shall not act on a matter in which the member has a financial interest other than the common public interest. A record shall be kept of the board's transactions and proceedings. The record and any other writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the board of review in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(d)  The business which the income tax board of review may perform shall be conducted at a public hearing of the commission held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.), as amended. Public notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 6-66) 
Sec. 78-71. - Same-Notice of appeal; transcript; hearing; confidential tax data; payment of deficiency or refund. 
(a)  A taxpayer or employer may file a written notice of appeal with the secretary of the income tax board of review not more than 30 days after receipt by the taxpayer or employer of a final assessment, denial in whole or in part of a claim for refund, decision, order or special ruling of the administrator. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the income tax board of review shall notify the administrator, who shall forward within 15 days to the income tax board of review a certified transcript of all actions and findings taken by the administrator that relate to the matter under appeal. The appellant or his or her duly authorized representative may inspect the transcript. 
(b)  The income tax board of review shall grant the appellant a hearing at which the appellant or his or her duly authorized representative and the administrator have an opportunity to present evidence that relates to the matter under appeal. After conclusion of the hearing, the income tax board of review by a majority vote of its three members shall affirm, reverse or modify the final assessment, denial, decision or order under appeal and furnish a copy of the decision to the appellant and the administrator. 
(c)  The provisions of this article as to the confidential character of tax data are applicable to proceedings pending before or submitted to the income tax board of review. 
(d)  A tax deficiency or refund and any interest or penalties on a deficiency or refund shall be paid not more than 30 days after receipt by the taxpayer or employer or by the city of notice of determination by the income tax board of review if no further appeal is made. 
(Code 1976, § 6-67; Ord. No. 97-495, § 23, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-72. - Same-Appeal to state tax commissioner, procedure. 
(a)  A taxpayer, employer or other person aggrieved by a rule adopted by the administrator may file a timely appeal to the state commissioner of revenue in the form and manner prescribed by the commissioner. 
(b)  A taxpayer or employer aggrieved by a final assessment, denial, decision, or order of the income tax board of review other than a decision under subsection (a), may appeal the assessment, denial, decision, or order to the tax tribunal not more than 35 days after the final assessment, denial, decision, or order was issued. The uncontested portion of a final assessment, order, or decision shall be paid as a prerequisite to appeal. An appeal under this subsection shall be perfected as provided under the tax tribunal act, Act No. 186 of the Public Acts of 1973, MCL 205.701 to 205.779, and rules promulgated under that act for the tax tribunal. 
(c)  Not more than 35 days after a final order of the tax tribunal, the taxpayer, employer, or other person shall pay the city the taxes, interest, and penalty found due to the city and the city shall refund to the taxpayer, employer, or other person any amount found to have been overpaid by the taxpayer, employer or other person. 
(Code 1976, § 6-68; Ord. No. 97-495, § 24, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-73. - Action in circuit court for judicial review. 
(a)  If a taxpayer, employer, other person or the city is aggrieved by a decision of the tax tribunal, the aggrieved party may take an appeal by right from a decision of the tax tribunal to the court of appeals. The appeal shall be taken on the record made before the tax tribunal. The taxpayer, employer, other person, or the city may take further appeal to the Supreme Court in accordance with the court rules provided for appeals to the Supreme Court. 
(b)  An assessment is final, conclusive, and not subject to further challenge after 90 days after the issuance of the final assessment, decision, or order of the administrator and a person is not entitled to a refund of any tax, interest, or penalty paid pursuant to an assessment unless the aggrieved person has appealed the assessment in the manner provided by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-69; Ord. No. 97-495, § 25, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-74. - Payment to taxpayer from general fund. 
    If a taxpayer is found entitled by a decision on an appeal to recover any sum paid, and further appeal has been taken within the time permitted, the sum shall be paid from the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-70; Ord. No. 97-495, § 26, 6-9-97) 
Sec. 78-75. - Violations of article; penalties. 
    Each of the following violations of this article is a misdemeanor and is punishable, in addition to the interest and penalties provided under this article, by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both: 
(1)  Wilful failure, neglect or refusal to file a return required by this article. 
(2)  Wilful failure, neglect or refusal to pay the tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
(3)  Wilful failure of an employer or person to withhold or pay to the city a tax as required by this article. 
(4)  Refusal to permit the city or an agent or employee appointed by the administrator in writing to examine the books, records and papers of a person subject to this article. 
(5)  Knowingly filing an incomplete, false or fraudulent return. 
(6)  Attempting to do or doing anything whatever in order to avoid full disclosure of the amount of income or to avoid the payment of any or all of the tax due. 
(Code 1976, § 6-71) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Sec. 78-76. - Effective date. 
    This article is effective as of January 1, 1988. 
(Code 1976, § 6-72) 
Secs. 78-77-78-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING PROJECT 

Sec. 78-96. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Tax Exemption Ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 19-11) 
Sec. 78-97. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the state housing development authority act, Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended. 
    Authority means the state housing development authority established pursuant to the act. 
    Contract rents shall be as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. 
    Elderly means a family in which the head of the household is 62 years of age or older or a single person who is 62 years of age or older. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of a housing development. 
    Sponsor means persons who have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer and electrical services which are paid by the housing development. 
(Code 1976, § 19-12) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-98. - Finding of public purpose. 
(a)  It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the act. The city is authorized by the act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of such taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the act to any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for elderly persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of such housing by providing a certain real estate tax exemption therefor is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated by this article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereon. 
(b)  The city acknowledges that R.J.K. Construction and Amurcon Corporation (the sponsor) has offered, subject to the receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as "Coventry Woods" on certain property located at Rememberance Road in the city to serve elderly persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of such housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. 
(Code 1976, § 19-13) 
Sec. 78-99. - Class of housing developments. 
    It is hereby determined that the class of housing developments to which the property tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be elderly housing developments which are financed or assisted pursuant to the act. It is further determined that "Coventry Woods" is of this class. 
(Code 1976, § 19-14) 
Sec. 78-100. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as "Coventry Woods" and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this article, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to construct, own and operate such housing development, hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four percent of the difference between contract rents actually collected and utilities; provided that the service charge for that part of any housing development which is occupied by other than the elderly shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax-exempt. 
(Code 1976, § 19-15) 
Sec. 78-101. - Contractual effect of article. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor, with the authority as third party beneficiary thereunder, to provide ad valorem property tax exemption and accept payments in lieu thereof as previously described is effected by enactment of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-16) 
Sec. 78-102. - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall be payable in the same manner as general ad valorem property taxes are payable to the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1976, § 19-17) 
Sec. 78-103. - Duration. 
    This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; provided, that construction of the housing development commences within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1976, § 19-18) 
Secs. 78-104-78-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR KINGSBURY PLACE APARTMENTS 

Sec. 78-110. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Walker Tax Exemption Ordinance for Kingsbury Place Apartments." 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-111. - Preamble. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401, et seq.). The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that Genesis Non-Profit Housing Corporation has offered, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan and/or receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to develop a housing development identified as Kingsbury Place Apartments which will be owned by Kingsbury Place Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership on certain property located at 725 North Center Drive, in the city to serve persons of low income (including persons with disabilities), and that on account of this housing development, an annual service charge for public services will be paid in lieu of all property taxes. The property located at 725 North Center Drive is legally described as follows: 
Part of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 1, Town 7 North, Range 12 West, City of Walker, Kent County, Michigan, described as: Commencing on the West Section line 841.5 feet South from the Northwest corner of Section; thence South 313.5 feet; thence Northeasterly 1666.5 feet to a point 1039.5 feet South from the North Section line; thence North 313.5 feet; thence Southwesterly 1666.5 feet to beginning, except: Commencing 841.50 feet South 1E12'52? East along the West Section line from the Northwest corner of Section; thence North 86E20'58? East along the South line of Greenview Plat 396.03 feet; thence south 1E12'52? East 314.08 feet; thence South 86E25'08? West 396.0 feet to the West Section line; thence North 1E12'52? West along the West Section line 313.50 feet to beginning and except the Easterly 680.0 feet of the remainder. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the state, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during a calendar year from all occupants of the housing development known as Kingsbury Place Apartments representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Low income persons and families as used in this article shall mean low income persons and families as defined in the Act. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development known as Kingsbury Place Apartments. 
    Persons with disabilities means persons with disabilities as defined in the Persons with Disabilities Civil Rights Act, as amended, MCL 37.1101 et seq. 
    Sponsor means Genesis Non-Profit Housing Corporation, and its successors and assigns, and including the owner(s) of the property at 725 North Center Drive as described in section 78-111. 
    Utilities mean fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-113. - Class of housing developments. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing developments which serve lower income families (including persons with disabilities), and which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that Kingsbury Place Apartments is of this class. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this article shall not be construed to obligate the city to grant a tax exemption for any development other than Kingsbury Place Apartments, it being the intent of the city of reserve its full authority and discretion under the Act and applicable law to grant or deny future requests for tax exemptions and to adopt a separate ordinance if any future tax exemptions are granted. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-114. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as Kingsbury Place Apartments which will be owned by Kingsbury Place Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership and the property on which it shall be constructed as described in section 78-111 shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after December 31 following both the commencement of construction and receipt of a certified notification from the authority that Kingsbury Place Apartments qualifies for such tax exemption. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this article, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan and/or an allocation of low income housing tax credits from the authority, to develop the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be the greater of 1) $3,000.00, or 2) four percent of the difference between annual shelter rents collected during the preceding calendar year and utilities during such calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-115. - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. 
    Notwithstanding section 78-114, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development known as Kingsbury Place Apartments which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low income persons and families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. The term "low income persons and families" as used herein shall be the same meaning as found in section 15(a)(7) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-116. - Contractual effect of article. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third-party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-117. - Payment of service charge; annual audit. 
    The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article for the preceding calendar year shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city (including, without limitation, administrative fees, late payment penalties, and interest as authorized by law) except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before June 30 of each year. The city treasurer may institute a civil action against the sponsor to recover the amount of any unpaid annual service charges and interest, penalties, and collection charges plus the costs of collecting said amounts, including reasonable attorney's fees. Not later than March 1 of each year, commencing with the year for which the exemption is granted, the sponsor shall file the following with the city assessor's office: 
(1)  An annual audit. 
(2)  A report which identifies: 
a.  The number of tenants occupying units as of December 31 of the previous year. 
b.  The number and rentals charged for all units during the preceding calendar year. 
c.  The number and rentals charged for all units not rented to low income persons or families during the preceding calendar year. 
d.  The amount and source of any other revenues generated by operation or use of the Kingsbury Place Apartments. 
e.  Whether the original authority-aided financing utilized to construct the Kingsbury Place Apartments is still outstanding and the number of years remaining on same. 
(3)  Such other information as is reasonably requested by the city in writing. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 78-118. - Duration. 
    This article and the property tax exemption hereunder shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property, but not for more than 50 years; provided, however, that this article and the property tax exemption hereunder shall terminate if construction of the Kingsbury Place Apartments as described in section 78-111 is not commenced within two years from the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-516, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Chapter 80 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Telecommunications-METRO Act, ch. 81. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 80-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  Before November 1, 2002. Before November 1, 2002, the purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate the access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers to ensure and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to exercise reasonable control of the public rights-of-way pursuant to the City Charter, the Michigan Telecommunications Act (Act No. 216 of the Public Acts of 1995, as amended, being MCLA 484.2101 et seq.), other state statutes (including, without limitation, MCLA 247.183), and article VII, § 29 of the 1963 Michigan Constitution by: 
(1)  Minimizing disruption of the public rights-of-way by regulating the access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers and the construction, installation, operation, and use of facilities in the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunication services; 
(2)  Ensuring that the city and the public are protected from liability for use of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers; 
(3)  Providing for the payment of nondiscriminatory permit fees which do not exceed the fixed and variable costs of granting permits and maintaining the rights-of-way used by telecommunications providers; and 
(4)  Assisting telecommunications providers in understanding the city's requirements for use of the public rights-of-way and providing a fair and non-discriminatory policy for permitting the use of the public rights-of-way by such providers. 
(b)  After October 31, 2002. The Michigan Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, 2002 PA 48 ("Act 48") is effective November 1, 2002. In order to comply with the requirements of Act 48, the city adopted Ordinance No. 02-490 to add chapter 81 ("Telecommunications-METRO Act") to the city code regarding permits for telecommunications providers issued on or after November 1, 2002. However, a number of the city's existing permits and consent agreements with telecommunications providers for use of the public rights-of-way, dated prior to November 1, 2002, incorporate by reference all or portions of this chapter 80. Under sections 4(2) and 5(1) of Act 48, those existing permits and consent agreements continue in force and effect in accordance with their terms and conditions, subject to section 13 of Act 48 (regarding fee modification) and any other applicable sections of Act 48. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or the city code, this chapter 80 shall, after October 31, 2002, remain in effect solely for the limited purpose of applying to those public rights-of-way permits and consent agreements in existence before November 1, 2002 (except as otherwise provided in Act 48), and for no other purpose. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (2), this chapter 80 shall have no application to telecommunications providers after October 31, 2002. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98; Ord. No. 02-490, § 2, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 80-2. - Reservation of rights. 
    The issuance of a permit or permits under this chapter and the access to and use of the public rights-of-way by a telecommunications provider shall not constitute a waiver of or otherwise adversely affect the following reserved rights: 
(1)  Right to require franchise. Article VII, § 29 of the 1963 Michigan Constitution and the City Charter require that all public utilities obtain a franchise to conduct a local business within the city. The applicability of this requirement to telecommunications providers may be challenged under Section 102(dd) of the Michigan Telecommunications Act which purports to define telecommunications services as not constituting public utility services. Due to this and other legal and regulatory issues, and to avoid the expense and delay of litigation that may be unnecessary, the city hereby determines that telecommunications providers shall not be required at this time to obtain franchises for the transaction of local business within the city. Telecommunications providers shall be required to obtain and maintain a permit for access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way and to otherwise comply with the terms of this chapter. Such a permit shall not constitute a franchise. The city reserves the right to require telecommunications providers to obtain a franchise in the future to transact local business within the city. 
(2)  Rights regarding takings claim. Certain cable or telecommunications providers have initiated or supported legal proceedings in which they contend that federal law grants them the right to physically occupy the rights-of-way and other property of a municipality for the purpose of providing telecommunications service without compensating the municipality for the use or value of the property so occupied or the cost of acquiring and maintaining such property. Municipalities dispute that claim. The city believes that if such a claim were sustained it would, among other things, constitute an unlawful taking by the United States in violation of the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution. The legal issues involved in such disputes have not been finally decided. The city desires to act on applications for permits granting access to its public rights-of-way at this time rather than wait for determination of these issues, provided this can be done without waiver or loss of any rights of the city or a permittee. Therefore, notwithstanding any other provision hereof, a permittee is not precluded by this chapter from seeking relief from the fee provisions of section 80-10 from any court or agency of competent jurisdiction. If a permittee seeks such relief, the city reserves the right to assert a takings claim and to take all action it deems necessary in support thereof. Neither this chapter nor the issuance or acceptance of a permit hereunder constitutes or will be claimed to constitute a waiver or relinquishment of any rights or defenses of either the city or the permittee in connection with these disputed issues, and the acceptance of a permit constitutes an acknowledgment and agreement thereto by the permittee. 
(3)  Option to obtain consent agreement. The city finds that legislative, legal and regulatory issues in connection with use of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers and the resulting potential for litigation and delay are likely to have an adverse impact on the development of a healthy, competitive telecommunications infrastructure in the community. This would be detrimental to the city and its residents as well as to telecommunications providers. The issues affect, among other things, both the cost to telecommunications providers and compensation to the city for the maintenance and use of its public rights-of-way. In order to promote certainty, encourage competition and avoid litigation, the city will, at the request and sole option of an applicant or permittee, consider entering into a consent agreement for use of the public rights-of-way for the provision of telecommunications services on terms and conditions mutually acceptable to the city and the telecommunications provider. It is the city's intent that such an agreement would satisfy the requirement for a permit under this chapter, and would include, among other things, a fee of up to five percent of the applicable gross revenues of the telecommunications provider, which would include the permit fee; an extended term of up to 15 years; authorization to conduct a local business in the city pursuant to Article VII, Section 29 of the 1963 Michigan Constitution; and a covenant to abide by the terms of the agreement as a compromise of disputed issues and uncertain outcomes, notwithstanding the resolution of these legislative, regulatory and legal requirements in the future. A permittee may request a consent agreement at any time. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-3. - City Signal; permit. 
    City Signal, Inc. and the city entered into a Right-of-Way Agreement in 1990, which has since been amended, including a 1995 amendment which permitted City Signal (now Brooks Fiber Communications) to use the public rights-of-way to provide local telephone service within the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Right-of-Way Agreement, as amended. For purposes of this section, the term "agreement" shall refer to the 1990 Right-of-Way Agreement, as amended. The agreement contains requirements for the use of the public rights-of-way that are substantially similar to the requirements of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the agreement shall be deemed to satisfy the requirement of a permit under this chapter and under the Telecommunications Act for the term of the agreement. Any requests of Brooks Fiber Communications for expansion of its telecommunications system shall be considered in accordance with the agreement. Upon expiration of the agreement, Brooks Fiber Communications shall be required to comply with all terms and conditions of this chapter as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 80-5. - Terms defined. 
    The meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Affiliate and affiliated mean any entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with a permittee. 
    City means the City of Walker. 
    City commission means the city commission of the City of Walker or its designee. This subsection does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. In any case in which a hearing is held pursuant to this chapter, the city commission may conduct the hearing or, in its sole discretion, may by resolution appoint a committee or subcommittee of the commission or a hearing officer to conduct the hearing and submit a proposal for decision to it, pursuant to procedures established by resolution. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Control, controlling, and controlled mean effective control, by whatever means exercised, such as those described in Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rule Making in MM Docket 92-264, 8 FCC Rcd 6828 (1993) at paragraphs 22-28 (adopting broadcast transfer of control standards as then in effect). 
    Local exchange service means the provision of an access line and usage within a local calling area for the transmission of high quality two-way interactive switched voice or data communication. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to this chapter for access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for wires, poles, pipes, conduits, or other facilities designed or used to provide telecommunications services. The term "permit" does not include any other permits, licenses, or approvals required by the city or other governmental entities. 
    Permittee means a telecommunications provider which has been issued a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public rights-of-way means the public rights-of-way, easements, highways, streets, and alleys within the city. 
    Telecommunications Act means Act No. 216 of the Public Acts of 1995, as amended from time to time. 
    Telecommunications provider means a person who provides one or more telecommunications services for compensation. 
    Telecommunications services means regulated and unregulated services offered to customers for the transmission of two-way interactive communication and associated usage. "Telecommunications services" does not include one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services and subscriber interaction for the selection of video programming or other programming services. 
    Telecommunications system means facilities designed or used to provide telecommunications services. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-6. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 80-7. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services without a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a consent agreement under subsection 80-2(3). For purposes of this chapter, use of the public rights-of-way includes the installation, construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of a telecommunications system within the public rights-of-way. In addition, a person providing local exchange service or other local telecommunications services is using the public rights-of-way for purposes of this chapter whether such person owns the facilities in the public rights-of-way outright or obtains the use of or access to the facilities from a third party under lease, contract, interconnection, or wholesale for retail or other similar arrangement. Failure to comply with the permit requirement of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. A person who violates this requirement shall comply with all requirements of this chapter applicable to a permittee and shall pay the annual fee plus late payment charges as provided by section 80-10 for the time period in which the violator did not have a permit plus the actual costs incurred by the city in enforcing this chapter against the person. 
(b)  Consent agreement. If a telecommunications provider negotiates a consent agreement with the city under the provisions of subsection 80-2(3), and the city determines that the consent agreement substantially satisfies the obligations of a telecommunications provider under this chapter, giving due regard to any special circumstances involving the telecommunications provider, the consent agreement will be deemed to satisfy the requirement of a permit under this chapter and under the Telecommunications Act. When a consent agreement is no longer in effect, the telecommunications provider shall be required to comply with all terms and conditions of this chapter as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-8. - Permit application procedures. 
(a)  Application. A telecommunications provider shall apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter. The application shall be made on an application form provided by the city. Ten copies of the application shall be filed with the city clerk, and two additional copies each shall simultaneously be filed with the city manager and city attorney. 
(b)  Required information. In addition to other information required by the application form or otherwise required by the city or this chapter, the application shall include, without limitation, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and each person exercising control over the applicant, and if the applicant or any person or persons exercising control is not a natural person, each of its officers, directors, stockholders beneficially holding more than five percent of the outstanding voting shares, general partners, and limited partners holding an equity interest of more than five percent. 
(2)  Copies of the most recent financial statements of the applicant. 
(3)  A description of (i) the applicant's existing and proposed telecommunications system and telecommunications services in the city, (ii) the types of existing and proposed wires and other facilities in the public rights-of-way, and (iii) a statement whether such facilities are owned by the applicant, or if not owned by the applicant, a copy of the agreement or legal instrument granting the applicant the right to the use of or access to such facilities. 
(4)  A map setting forth the specific location of the facilities in the public rights-of-way. The map shall identify the location of above ground and underground facilities. 
(c)  Application fee. The application will be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by chapter or resolution of the city commission. The nonrefundable application fee shall be designed to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing an application for a permit and issuance of a permit in accordance with the procedures of this chapter. 
(d)  Administrative completeness. An application shall not be deemed to be filed for purposes of the 90-day permit application review period in Section 251(3) of the Telecommunications Act unless and until the application is determined by the city manager to be administratively complete. A determination whether the application is administratively complete shall be made by the city manager within ten business days after the application is received by the city. If the city manager determines that the application is not administratively complete, the city manager shall so advise the application in writing and shall identify the items which must be furnished by the applicant for an administratively complete application. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant to review the application. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the applicant fails to provide the requested additional information by the deadline established by the city manager, the 90-day period for acting on the application under subsection (g), below, shall be extended by the number of days after the deadline that the information was provided to the city manager. 
(f)  Misleading statements. A person who provides information to the city in connection with a permit application or any other matters under this section which contains an untrue statement of a material fact or omits a material fact necessary to make the information not misleading shall be in violation of this chapter, and shall be subject to all remedies for violation of this chapter and this Code including, without limitation, denial of the requested action and permit revocation pursuant to section 80-18. Each day that a person fails to correct an untrue statement of a material fact or the omission of a material fact necessary to make the information not misleading shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(g)  Permit approval or denial. Within 75 days after the city manager determines that the application is administratively complete (subject to any adjustments for delays in providing additional information as provided in subsection (e), above), the city commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper in general circulation not less than ten days before the public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall also be mailed to the applicant not less than ten days before the public hearing. Any report or recommendation on the application obtained or prepared by the city manager shall be mailed to the applicant not less than ten days before the public hearing. The applicant and any other interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on the application. Following the public hearing, the city commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 90 days after the city manager determines that the application is administratively complete pursuant to subsection (d), above, subject to any adjustments for delays in providing additional information as provided in subsection (e), above. The city commission shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. The failure of the city to comply strictly with the procedural requirements of this section for the review of permit applications shall not invalidate the decision or proceedings of the city. 
(h)  Conditions. The city commission may impose conditions on a permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Without limitation, these conditions may include the posting of a bond by the telecommunications provider in an amount which shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public rights-of-way are returned to their original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(i)  Modification. The city commission may, in its discretion, grant a modification of a specific requirement of sections 80-11, 80-12, 80-13, or 80-16 of this chapter if the applicant requests such modification in its application for a permit and if the applicant demonstrates that: (1) there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances which warrant a modification, (2) the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare, and (3) the modification will not impair the intent and purposes of this chapter and its several sections. The application shall describe the applicant's request for a modification and the reasons for the request with specificity. A modification granted by the city commission pursuant to this section shall expire upon the expiration of the permit or earlier if so determined by the city commission. A modification shall modify only those requirements expressly set forth in the approval of the city commission and shall not modify any other provisions of this chapter. If a request for a modification is denied by the city commission, the telecommunications provider shall comply with all requirements of this chapter without exception. 
(j)  Waiver. The city commission shall grant a waiver of any requirement of this chapter if an applicant or permittee requests a waiver and the city commission finds that (1) unless waived the requirement will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the ability of the applicant or permittee to provide any telecommunications service within the meaning of Section 253(a) of the Federal Telecommunications Act, 47 USC § 253(a), (2) the requirement is not within the scope of any state or local authority referenced is Section 253(c) of the Federal Telecommunications Act, 47 USC § 253(c), and (3) the requirement is not necessary to protect the public safety and welfare or safeguard the rights of consumers. A request for a waiver may be included in an application for a permit. A request for a waiver shall include a detailed statement of the facts and circumstances forming the basis for the request. If the request is made in connection with an application for a permit, the provisions of subsections (d) through (g), above, shall apply to the request, except that submission of a request for a waiver shall constitute consent that the time periods provided in subsection (g), above, for holding a public hearing and acting on an application are extended by 90 days. Subsections (a), (c), and (f), above, shall apply to a waiver request that is not made in connection with a permit application, and the request may be denied for violation of or failure to comply with any of those provisions. subsection (g), above, shall also apply to such a request, with the exception of the 75- and 90-day time periods set forth in that subsection, but the city commission may by resolution establish different or additional procedures for conducting the public hearing and acting on the request. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 80-10. - Annual permit fees. 
(a)  Establishment of annual fees; payment. In addition to the nonrefundable application fee set forth in subsection 80-8(c) and any other fees for other permits or authorizations required by this Code, the permittee shall pay an annual fee in an amount established by ordinance or resolution of the city commission. The annual fee may be modified from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city commission. The amount of the annual fee shall not exceed the fixed and variable costs to the city in maintaining the public rights-of-way used by a telecommunications provider unless otherwise permitted by law. The annual fee shall be payable quarterly as follows: 
1st quarter (Jan. 1-March 31) April 30 2nd quarter (April 1-June 30) July 31 3rd quarter (July 1-Sept. 30) October 31 4th quarter (Oct. 1-Dec. 31) January 31  
When a permit is issued during a calendar year, the annual fee shall be prorated for the balance of the calendar year. In the event that a quarterly payment is not paid when due, the permittee shall pay a late payment charge of the greater of $100.00 or interest at the rate of one percent over the prime rate then charged by NBD Bank and computed monthly. A person who violates this chapter by failing to obtain a permit shall pay the annual fee plus late payment charges, as required by this section, for the time period in which the violator did not have a permit plus the actual costs of the city in enforcing this chapter against the person. 
(b)  Option to pay annual fee based upon gross revenues. A permittee, at its option, may elect to pay an annual fee of one percent of its annual gross revenues as set forth below, in lieu of and in full satisfaction of the annual fee established by the city commission pursuant to subsection (a), above. Permittees may elect this annual fee option for administrative convenience in computing the fee or for any other reason. 
(1)  An election shall be made within 45 days of applying for a permit or at least 60 days before the start of any calendar year after issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Any election, once made, shall continue in effect until the end of the next three calendar years, such that an election made in a permit application in 1997 would continue in effect through the end of the year 2000. 
(3)  An election shall be made on a form provided by the city. Copies of the form shall be submitted in the manner provided in subsection 80-8(a). The permittee shall supply all information requested on the form and any additional information that the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant, including information on affiliates of the permittee relating to the requirements of subsections (b)(5)-(7) and (c), below. After providing notice and an opportunity to be heard the city may reject or revoke an election for failure to comply with this subsection (b)(3), below. 
(4)  The annual fees shall be paid quarterly by the same due dates as are set forth in subsection (a), above. 
(5)  An election shall apply to all affiliates of a permittee. In making its election, a permittee shall expressly affirm that it has the authority to bind, and does bind, its affiliates to the obligations of subsection (b) including subsection (b)(6), below, and the audit and records provisions of subsections (b)(7) and (c), below. 
(6)  For purposes of this subsection (b), "gross revenues" is defined in Appendix A. 
(7)  If a permittee or any affiliate of a permittee refuses to pay the fees due under this option or prohibit or effectively prohibit the city from auditing the permittee or its affiliates under subsection (c) to verify the accuracy of annual fees, then the city at its option may revoke the election for all or any portion of the time period in question. The annual fees computed under subsection (a), above, shall then become immediately due and payable, less a credit for any sums paid by the permittee or its affiliates, plus the late payment charges set forth in subsection (a), above, and any additional sums due under the last sentence of subsection (c), below. 
(c)  Records. All records (including those of affiliates) reasonably necessary to verify the accuracy of annual fees paid by the permittee under either subsection (a) or (b), above, shall be made available by a permittee at a location within the city or within 20 miles of the city's boundaries. The city, by itself or in combination with other municipalities, reserves the right to audit any permittee (or any affiliate of a permittee) to verify the accuracy of annual fees paid or to be paid to the city. Any additional amount due the city shall be paid within 30 days of submission of an invoice. If the additional amount due exceeds two percent of the total annual fee which the audit determines should have been paid for a calendar year, the permittee shall pay the city's costs in connection with the audit within 30 days of submission of an invoice. 
(d)  Other payments. The nonrefundable application fees and the annual fees established pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to any tax, charge, fee, or payment due, or to become due, to the city by a permittee under this Code or the laws of the state. 
(e)  Misleading statements. A person who provides information to the city in connection with any matter under this section which contains an untrue statement of a material fact or omits a material fact necessary to make the information not misleading shall be in violation of this chapter, and shall be subject to all remedies for violation of this chapter and this Code including, without limitation, rejection or revocation of an election under subsection (b), above, and permit revocation pursuant to section 80-18. Each day that a person fails to correct an untrue statement of a material fact or the omission of a material fact necessary to make the information not misleading shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-11. - Duration of permit; renewal. 
    A permit shall remain in effect until December 31 following the fifth anniversary of the issuance of the permit (unless the permit expires pursuant to subsection 80-12(k) or the permit is earlier revoked pursuant to section 80-18). Applications for renewal of permits shall be filed in the same manner as original applications in section 80-8 and shall be filed with the city not less than 120 days before the expiration of the permit. The city expressly reserves all rights to approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications for permit renewals pursuant to this chapter and to impose additional conditions on renewed permits. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-12. - Permit terms and requirements. 
(a)  Nonexclusive; additional permits. A permit shall be nonexclusive. The city expressly reserves the right to approve, at any time, additional permits for access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers and to enter into agreements and grant franchises for such access and use. The issuance of additional permits, entry into agreements, or grant of franchises shall not be deemed to amend, modify, revoke, or terminate the terms and conditions of any permits previously issued to telecommunication providers. 
(b)  Expansion requests. A permit approved by the city commission shall authorize access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way described in the permit, subject to strict compliance with the conditions of the permit, the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable requirements of this Code or applicable state and federal law. The permittee shall not use any public rights-of-way not expressly authorized by the permit. Any use of the public rights-of-way (including any installation, construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of a telecommunication system within the public rights-of-way) to provide telecommunications services shall be performed only as authorized by the permit. A permittee may, however, expand its telecommunications system to public rights-of-ways not described in its permit by obtaining approval of an amended permit from the city. Such approval may be granted in writing by the city manager in response to a written request from the permittee for expansion to specific portions of named public rights-of-way. The city commission may establish by resolution a nonrefundable application fee for such a request. The city manager may grant, grant with conditions, or deny such request. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny any request. A denial of any request may be appealed to the city commission which shall make the final decision. Any expansion into additional public rights-of-way shall be subject to all terms and conditions of the original permit and this chapter including, without limitation, the application of the annual fee to the expanded public rights-of-way used by the permittee. 
(c)  Construction permit. A permittee shall not commence construction upon, over, across or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction permit as required under Chapter 70 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Lease or use of facilities; overlashing. A permittee shall not lease, sublease, license or otherwise allow the use of wires, conduit, poles or facilities in the public rights-of-way by a person who is required to obtain a permit under section 80-7 or is required by law to obtain the city's permission or consent to transact local business in the city, and who lacks such permit, permission or consent. A permittee shall not allow the property of a third party or non-telecommunications system wires or any other facilities to be overlashed, affixed or attached to any portion of a permittee's telecommunications system; or allow other actions with a similar result without the written consent of the city manager. 
(e)  "As built" maps. Without expense to the city, a permittee shall provide the city with "as-built" maps, records and plans showing its telecommunications system or portions thereof within the city, including those of affiliates used by the permittee, and maps and descriptive information of facilities of other persons used by the permittee. The city manager may waive part or all of this requirement if satisfactory records of the location of the telecommunications system were previously provided to the city. The "as built" maps, records and plans shall be provided within 30 days of the completion of the telecommunications system and any extensions, additions, or modifications to the telecommunications system. In addition to the foregoing, a permittee, without expense to the city, shall, upon 48 hours notice, give the city access to all "as-built" maps, records, plans and specifications showing its telecommunications system or portions thereof within the city. Upon request by the city, a permittee shall inform the city as soon as possible (but no more than one business day after the request) of any changes from previously supplied maps, records, or plans and shall mark up maps provided by the city so as to show the location of its telecommunications system. 
(f)  No recourse. A permittee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of a permit or the authority to grant permission to use all or part of the public rights-of-way. A permittee expressly acknowledges that on accepting a permit it did so relying on its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city. 
(g)  No inducement. By acceptance of a permit, a permittee acknowledges that it has not been induced to obtain the permit by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the city or by any third person concerning any term or condition of a permit not expressed in this chapter. 
(h)  Acceptance of terms and conditions. Permittee acknowledges by the acceptance of a permit that it has carefully read its terms and conditions and does accept all of such terms and conditions. 
(i)  No priority. A permit does not establish any priority of use of the public rights-of-way by a permittee over any present or future permittees or parties having agreements with the city or franchises for such use. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public rights-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to the city, the third priority to the state and its political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and thereafter as between permittees, other permit holders, parties having agreements with the city, and franchisees, as determined by the city in the exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the state. 
(j)  Future use by city. A permittee acknowledges, by accepting a permit, that it obtains no rights to or further use of the public rights-of-way other than those expressly granted herein. Each permittee acknowledges and accepts as its own risk that the city may make use in the future of the public rights-of-way which a permittee is using or in which a permittee's telecommunications system is located in a manner inconsistent with the permittee's use of such public rights-of-way and that in such event the permittee will not be entitled to compensation from the city. 
(k)  Expiration of permit. Unless the city grants an extension, a permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless prior thereto the permittee either (1) commences construction, installation, or operation of its telecommunications system within the public rights-of-way authorized by the permit and diligently pursues completion of construction or installation, or (2) commences use of the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services as authorized by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-13. - Use of public rights-of-way by permittee. 
(a)  No burden on public rights-of-way. A permittee and its contractors and subcontractors and a permittee's telecommunications system shall not unduly burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public rights-of-way within the city. A permittee shall erect and maintain its telecommunications system so as to cause minimum interference with the use of the public rights-of-way and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners. Permittee's cables and wires shall be suspended or buried so as to not endanger or injure persons or property in the public rights-of-way. If the city in its reasonable judgment determines that any portion of the telecommunications system constitutes an undue burden or interference, the permittee at its sole cost and expense shall modify its telecommunications systems or take such other actions as the city may determine are in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and the permittee shall do so within the time period established by the city. 
(b)  Restoration of property. A permittee and its contractors and subcontractors shall immediately restore, at the permittee's sole cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, any portion of the public rights-of-way that is in any way disturbed, damaged, or injured by the construction, operation, maintenance or removal of the telecommunications system to as good or better condition than that which existed prior to the disturbance. In the event that the permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to do so within the time specified by the city, the city shall be entitled to complete the work and the permittee shall reimburse the city for the costs of doing so. 
(c)  Easements. Any easements over or under private property necessary for the construction or operation of a telecommunications system shall be arranged and paid for by the permittee. Any use or intrusion on private property without an easement or other instrument evidencing permission of the property owner shall constitute a trespass by the permittee and a violation of this chapter. Any easements over or under property owned by the city other than the public rights-of-way shall be separately negotiated with the city. 
(d)  Tree trimming. A permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with its telecommunications system. The permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to trimming only those trees that are essential to maintain the integrity of its telecommunications system. No trimming shall be done in the public rights-of-way without previously informing the city. 
(e)  Pavement cut coordination/additional fees. A permittee shall coordinate all construction work in the public rights-of-way with the city's program for street construction, rebuilding, resurfacing and repair (collectively, "street resurfacing"). A permittee shall meet with the official of the city primarily responsible for the public rights-of-way at least twice per year to this end. The goals of such coordination shall be to require a permittee to conduct all work in the public rights-of-way in conjunction with or immediately prior to any street resurfacing planned by the city, and to prevent the public rights-of-way from being disturbed by a permittee for a period of years after such street resurfacing. In addition to any other fees or payments required by this chapter, a permittee shall pay to the city the sum of $1,250.00 for each 50 feet cut into or excavation of any public rights-of-way, or portion thereof, which was subject to street resurfacing within 18 months prior to such cut or excavation. This fee is in addition to and not in lieu of the obligation to restore the public rights-of-way and is in addition to all other fees required by this chapter or this Code. 
(f)  Marking. A permittee shall mark any installations of its telecommunications system which occur after the effective date of this chapter as follows: 
(1)  Aerial portions of its telecommunications system shall be marked with a marker on its lines on alternate poles which shall state the permittee's name and provide a toll-free number to call for assistance. 
(2)  Direct buried underground portions of its telecommunications system shall have (i) a conducting wire placed in the ground at least several inches above the permittee's cable (if such cable is nonconductive), (ii) at least several inches above that a continuous colored tape with the permittee's name and a toll-free phone number and a statement to the effect that there is buried cable beneath, and (iii) stakes or other appropriate above-ground markers with the permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that there is buried telephone cable below. 
(3)  Portions of its telecommunications system located in conduit, including facilities of others used by a permittee, shall be marked at each manhole with the permittee's name and toll-free telephone number to call for assistance. 
(g)  Compliance with laws. A permittee shall comply with all laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations regarding the installation, construction, ownership and use of its telecommunications system, whether federal, state or local, now in force or which hereafter may be promulgated (including, without limitation, any chapter requiring the installation of additional conduit when a permittee installs underground conduit for its telecommunications system). Before any installation is commenced, the permittee shall secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from all appropriate departments, agencies, boards or commissions of the city or other governmental entity as may be required by law, including, without limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits. A permittee shall comply in all respects with applicable codes and industry standards, including but not limited to the National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition) and the National Electric Code (latest edition). A permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as may exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(h)  Street vacation. If the city vacates or consents to the vacation of public rights-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation necessitates the removal and relocation of a permittee's facilities in the vacated right-of-way, the permittee shall, as a condition of the permit, consent to the vacation and move its facilities at its sole cost and expense when ordered to do so by the city or a court of competent jurisdiction. The permittee shall relocate its facilities to such alternate route as the city, acting reasonably and in good faith, shall designate. 
(i)  Relocation. If the city requests a permittee to relocate, protect, support, disconnect, place underground or remove its facilities because of street or utility work, or other public projects, the permittee shall relocate, protect, support, disconnect, place underground or remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense, to such alternate route as the city, acting reasonably and in good faith, shall designate. The work shall be completed within the time period designated by the city. 
(j)  Public emergency. The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy facilities of a permittee, without any prior notice, if such action is deemed necessary by the mayor, city manager, police chief, or fire chief or their designees because of a public emergency. Public emergency shall be any condition which, in the opinion of any of the officials named, poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property caused by any natural or man-made disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, major watermain breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. The permittee shall be responsible for repair at its sole cost and expense of any of its facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the city. 
(k)  Miss Dig. If eligible to join, a permittee shall subscribe to and be a member of "MISS DIG," the association of utilities formed pursuant to Act 53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, MCL § 460.701 et seq., and shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(l)  Use of existing facilities: undergrounding. A permittee shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities wherever practicable, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional poles or other facilities unless expressly authorized by the permit. Where utility wiring is located underground, either at the time of initial construction or subsequent thereto, a permittee's telecommunications system shall also be located underground unless otherwise expressly authorized by the permit. All undergrounding shall be at the sole cost and expense of the permittee. 
(m)  Underground relocation. If a permittee has its facilities on poles of Consumers' Energy Company or another public utility company and Consumers' Energy Company or other public utility company relocates its facilities underground, the permittee shall relocate its facilities underground in the same location at permittee's sole cost and expense. 
(n)  Pole/conduit license agreement; notification. If a permittee forfeits or otherwise loses its rights under a pole/conduit license agreement with Consumers' Energy Company or other entity, then permittee shall notify the city manager in writing within 30 days. 
(o)  Identification. All personnel of a permittee and its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. A permittee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of a permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public with the permittee's name and telephone number. 
(p)  911 emergency service. As a condition of a permit, a permittee providing local exchange service shall provide 911 service within the city in accordance with the provisions of the applicable 911 service plan and the rules and orders of the Michigan Public Service Commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIABILITY AND INSURANCE 

Sec. 80-15. - No city liability; indemnification. 
(a)  City not liable. The city, and its officers, agents, elected or appointed officials, employees, departments, boards, and commissions, shall not be liable to a permittee or to its affiliates or customers for any interference with or disruption in the operation of a permittee's telecommunications system or the provision of telecommunications services, or for any damages arising out of a permittee's use of the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Indemnification. As a condition of a permit, a permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions from any and all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings, and expenses of any nature (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees) arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns, but only to the extent of the fault of the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-16. - Insurance. 
(a)  A permittee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of a permit the following insurance covering all insurable risks associated with its ownership or use of its telecommunications system: 
(1)  A comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including Completed Operations Liability, Independent Contractors Liability, Contractual Liability coverage and coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage, in an amount not less than $10,000,000.00. 
(2)  An automobile liability insurance policy covering any vehicles used in connection with its activities under its permit in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(3)  Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance with statutory limits. 
(b)  The city shall be named as an additional insured in all applicable policies. All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled or modified unless 30 days prior written notice is given to the city. A permittee shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance evidencing such coverage as a condition of issuance of the permit and shall maintain on file with the city a current certificate. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers licensed to do business by the state or by surplus line carriers on the Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(c)  Each policy which is to be endorsed to add the city as an additional insured hereunder, shall contain cross-liability wording, as follows: 
"In the event of a claim being made hereunder by one insured for which another insured is or may be liable, then this policy shall cover such insured against whom a claim is or may be made in the same manner as if separate policies had been issued to each insured hereunder." 
(d)  If the insurance policies required by this section are written with deductibles in excess of $50,000.00, the deductibles shall be approved in advance by the city. A permittee agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished by this chapter. 
(e)  The permittee shall require that its contractors and subcontractors working in public rights-of-way carry in full force and effect workers' compensation and employer liability, comprehensive general liability and automobile liability insurance coverages of the types which permittee is required to obtain under subsection 80-16(a) with appropriate limits of coverage. 
(f)  The permittee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with respect to the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to it. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
ARTICLE V. - ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT PROHIBITED; REVOCATIONS AND REMOVAL OF FACILITIES 

Sec. 80-17. - No assignment or transfer of control without city consent. 
    A permittee shall not assign or transfer a permit or any of its rights under a permit, in whole or in part, voluntarily, involuntarily or by operation of law, including by merger or consolidation or by other means, nor shall there be a transfer of control of a permittee or its business, without the prior written consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. The permittee shall reimburse the city for reasonable, actual costs incurred in the review of a request by the permittee for consent to an assignment or transfer of the permit or a transfer of control of a permittee or its business. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the permittee may grant a security interest in its rights under a permit in favor of a third party without first obtaining the consent of the city. If a permit or any rights thereunder is assigned or transferred in whole or in part with the approval of the city, the terms and conditions of the permit and of this chapter shall be binding upon the successors and assigns of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-18. - Revocation. 
    In addition to all other rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional separate and distinct remedy the right to revoke a permit and all rights and privileges of a permittee in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A permittee fails after 30 days prior written notice to comply with any of the provisions of the permit or this chapter (except subsection 80-8(f)); or 
(2)  A permittee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; or 
(3)  All or part of a permittee's facilities are sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permittee within 90 days from such sale; or 
(4)  A permittee violates subsection 80-8(f) or otherwise attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations with the city; or 
(5)  The city condemns all of the property of a permittee within the city by the lawful exercise of eminent domain; or 
(6)  A permittee abandons its telecommunication system or fails to seek renewal of its permit; or 
(7)  A permittee fails to pay any fines due for violations of this chapter; or 
(8)  A permittee fails to pay any civil fines imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction, such as pursuant to an ordinance providing for civil infractions. 
    No revocation, except for reason of condemnation, shall be effective unless the city commission shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the reason for the revocation and the effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted without 30 days prior notice to the permittee and a hearing at which the permittee receives rudimentary due process. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-19. - Removal. 
(a)  Removal-Underground. Upon revocation of a permit, or upon expiration of a permit if the permit is not renewed, the permittee may remove any underground cable from the public rights-of-way which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. Except as otherwise provided, the permittee shall not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the public rights-of-way along the extension of cable to be removed. The permittee shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any underground cable or conduit which is ordered to be removed by the city based upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the city, that removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets for public purposes. Any order by the city to remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the permittee not later than 30 calendar days following the date of revocation or expiration of the permit. A permittee shall file written notice with the city clerk not later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration or termination of the permit of its intention to remove cable and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the city. Removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the date of revocation or expiration of the permit. Underground cable and conduit in the public rights-of-way which is not removed within such time period shall be deemed abandoned and, at the option of the city, title shall be vested in the city. For purposes of this subsection (a), "cable" means any wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire. 
(b)  Same-Above ground. Upon revocation of a permit, or upon expiration of a permit if the permit is not renewed, a permittee, at its sole cost and expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the city, remove from the public rights-of-way all above ground elements of its telecommunication system, including but not limited to poles, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, and lines attached to or suspended from poles. 
(c)  Permits; restoration; completion. A permittee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security as required by applicable law or ordinances of the city, shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable law or chapters, and shall restore the public rights-of-way to the same condition they were in before the work of removal commenced. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 80-21. - Other provisions not waived. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any ordinances, Charter provisions, codes, or regulations of the city or the city's right to require permittee or persons utilizing the telecommunication system or telecommunications services to secure appropriate permits or authorization for such use. 
(b)  The city fully reserves its police powers to ensure and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and fully reserves its authority and power to amend this chapter at any time. The terms and conditions of any permit shall be subject to compliance with any future amendments of this chapter. The city fully reserves its right to exercise the reasonable control of the public rights-of-way pursuant to Article VII, § 29 of the 1963 Michigan Constitution. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter or any permit shall limit any right the city may have to acquire by eminent domain any property of a telecommunications provider. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter or any permit shall limit the authority the city to impose a tax, fee, or other assessment of any kind on any person. A telecommunications provider shall pay all fees necessary to obtain all federal, state, and local licenses, permits, and authorizations required for the construction, installation, maintenance, or operation of its telecommunications system within the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-22. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sections and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby, except as provided in this section. If a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction determines, by a final, nonappealable order or an order from which no appeal has been taken within the time allowed, that any right or obligation of a permittee under this chapter is invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, then the permit shall become revocable and subject to termination without cause by either the city or the permittee on 60 days written notice. In the event of termination under this section by the city, the procedures for revocation set forth in section 80-18 shall be followed. In the event of termination under this section by either the city or the permittee, the provisions of section 80-19 for removal shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-23. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 80-24. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $5,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as follows: 
First repeat offense Not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00 Second and subsequent repeat offense Not less than $2,000.00 and not more than $20,000.00.  
(Ord. No. 98-509, § 1, 2-9-98) 
CHAPTER 81. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS-METRO ACT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Telecommunications generally, ch. 80. 

Sec. 81-1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) (Act) and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-3. - Terms defined. 
(a)  Terms. The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of Walker. 
    City commission means the City Commission of the City of Walker or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  Other terms; Act All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the department of consumer and industry services, and shall have the same meaning as the term commission in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934; chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332; and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934; chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 33;2 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
1.  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
3.  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-4. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make five copies of the application and distribute one copy to the city engineer. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contains trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231-15.246, pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 181 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 81-4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a permit as required under chapter 70 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged to a telecommunications provider for such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps shall be in paper format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 81-4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act (including providers with permits or consent agreements in effect on October 31, 2002), relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of Ordinance No. 02-490, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the Act, if section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 81-11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-14. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority to the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-17. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231-15.246, as provided in subsection 81-4(c) of this chapter, to the extent permitted by law; 
(b)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter, in accordance with subsection 81-4(f) of this chapter; 
(c)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500 application fee, in accordance with subsection 81-4(g) of this chapter; 
(d)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 81-5(a) of this chapter; 
(e)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with subsection 81-5(a) of this chapter; 
(f)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with subsection 81-5(a) of this chapter; 
(g)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in subsection 81-5(b) of this chapter; 
(h)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with subsection 81-5(c) of this chapter; 
(i)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with subsection 81-5(d) of this chapter; 
(j)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction permits, in accordance with section 81-6 of this chapter; 
(k)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this ordinance, in accordance with section 81-11 of this chapter; 
(l)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 81-14 of this chapter; and 
(m)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 81-15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-19. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-20. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 81-21. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $5,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as follows: 
First repeat offense Not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00 Second and subsequentrepeat offense Not less than $2,000.00 and not more than $20,000.00  
(Ord. No. 02-486, § 1, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 08-557, § 2, 6-9-08) 
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic control at outdoor assemblies, § 10-73; court, ch. 26; noise from stationary motor vehicles restricted, § 34-131(9); motor vehicle noise, § 34-156 et seq.; standards for vehicles transporting excavated material, § 34-298; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; trespassing with motor vehicles, § 50-27; transporting vehicles in waste haulers, § 62-31 et seq.; lights for snowplows, § 70-63; vehicles with metal tracks or studs prohibited, § 70-67; license for commercial snow removing vehicles, § 70-81 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 74; malicious destruction of vegetation or soil with vehicle, § 90-2. 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Warrantless arrests. 
    A peace officer, without a warrant, may arrest a person in any of the following situations: 
(a)  The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of an accident in this city, the operator of a vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of section 82-27(5.15(1), (3), or (6)) or section 82-27(5.15m) of this code, or Section 625(1), (3), or (6) or Section 625m of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, MCL 257.625 and 257.625m. 
(b)  The person is found in the driver's seat of a vehicle parked or stopped on a highway or street within this city if any part of the vehicle intrudes into the roadway and the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was operating the vehicle in violation of section 82-27(5.15(1), (3), or (6)) or section 82-27(5.15m) of this code, or Section 625(1), (3), or (6) or Section 625m of Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949. 
(c)  The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of an accident, the operator of a snowmobiles involved in the accident and was operating the snowmobile in violation of section 82-27(1) or (3) of Part 821 (snowmobiles) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, MCL 324.82127. 
(d)  The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of an accident, the operator of an ORV involved in the accident and was operating the ORV in violation of Section 81134(1) or (2) or 81135 of Part 811 (off-road recreation vehicles) of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, MCL 324.81134 and 324.81135. 
(e)  The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time an accident, the operator of a vessel involved in the accident and was operating the vessel violation of Section 80176(1) or (3) of Part 801 (marine safety) of Act No. 451 of the License Acts of 1994, MCL 324.80176. 
(Ord. No. 97-494, § 3, 3-24-97) 
Secs. 82-2-82-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE AND UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-459, § 1, adopted July 24, 2000, repealed the former art. II, §§ 82-26-82-28, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to the uniform traffic code and derived from Code 1976, §§ 11-1, 11-2 and 11-6; Ord. No. 91-402, § 1, adopted Jan. 1, 1992; Ord. No. 92-407, § 1, adopted April 14, 1992; Ord. No. 94-447, §§ 2-8, adopted Oct. 25, 1994; Ord. No. 95-462, §§ 1-11, adopted May 9, 1995; Ord. No. 97-494, §§ 4-10, adopted March 24, 1997; Ord. No. 99-538, §§ 1-10, adopted Sept. 13, 1999; and Ord. No. 99-453, §§ 2, 3, adopted Dec. 27. 1999. 
Ord. No. 02-494, § 2, adopted Dec. 23, 2002, changed the title of art. II to read as herein set out. The former title was Michigan Vehicle Code. 

Sec. 82-26. - Adopted. 
(a)  The Michigan Vehicle Code (Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended; MCL 257.1 et seq.), as amended from time to time (specifically including, but not limited to, the provisions of Public Act No. 61 of 2003 effective on September 30, 2003) is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Walker. 
(c)  The city clerk shall publish this section in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the Code is available for inspection by the public at all times. 
(d)  The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 00-459, § 2, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 03-505, § 1, 9-22-03) 
Sec. 82-27. - Adoption by reference of uniform traffic code; amendment. 
(a)  The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships, and villages ("uniform traffic code") as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police in Rule No. 2002-009-SP pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), effective October 30, 2002, in accordance with Public Act No. 62 of 1956, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference subject to the modification in subsections (e) and (f) below. 
(b)  References in the uniform traffic code to "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Walker. 
(c)  The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the uniform traffic code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available for inspection by the public at the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Violations of the provisions of the uniform traffic code designated as civil infractions shall constitute civil infractions under the City Code. Violations of the uniform traffic code designated as misdemeanors shall constitute misdemeanors under the City Code, and, notwithstanding any provision of the uniform traffic code, shall be punishable as provided in subsection 1-11(b) of the City Code. 
(e)  R28.1323 is hereby added to the uniform traffic code to read as follows: 
    R28.1323. Engine brakes prohibited in certain areas. 
a.  For purposes of this section, "engine brakes" are defined as an exhaust or exhaust manifold powered auxiliary braking system found on trucks. The terms "truck" and "truck tractor" used in this section shall have the same meaning as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code, as amended from time to time, being MCL 257.1 et seq. 
b.  The city commission hereby finds that engine brakes are an auxiliary system and that drivers of trucks have other means of braking. In certain areas of the city, the use and application of engine brakes can be noisy and disruptive of the peace and tranquility of nearby residential areas. 
c.  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate streets, or parts of streets, where it is unlawful for the driver of a truck or truck tractor to use engine brakes (except in an emergency situation). The traffic engineer shall erect appropriate traffic-control devices to give notice of the prohibited use of engine brakes. 
d.  A person who violates a prohibition on the use of engine brakes on designated streets or parts of streets under this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(f)  R28.1823, Rule 823, is hereby added to the uniform traffic code immediately following R28.1822, Rule 822, to read as follows: 
    R28.1823, Rule 823. Parking on private property without permission. 
(1)  No person shall park a vehicle on any private property within the city without the express or implied consent, authorization, or ratification of the owner, occupant, lessee, or trustee of such property. A complaint for violation of this rule shall be made by the owner, occupant, lessee, trustee of such property. 
(2)  The evidentiary presumptions and other provisions in Sections 675a through 675d of the Michigan Vehicle Code (Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended; MCL 257.1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, shall apply to this rule. 
(3)  A person who violates this rule is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The civil fine for a violation of this rule shall be not less than $100.00, plus costs and sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this rule shall be subject to increased fines as provided by subsection 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(g)  R28.1202a, Rule 1202a, is hereby added to the Uniform Traffic Code immediately following R28.1202, Rule 1202, to read as follows: 
(1)  No person who is the driver of a motor vehicle who is given by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren, a visual or audible signal by a police officer, acting in the lawful performance of his or her duty, directing the driver to bring his or her motor vehicle to a stop shall willfully fail to obey such direction, by increasing the speed of the motor vehicle, extinguishing the lights of the motor vehicle, continuing the operation of the vehicle without increasing speed or changing direction, or otherwise attempting to flee, avoid, or elude the officer, provided that the officer is in uniform and, if in a vehicle, the vehicle is adequately identified as an official police vehicle. 
(2)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 02-494, § 1, 12-23-02; Ord. No. 03-507, §§ 1, 2, 12-22-03; Ord. No. 05-525, § 1, 3-28-05) 
Secs. 82-28-82-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL ORDERS 

Sec. 82-45. - Scope. 
    The sections of this article contain traffic control orders adopted by the city commission pursuant to section 2.53 of the uniform traffic code adopted by reference in section 82-26. 
(Code 1976, § 11-15) 
Sec. 82-46. - Weight restrictions generally. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon, and the term "through traffic" means vehicles not loading or unloading in whole or in part on the streets specified in this section. 
    Public service vehicles means any vehicle, whether or not owned or licensed by the city, which provides services to the owners of property fronting on the regulated street, which services relate to their health, safety and welfare, and shall include garbage trucks, trash trucks, vehicles to service septic systems, snowplows and road maintenance vehicles serving the owners of such property. 
(b)  Restrictions. 
    Angie Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight to be driven on any portion of Angie Avenue. 
    Cogswell Street. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized public service vehicles, vehicles making deliveries to residential properties, emergency vehicles and schoolbuses, to be driven on Cogswell Street. 
    Collindale Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized emergency vehicles and schoolbuses, to enter as through traffic upon Collindale Avenue, from the city limits south to O'Brien Road. 
    Cummings Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized emergency vehicles and schoolbuses and vehicles owned by abutting residents or occupants, to be driven as through traffic on Cummings Avenue, from Lake Michigan Drive south to its end at O'Brien Road. 
    Ferris Street. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight to be driven on any portion of Ferris Street. 
    Gaynor Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized public service vehicles, vehicles making deliveries to residential properties, emergency vehicles and schoolbuses, to be driven on Gaynor Avenue between Harding Street and Rogers Street. 
    Harding Street. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized public service vehicles, vehicles making deliveries to residential properties, emergency vehicles and schoolbuses, to be driven on Harding Street between Alpine Avenue and Powers Avenue. 
    Lamont Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight to be driven on Lamont Avenue, N.W., from Richmond Road north to its end. 
    Lankamp Street. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight to be driven on any portion of Lankamp Street. 
    Maynard Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized emergency vehicles and schoolbuses, to be driven as through traffic on Maynard Avenue, from Lake Michigan Drive south to O'Brien Road. 
    Rogers Street. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized public service vehicles, vehicles making deliveries to residential properties, emergency vehicles and schoolbuses, to be driven on Rogers Street. 
    Sunset Hill Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight, except authorized emergency vehicles and schoolbuses and vehicles owned by abutting residents or occupants, to be driven as through traffic on Sunset Hill Avenue, from Lake Michigan Drive south to its end at O'Brien Road. 
(Code 1976, § 11-18) 
Sec. 82-47. - Weight restrictions based on seasonal or other conditions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide proper roadway maintenance on public streets within the jurisdiction of the city by the imposition of weight restrictions based upon temperature, time of the year, weather conditions, road conditions, and such other circumstances as may affect road condition and maintenance. 
(b)  Imposition. The street administrator for the city is hereby authorized and directed to impose the following maximum allowable gross axle load limit restrictions on a temporary basis where in his opinion the absence of such restrictions may be injurious to any public street within the jurisdiction of the city pursuant to the purpose of this section and to protect the public health, safety and welfare: 
Maximum Allowable Gross Axle Loading
When Restrictions Are in Force 
Spacing Between Axles Unposted 
Roads 
(lbs.) Posted 
Roads 
(lbs.) 9 feet or over 18,000 11,700 More than 31/2 feet, but less than 9 feet 13,000  8,450 When part of a tandem axle assembly* 16,000 10,400 When less than 31/2 feet the combined weight shall not exceed 18,000 11,700 Maximum load on any wheel (pounds per inch of tire width)    700    450  
*On any legal combination of vehicles, only one tandem axle assembly shall be permitted at the weights shown and no other tandem axle assembly shall exceed a gross weight of 13,000 pounds and 8,450 pounds, respectively, per axle. On a five-axle tractor-semitrailer combination, two separate two-axle tandem assemblies shall be permitted at the weights shown. 
(c)  Notice. The weight restrictions to be imposed pursuant to this section as set forth under "posted roads" shall not be effective until notice thereof is given by appropriate signs placed on such streets. The weight restrictions set forth under "unposted roads" shall be in effect at all times for roads not so posted without necessity of further notice. 
(d)  Violation. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, stop, stand or park any vehicle with a weight in excess of the limit imposed by this section on any public street within the city where such signs have been posted. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of a violation of this section, as defined in subsection (d), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 for a first offense, $100.00 for a second offense, and $1.00 per pound for every pound in excess of the imposed limit, but not to exceed $500.00, for each offense thereafter. 
(f)  Enforcement. The street administrator is hereby directed and authorized to enforce the provisions of this section, including appointment of authorized representatives for enforcement of this section, which representatives shall have authority to issue written notices of violations and to order appearance of violators in the city municipal court or any other court of competent jurisdiction for enforcement of the ordinances of the city. 
(g)  Disclosure of information. It shall be the duty of any person driving or in charge of any vehicle on any street posted pursuant to this section to stop and answer any questions by the authorized representative of the street administrator regarding the weight of his vehicle, its destination, and its point of origin; such person shall also present for examination his logbook, weight slips, delivery slip, and other evidence of the weight, destination and point of origin of his vehicle; and such person shall also drive his vehicle to the nearest commercial scale for weighing upon direction of the authorized representative. Any person failing or refusing to comply with the disclosure requirements of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500.00. 
(h)  Hardship. In case of an emergency or unusual hardship, a temporary highway permit allowing exceptions to this section may be issued by the city engineer upon the filing of an application prescribed by the street administrator and payment of the application fee. 
(Code 1976, § 11-5) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Sec. 82-48. - Right turn on red light restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating any vehicle other than an emergency vehicle to turn right at an intersection where the traffic signal device which regulates traffic in such person's lane of traffic is red, when such right turn on a red traffic signal is prohibited by a validly posted traffic control sign. 
(Code 1976, § 11-19) 
Secs. 82-49-82-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 

Sec. 82-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    ATV means a three- or four-wheeled vehicle designed for off-road use that has low pressure tires, has a seat designed to be straddled by the rider, and is powered by a 50cc to 500cc gasoline engine or an engine of comparable size using other fuels. 
    Operate means to ride in or on, and be in actual physical control of, the operation of an ORV. 
    ORV or vehicle means a motor-driven off-road recreational vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. It includes, but is not limited to, a multitrack or multi-wheel drive vehicle, an ATV, a motorcycle or related two-wheel or three-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground-effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. "ORV" or "vehicle" does not include a registered snowmobile, a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes, a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function, or a registered aircraft. 
    Owner means any of the following: 
(1)  A vendee or lessee of an ORV which is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease of the ORV, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee. 
(2)  A person renting an ORV, or having the exclusive use of an ORV, for more than 30 days. 
(3)  A person who holds legal ownership of an ORV. 
(Code 1976, § 11-41) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-67. - Regulation and supervision of minors, etc. 
(a)  A parent or legal guardian shall not permit a child under the age of 12 to operate a vehicle without the direct supervision of an adult, except on land owned by, or under the control of, the parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  The owner of a vehicle shall not knowingly permit: 
(1)  The vehicle to be operated by a person under the age of 12 without direct supervision of an adult. 
(2)  The vehicle to be operated by a person who is incompetent to operate the vehicle because of mental or physical disability, or because of being under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance as defined by MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq. 
(c)  A person who is at least 12 but less than 16 years of age may operate an ORV if that person satisfies any of the following: 
(1)  Is under the direct supervision of a person who is 18 years of age or older. 
(2)  Is on land owned by or under the control of a parent or legal guardian. 
(3)  Has in immediate possession an ORV safety certificate issued by the department of natural resources or its designated representatives. 
(4)  Possesses an ORV safety certificate issued under the authority of another state, or province of Canada. 
(d)  When operating an ORV under subsection (c)(3) or (4) that person shall present the ORV safety certificate to any law enforcement officer upon demand. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, an operator who is under 12 years of age shall not cross a highway or street. An operator who is at least 12 years of age but less than 16 years of age may cross a highway or street if the operator has a valid ORV safety certificate in his immediate possession. 
(Code 1976, § 11-42) 
Sec. 82-68. - General operating restrictions. 
    A person shall not operate an ORV: 
(1)  At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, or in a careless manner not having due regard for conditions then existing. 
(2)  While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance as defined by MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq. 
(3)  During the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and lighted taillight. 
(4)  Unless equipped with a braking system which may be operated by hand or foot, capable of producing deceleration at 14 feet per second on level ground at a speed of 20 miles per hour; a brake light, brighter than the taillight, visible when the brake is activated to the rear of the vehicle when the vehicle is operated during the hours of one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise; and a throttle so designed that when the pressure used to advance the throttle is removed, the engine speed will immediately and automatically return to idle. 
(5)  In a state game area or state park or recreation area, except on roads, trails, or areas designated for this purpose; on state-owned lands under the control of the department of natural resources other than game areas, state parks, or recreational areas where the operation would be in violation of rules promulgated by the commission; in a forest nursery or planting area; on public lands posted or reasonably identifiable as an area of forest reproduction, and when growing stock may be damaged; in a dedicated natural area of the department of natural resources; or in any area in such a manner as to create an erosive condition, or to injure, damage or destroy trees or growing crops. 
(6)  On any city-owned property unless otherwise posted. 
(7)  On the frozen surface of public waters within 100 feet of a person not in or upon a vehicle, or within 100 feet of a fishing shanty or shelter or an area which is cleared of snow for skating purposes, except at the minimum speed required to maintain controlled forward movement of the vehicle, or as may be authorized by permit in special events. 
(8)  Unless the vehicle is equipped with a spark arrester-type muffler, in good working order and in constant operation. Noise emission under full throttle, at 50 feet at right angles from the vehicle path, shall not exceed 90 db(A) on a vehicle manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1973; 88 db(A) on a vehicle manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1973; or 86 db(A) on a vehicle manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1975, as measured on a sound level meter which meets the requirements of ANSI S1.4 1971, using the procedure and ancillary equipment therein described. A vehicle subject to this section, manufactured or assembled after February 1, 1976, and used, sold or offered for sale in this state shall conform to the noise emission levels established by the Environmental Protection Agency under the federal noise control act of 1972, except in an officially authorized special event. 
(9)  Within 100 feet of a dwelling at a speed greater than the minimum required to maintain controlled forward movement of the vehicle, except on property owned or under the operator's control or on which the operator is an invited guest, or on a roadway, forest road or forest trail under the jurisdiction of the department of natural resources and where permitted by such department, or on an ORV access route as authorized by local ordinance. 
(10)  In or upon private property without consent of the owner or lessee of the land. The operator of the vehicle is liable for damage to private property, including but not limited to damage to trees, shrubs, or growing crops, injury to living creatures, or damage caused through vehicle operation in a manner so as to create erosive or other ecological damage to private property. The owner of the private property may recover from the person responsible nominal damages of not less than the amount of damage or injury. Failure to post private property or fence or otherwise enclose property in a manner to exclude intruders, or for the private property owner or other authorized person to personally communicate against trespass, shall not imply consent to ORV use. 
(11)  While transporting thereon a bow unless unstrung or encased, or a firearm unless unloaded and securely encased, or equipped with and made inoperative by a manufactured key-locked trigger housing mechanism. 
(12)  On or across a cemetery or burial ground, or land used as an airport. 
(13)  Within 100 feet of a slide, ski or skating area, unless the vehicle is being used for the purpose of servicing the area. 
(14)  On an operating or nonabandoned railroad or railroad right-of-way, other than for the purpose of crossing at a clearly established site intended for vehicular traffic, except railroad, public utility or law enforcement personnel while in performance of their duties. 
(15)  In or upon the waters of any stream, except for the purpose of crossing the stream over a bridge, culvert, or similar structure, or by operating the vehicle at the minimum speed required to maintain controlled forward movement of the vehicle and crossing in the most direct manner from and to an established trail so as to negate erosive damage to the bed and banks of the stream or river, or as may otherwise be authorized by the director of the department of natural resources on state-owned land; or to travel upstream or downstream in any river or stream unless of a water depth sufficient to permit flotation of the vehicle at all times. 
(16)  To hunt, pursue, worry, kill, or attempt such action toward a bird or animal, wild or domesticated. 
(17)  In a manner so as to leave behind litter or other debris. 
(Code 1976, § 11-43) 
Cross reference- Noise, § 34-126 et seq. 
Sec. 82-69. - Willful failure to obey an officer's direction. 
(a)  An operator of an ORV who is given by hand, voice, emergency light or siren a visual or audible signal by a law enforcement officer acting in the lawful performance of his duty, directing the operator to bring the vehicle to a stop, and who willfully fails to obey the signal by increasing speed, extinguishing lights, or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the officer is guilty of a misdemeanor. The officer giving the signal shall be in uniform, and the officer's vehicle shall be easily identifiable as an official law enforcement vehicle. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle on the private premises of another, when visibly hailed by the owner or the owner's authorized agent, shall bring the vehicle to an immediate stop and provide personal identification. Refusal to obey such a request to stop or subsequent escape or attempt to escape is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1976, § 11-44) 
Sec. 82-70. - Operation on highway or right-of-way; crossing highway; special event on street, highway or frozen surface. 
    A person shall not operate an ORV which is not registered under Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), as amended, upon a public highway, street or right-of-way thereof, except under the following conditions and circumstances: 
(1)  The operator of a vehicle may cross a public street or highway, other than a limited access highway, at right angles, for the purpose of getting from one area to another, when the operation can be done in safety. The operator shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop before proceeding across a public street or highway, and shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic. 
(2)  A vehicle may be operated on a street or highway for a special event of limited duration, conducted according to a prearranged schedule, only under permit from the city. A special event involving ORVs may be conducted on the frozen surface of public waters only under permit from the department of natural resources. 
(Code 1976, § 11-46) 
Sec. 82-71. - Compliance with other ordinances and laws. 
    Compliance with the provisions of this article does not relieve any person from the necessity to comply with all other applicable provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the city, or statute or regulation of the state or federal government. 
(Code 1976, § 11-45) 
Secs. 82-72-82-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 82-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inoperable motor vehicles means motor vehicles which do not bear valid registration plates as required by the state vehicle code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), or which, by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other cause, are incapable of being propelled under their own power, or are unsafe for operation on the streets and highways of this state, because of inability to comply with the state vehicle code. 
    Motor vehicles means any wheeled vehicles which are or are intended to be operable as self-propelled vehicles. 
(Code 1976, § 11-29) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-92. - Article supplementary to other ordinances and state statutes. 
    This article shall not be construed as repealing any ordinance relating to the keeping of rubbish, litter, garbage, refuse, trash or junk, but shall be construed as supplementary to any such ordinance as well as to any statutes of the state relating thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 11-30) 
Sec. 82-93. - To be stored in enclosed structure; exceptions. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to store, place or permit to be stored or placed any inoperable motor vehicle or any part or parts of a motor vehicle on land located in the city, except as such storage or placement may be permitted under the provisions of the zoning chapter or the provisions of section 82-94, unless such inoperable motor vehicle or part or parts of a motor vehicle are kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. 
(Code 1976, § 11-32) 
Sec. 82-94. - Temporary open storage on private property. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant of land may store or permit to be stored on such land one inoperable motor vehicle, for a period of not to exceed 48 hours, if such motor vehicle is registered in his name. In the event of hardship, such owner or occupant may apply to the building official for a permit to extend such period of 48 hours for an additional period of not to exceed one week. 
(b)  Upon application duly made and upon a showing of hardship, which hardship can be eliminated by an extension of time for the storage of the inoperable motor vehicle, the building official is hereby authorized to issue the permit referred to in subsection (a). No such permit shall be granted for successive weeks for any one motor vehicle. A fee of $1.00 shall be collected for each such permit so issued and shall be paid into the general fund. 
(c)  Nothing in this section or any permit issued under this section shall be construed to authorize the parking, placing or storage of an inoperable motor vehicle in any front yard, as defined in chapter 94, pertaining to zoning, and such parking, placing or storage is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 11-33) 
Sec. 82-95. - Parking on streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any inoperable motor vehicle on any street area in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 11-34) 
Sec. 82-96. - Violation of article declared public nuisance. 
    The presence of an inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle in violation of the terms of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 11-31) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 34-26 et seq. 
Sec. 82-97. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article (article V) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-453, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Secs. 82-98, 82-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION OF PUBLIC PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 82-100. - Purpose. 
    Under the authority of Public Act No. 235 of the Public Acts of 1969, as amended, and upon request of the downtown development authority, the city hereby regulates the movement of vehicles and pedestrians and the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in public parking lots within the city. 
(Ord. No. 93-426, § 1, 11-23-93) 
Sec. 82-101. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Public parking lots means the public parking lots and related access drives for which public easements have been granted to the city downtown development authority. 
    Traffic control devices means signs, signals, markings, and devices placed or erected under the direction of the chief of police for the purpose of regulating the movement of vehicles and pedestrians and the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in public parking lots. 
    Uniform Traffic Code means the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages, as amended, and adopted by reference in article II of chapter 82. 
(Ord. No. 93-426, § 1, 11-23-93) 
Sec. 82-102. - Regulation of public parking lots; tow-away zones. 
(a)  The chief of police may determine controls of the movement of vehicles and pedestrians and the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in public parking lots including, without limitation, the designation of tow-away zones where parking is restricted or prohibited. The chief of police shall direct the placement and maintenance of whatever traffic-control devices are necessary to give notice of the controls determined to be necessary. 
(b)  Tow-away zones may be designated by the chief of police in public parking lots by posting signs which read "tow-away zone". Such signs shall be posted independently or as an extra panel attached below the posted signs which prohibit or restrict parking at the location. 
(c)  A police officer may immediately remove a vehicle from a public parking lot and impound the vehicle if a vehicle is found parked in violation of a traffic-control device in a tow-away zone designated by the chief of police under this article. A police officer who impounds a vehicle under this section shall follow the same procedures for impounding a vehicle parked in a tow-away zone under the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-426, § 1, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 10-586, § 1, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 82-103. - Prima facie responsibility of registered owner; operator. 
    If a vehicle is parked in a public parking lot in violation of the directions of a traffic-control device, the person in whose name the vehicle is registered in this state or another state at the time of the violation is prima facie responsible for that violation and subject to section 82-104. A police officer who issues a citation for a vehicle that is stopped, standing, or parked in violation of the directions of a traffic-control device in a public parking lot may issue the citation to the operator of the vehicle if the operator is present at the time of violation. 
(Ord. No. 93-426, § 1, 11-23-93) 
Sec. 82-104. - Violations; civil infraction. 
    A person who fails to comply with the directions of a traffic-control device in a public parking lot is responsible for a civil infraction. A civil infraction under this article shall be processed in the same manner as a civil infraction under the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-426, § 1, 11-23-93) 
Secs. 82-105-82-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-494, §§ 3, 4, repealed art. VII in its entirety and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former art. VII pertained to traffic engineer; traffic control orders; procedures and derived from Ord. No. 00-459, § 3, adopted Jul 24, 2000. 

Sec. 82-120. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, commercial vehicle, commercial motor vehicle, and motor home shall have the meaning as those terms are defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code (Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended; MCL 257.1 et seq.), as amended, and "major recreational equipment" shall have the meaning as that term is defined in section 94-470 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 82-121. - Weight restrictions on parking. 
(a)  No commercial vehicle, commercial motor vehicle, motor home, or major recreational equipment shall be parked for longer than six hours on any road or street anywhere in the city. For purposes of this article, commercial vehicle, commercial motor vehicle, and motor home shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code (Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended; MCL 257.1 et seq.), as amended, and major recreational equipment shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in section 94-470 of the City Code. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 82-122. - Restrictions on angle parking for commercial vehicles. 
(a)  No commercial vehicle or commercial motor vehicle shall be allowed to stand at an angle to the side of the roadway and projecting into such roadway for longer than four hours. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall such angle parking be permitted where the free flow of traffic would be curtailed, except upon written permission from the chief of police, and then only upon showing to the chief of police of the need for such angle parking and the length of time required for such angle parking, which length of time shall be reasonable with reference to traffic conditions at the location to which the request relates. This section shall not apply to a vehicle which has become inoperable because of an unforeseen circumstance, and such vehicle may remain on the road or street as long as reasonably necessary to make it operable or obtain a means of removing it, whichever shall be the shorter period. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 82-123. - Restrictions on parking of unattached trailers; penalties. 
(a)  No unattached trailer of any type shall be parked on a roadway in the city at any time except as may be necessary to temporarily disconnect it for purposes of loading or unloading, and then for no longer than two hours at any time. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 82-124. - Moved vehicles deemed stationary. 
    For purposes of this article, any vehicle which has been moved less than 100 feet shall be considered stationary and as if it were still parked in the location immediately preceding the move. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-02) 
Sec. 82-125. - Restrictions on parking of commercial vehicles in residentially zoned districts; penalties. 
(a)  No commercial vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, other than trucks three-fourths of a ton or smaller, shall be parked in any public street or highway located within a residentially zoned district, unless such vehicle is parked in that location in connection with services being performed on, for, or related to property within 100 feet of the place where such vehicle is parked. Such services shall include, as example and not by way of limitation, excavation and construction, repair of buildings or equipment, and pickup or delivery of items. No commercial vehicle or commercial motor vehicle shall be parked in the manner specified in this section for any period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to perform the function for which that vehicle is being used. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 02-486, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-02) 
Secs. 82-126-82-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-494, §§ 3, 5, adopted Dec. 23, 2002, amended Art. VIII in its entirety and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to pedestrians and derived from Ord. No. 00-459, § 4, adopted July 24, 2000. 

Sec. 82-130. - Authorizing or permitting unlicensed driver to operate vehicle prohibited. 
(a)  A person shall not knowingly authorize or permit a motor vehicle owned by him or her [or] under his or her control to be driven by any person who is unlicensed to drive such vehicle. 
(b)  A violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 02-494, §§ 3, 5, 12-23-02) 
Secs. 82-131-82-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 82-200. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the orderly operation of trucks on the streets of the city. The primary objectives are to facilitate the transfer of goods and services by trucks to businesses and to preserve the quality of life of neighborhoods. Prime considerations involved with the purpose of this article are: 
(a)  The safety of our citizens; 
(b)  Avoidance of unreasonable or unnecessary disturbance or reduction in property values due to truck noise, vibrations, and/or air pollution; 
(c)  Protection against the deterioration of those streets not designated for truck traffic; and 
(d)  Adequate truck service to businesses and residences in an expeditious manner, having due regard for economical vehicle operation. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-201. - Traffic control signs. 
    Where density of traffic, protection of life and property, construction and condition of the roadway, or any hazardous condition make it advisable, the direction of traffic flow, and routing of buses, trucks, and heavy vehicles, will be made by this article by duly posting traffic control signs and it shall be unlawful to drive or cause to be driven, any vehicle in violation of such direction and routing. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-202. - Truck route map. 
    The streets designated as forming the truck route system are indicated upon the truck route map attached as appendix A and the map, and all notations, references or other information located thereon, are made a part of this article and shall have the same force and effect as if there were fully set forth or described herein. The map shall be properly attested by the chief of police and shall be on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-203. - Street designations. 
    The streets of the city are hereby designated for purposes of this article as follows: 
(a)  Truck routes. Those streets or portions of streets specifically designated as truck routes in section 82-204. 
(b)  Major streets. Those streets or portions of streets that are certified by the Michigan Department of Transportation as major streets in the city, excluding those streets or portions of streets designated as truck routes in section 82-204. For purposes of this article, major streets are only those streets or portions of streets designated in section 82-205. 
(c)  Local streets. All streets not designated in this article as truck routes or major streets. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-204. - Truck routes. 
    The following roadways, or portions of roadways, in the city are hereby designated as truck routes for purposes of this article: 
Street Location Alpine Ave. (pt. M-37) 4 Mile Rd. to south city limit Bristol Ave. Pannell Street to 1700 ft. south (200 ft. North of bridge) Butterworth Dr. Maynard Ave. to east city limit Butterworth Dr. Veterans Memorial Dr. to Wilson Ave. (M-11) Courier Ct. Three Mile Rd. to its terminus Calann Three Mile Rd to its terminus Dykstra Dr. Fruit Ridge Ave. to its east terminus Elmridge Dr. Three Mile Rd. to 1,320 ft. south Fruit Ridge Ave. Three Mile Rd. to Four Mile Rd. Hillside Dr. Alpine Ave. to West River Drive Lake Michigan Dr. West city limit to east city limit Leonard St. Remembrance Rd. to east city limit Marlin Ct. Three Mile Rd. to 450 ft. north Maynard Ave. Butterworth to Veterans Memorial Dr. Mill Creek North Park St. north to city limit Mullins Ct. Three Mile Rd. to its north terminus Mullins Ave. Three Mile Rd. to its south terminus North Park St. West River Dr. to Grand Rapids city limits Northridge Dr. Walker Ave. to its terminus Pannell St. Bristol Ave. to city limit Peach Ridge Ave. Three Mile Rd. north to its terminus at I-96 Remembrance Rd. (Pt. M-11) West city limit to Leonard St. Turner Ave. West River Drive to south city limit Veterans Memorial Dr. Maynard Ave. to Butterworth Dr. Waldorf Ct. Waldorf St. to its north terminus Waldorf St. Walker Ave. to 330 ft. east of Waldorf Ct. Walkent Dr. Three Mile Rd. to its north terminus (including Walkent Ct.) Walkent Dr. Three Mile Rd. to its south terminus Walker Ave. Northridge Drive to Sharp Dr. Walker Ct. Walker Ave. to its terminus Walker Ridge Ave. Northridge Dr. to its terminus West River Dr. Hillside Dr. to north city limit Wilson Ave. Three Mile Rd. to south city limit (Grand River) Wilson Ave. Three Mile Rd. north to its terminus (including South Wilson Ct. and North Wilson Ct.) Three Mile Rd. Wilson Ave. to Walkent Dr. Three Mile Rd. 692 feet West of Alpine Ave. to Alpine Ave. I-96 All I-296 (US 131) All  
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-205. - Major streets. 
    The following roadways, or portions of roadways, in the City of Walker, are hereby designated as major streets for purposes of this article: 
Street Location Bristol Ave. Three Mile Rd. south to Grand Trunk Bristol Ave. 1700 ft. South of Pannell St. (200 ft. north of bridge) to south city limit Butterworth Dr. Veterans Memorial Dr. east to Maynard Ave. Covell Ave. O'Brien Rd. to Fulton St. Fennessy St. Kenowa Ave. to O'Brien Rd. Hillside Dr. West River Dr. north to its terminus Kinney Ave. Lake Michigan Dr. to Three Mile Rd. Lankamp St. Hillside Dr. to West River Dr. Leonard St. West city limit to Remembrance Rd. Maynard Ave. Butterworth Dr. to O'Brien St. Maynard Ave. O'Brien Rd. to Lake Michigan Dr. O'Brien Rd. Wilson Ave. to Covell Ave. Richmond St. Remembrance Rd. to Elmridge Dr. Three Mile Rd. Walkent Dr. to 692 ft. west of Alpine Ave. Three Mile Rd. Remembrance Rd. to Wilson Ave. Walker Ave. South city limit to Sharp Dr. Walker Ave. Northridge to Four Mile Rd.  
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-206. - Motor vehicles of restricted class. 
    Motor vehicles of the restricted class as used in this article are defined as all motor vehicles having a weight of 10,000 pounds or more including the load therein, except vehicles carrying or designated to carry passengers, all governmentally-owned or leased vehicles, public utility vehicles and vehicles used for private refuse handling. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-207. - Travel into or out of city. 
    Motor vehicles of the restricted class, which do not have a pick-up, delivery, or service within the city, shall enter and exit the city on truck routes only. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-208. - Travel within the city; truck routes; exceptions. 
    Motor vehicles of the restricted class, while in the city, shall travel on truck routes only, except as follows: 
(a)  The operation of authorized emergency vehicles may occur on any roadway in the city. 
(b)  The operation of recreational vehicles as defined by state law, which are of the restricted class, may use any roadway in the city. 
(c)  The operation of motor vehicles of the restricted class is permitted on any roadway in the city for pick-up, delivery, or service where the destination is not on a truck route, provided that ingress and egress thereto or therefrom is accomplished in the following manner: 
1.  Vehicles of the restricted class shall utilize designated truck routes to the point closest to delivery, pick-up or service, subject to the requirement of subsection (2) to follow major streets whenever possible when leaving or returning to truck routes. 
2.  Upon leaving or returning to the truck route, vehicles of the restricted class shall utilize the shortest route available except that when leaving or returning to truck routes, such vehicles shall follow major streets whenever possible to travel to and from local streets and then utilize local streets only when necessary for the completion of the pick-up, delivery, or service. 
3.  In making consecutive deliveries, pick-ups or services to destinations not on truck routes, motor vehicles of the restricted class shall proceed on roadways other than truck routes only if the distance traveled on nontruck routes as a result of this routing would be less than the distance traveled on nontruck routes if the vehicle had returned to a truck route as in (2) above and then proceeded to the next delivery points in (1) and (2) above. 
(d)  The roadways designated as truck routes in section 82-204 shall be posted with signs at appropriate intervals. Such signs shall consist of the words "truck route" below which shall be placed an arrow indicating the direction of the truck route. 
(e)  Nontruck route streets may be posted with signs at appropriate intervals. Such signs shall indicate "no trucks" or "not a truck route". 
(f)  It shall be the duty of any person driving or in charge or control of any buses, trucks, or heavy vehicles, other than vehicles carrying or designed by carry passengers upon any roadway not a designated truck route upon the request of a police officer to stop and answer any questions regarding the weight of the truck, its designation, and its point of origin; and such persons shall also present log book, weight slips, delivery slips, and other written evidence of destination or point of origin, for the officer's examination. 
(g)  If any designated truck route or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, motor vehicles of the restricted class shall use such other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the department of public works director, the city engineer, or their respective designees. 
(h)  In case of emergency, a temporary permit allowing exceptions to this article may be issued by the department of public works director, the city engineer, or their respective designees. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Sec. 82-209. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(b)  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased civil fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-523, § 1, 12-27-04) 
Secs. 82-210-82-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FARE 

Sec. 82-220. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Proof of fare payment means: 
(1)  A transit pass valid for the day and time of use; or 
(2)  A receipt showing payment of the applicable fare for use of the public transportation vehicle during the day and time specified in the receipt. 
    Public transportation authority means a public authority or other entity authorized to provide public transportation services under the laws of the State of Michigan. 
    Public transportation entity means any legal or administrative entity authorized under the laws of the State of Michigan to enforce the provisions of this article, including the City of Walker and such other entities that may be created with the authority to enforce this article. 
    Public transportation vehicle means a bus, train, or other vehicle used by a public transportation authority to provide public transportation services. 
    Transit pass means any pass, coupon, card, identification, token, ticket or other document used to obtain public transportation services. 
(Ord. No. 16-629, § 1, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 82-221. - Fare evasion. 
    No person shall occupy, ride in, or use a public transportation vehicle without paying the fare established by the public transportation authority. All persons who occupy, ride in, or use a public transportation vehicle must possess proof of fare payment and shall present such proof upon the demand of a police officer, security officer, or fare inspector as authorized in accordance with this article. A violation of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, as provided for in chapter 48 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-629, § 1, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 82-222. - Fare inspectors. 
(1)  A public transportation entity may appoint or employ fare inspectors as necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. The appointing or employing public transportation entity shall determine the requirements for appointment or employment as a fare inspector. 
(2)  A fare inspector that is appointed or employed in accordance with this section is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article while acting within the scope of his or her authority and in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 16-629, § 1, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 82-223. - Penalties for fare evasion. 
    Violation of the fare evasion provisions of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction as provided for in chapter 48 with the following penalties plus any statutory justice system assessment (or similar statutory assessment): 
Initial offense ..... $65.00 
Repeat offense ..... $130.00 
Subsequent repeat offense ..... $250.00 
(Ord. No. 16-629, § 1, 6-27-2016) 
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 42; planning, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 62; special assessments, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; repair work, location of utilities within public right-of-way, § 70-26 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 74; water and sewer requirements of zoning chapter, §§ 94-167(f), 94-169(f), 94-342, 94-346. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Adoption of county sewage and water regulations. 
    The Kent County sewage and water regulations, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 5-21) 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt by reference, § 4.8. 
Secs. 86-2-86-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Provision of water at outdoor assemblies, § 10-77. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 86-21-86-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRAND RAPIDS WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 86-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial user means a person whose premises are used to offer services and/or products, including but not limited to retail and wholesale stores, gasoline stations, restaurants, schools, churches, hotels, motels, nursing homes, private clubs, theaters and governmental buildings. 
    Commodity charge means a variable unit charge payable by a user based on the actual water consumption as determined in this article. 
    Domestic user means a person whose premises are domiciles for single- or multiple-family use. 
    Industrial user means a person who operates a manufacturing or process facility which is engaged in producing a product. 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land or building having any connection to the water system. 
    Service charge means a fixed charge payable by a user based on the size of his water meter. 
    User means a domestic, commercial or industrial user. 
    Water service means the retail sale of water by the City of Grand Rapids pursuant to the contract between the City of Grand Rapids and the City of Walker referred to in section 86-27. In the event of the termination of such Grand Rapids contract, "water service" shall refer to the water service furnished by the city. 
    Water system or system means the water system as constructed by the City of Grand Rapids and by or for the City of Walker pursuant to the contract referred to in section 86-27. In the event of termination of such Grand Rapids contract, "water system" or "system" shall refer to the water system of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 20-11) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-27. - Contracts with City of Grand Rapids and Kent County for construction of system and sale of water. 
(a)  By a contract between the City of Walker and the City of Grand Rapids, dated December 20, 1966, amended on January 3, 1978, and subsequently amended, the City of Grand Rapids is given the exclusive right and duty to sell water on a retail basis within the city and provision is made therein for the construction of mains and the rendering of services by the City of Grand Rapids within the city and for the construction by the City of Walker, upon a special assessment or other basis, of certain local distribution systems. 
(b)  By contract between the County of Kent, the City of Walker and the City of Grand Rapids, dated November 1, 1967, the county undertakes construction of the Walker sewage disposal and water supply system, under the provisions of Act No. 185 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1957 (MCL 123.731 et seq., MSA 5.570(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 20-12) 
Sec. 86-28. - Applicants for service to agree to comply with ordinances, rules and regulations. 
    No connection shall be made to the water system unless each applicant for water service shall execute a written consent agreeing to comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and, so long as the City of Grand Rapids shall furnish water service in the city pursuant to the contract referred to in section 86-27, of the City of Grand Rapids with respect to the system. 
(Code 1976, § 20-13) 
Sec. 86-29. - Mingling of water from other sources. 
    Water from any other source or supply shall not be introduced into any part of the water system or mixed or mingled with the water system, without prior written approval of the city and, so long as the City of Grand Rapids shall furnish water services in the city pursuant to the contract referred to in section 86-27, the approval of the City of Grand Rapids. 
(Code 1976, § 20-14) 
Sec. 86-30. - Service laterals as prerequisite to issuance of improvement permits and approval of plats. 
    Permits to improve platted or unplatted premises shall not be issued and plats shall not be approved when the property lies within a part of the city served by the water system, unless laterals to serve all of the premises as subdivided or to be improved are provided; unless the city commission shall determine, by resolution, that compliance with this section would work an unreasonable hardship upon the owner of the premises involved. 
(Code 1976, § 20-15) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 74. 
Sec. 86-31. - Connection permit. 
    Prior to the connection of any premises to the water system, a permit shall be secured from the treasurer of the city. The application for such permit shall be accompanied by such fee as shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 20-16) 
Sec. 86-32. - Charges for installation of local distribution mains; frontage charges. 
    Frontage and other charges for the water system shall be paid as follows: 
(1)  The cost of installing local distribution mains by the city or by the county department of public works for the city shall be borne, in whole or in part, by the property benefited by special assessments according to the benefit to each parcel or otherwise as provided by the city commission. As to any property not subject to assessment or not assessed, a comparable charge shall be paid for the privilege of connection. 
(2)  Users who request or are required to directly connect to a water line installed at the expense of the water system shall pay for the current cost of installations. This charge shall be known as the front foot charge and all references in this section to frontage charges shall be deemed to mean front foot charges. The front foot charge shall be determined by multiplying the front foot rate by the number of feet for which the property would be specially assessed under the special assessment district. At the time an applicant obtains a permit from the city, the city will determine the applicable front footage and specify it on the permit. The charge will be computed and collected by Grand Rapids before issuance of its permit. The front foot rates shall be as follows: 
a.  Domestic user: 
Current cost of installation ..... $28.20 
b.  Commercial or industrial user: 
1.  The same as a domestic user if the connection is made to a line eight inches or less in diameter. 
2.  For a line larger than eight inches: 
Current cost of installation ..... $38.40 
The front foot rates set out in this section shall remain in effect unless and until modified by resolution of the city commission. 
(3)  Where connection to a water main installed by the City of Grand Rapids is made with respect to one portion of a large undeveloped parcel of land under single ownership and service for the entire parcel is not requested, the frontage charge shall be based upon the average building parcel size, which shall be deemed to be 125 feet of frontage by 150 feet in depth, unless the parcel to be effectively serviced shall be of larger or smaller frontage, in which case that frontage shall be used to determine the frontage charge for the purposes of subsection (2). If the original parcel is subsequently subdivided and connections are made with respect to additional portions thereof, frontage charges with respect thereto shall be paid upon the same basis. 
(4)  Frontage charges payable in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2) may be paid in up to ten equal annual installments with interest at the rate of six percent per annum on the unpaid balance commencing with the due date of the first installment and computed to the due date of each installment, with the privilege of payment in full at any time subject to the payment of interest to the next installment due date. If any installment shall not be paid within one month from the due date thereof, a penalty shall be charged and added to the past due installment as follows: one percent of the principal amount of the installment due per month for each month or fraction thereof for the first three months of delinquency; two-thirds of one percent per month for each month or fraction thereof for the next nine months; three-quarters of one percent per month for each month or fraction thereof after 12 months. 
(Code 1976, § 20-17) 
Sec. 86-33. - Connection charge. 
(a)  If a property owner requests to connect to an existing water line, the following connection charges shall be paid to the City of Grand Rapids prior to connection based upon the water meter size in accordance with the following table: 
Water meter 
  size Charge  3/4-inch or less $   900.00 1-inch 1,500.00 11/2-inch 3,000.00 2-inch 4,800.00 3-inch 10,500.00 4-inch 18,900.00 6-inch or more 42,000.00  
The connection charges set forth in this section shall remain in effect unless and until modified by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  If existing users apply for a meter size larger than the existing meter, they shall be required to pay the difference between the charge for the meter size applied for and the existing meter, based on the rates in effect at the time of application. No credit or rebate shall be given to any customer who applies for a meter of a smaller size than the existing meter. 
(c)  Permits issued by the Grand Rapids inspection services office for installation of water connections shall expire six months from the date of application. Fees paid for installation permits are nonrefundable upon expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 20-18) 
Sec. 86-34. - Service stub charge. 
(a)  Owners of property within the city, for which property one or more service stubs are provided, running from the water main to the lot or property line, shall pay a service stub charge, per service stub provided, in the following amounts: 
(1)  Two hundred ten dollars per one-inch connection. 
(2)  Two hundred sixty dollars per 11/2-inch connection. 
(3)  Three hundred twenty dollars per two-inch connection. 
(4)  Three hundred fifty dollars per four-inch connection. 
(b)  The charge provided for in this section may be paid in cash, in full or in part, and the balance shall be paid in ten equal annual installments, with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of six percent per annum, and with the privilege of payment in full at any time subject to the payment of interest to the next installment due date. 
(Code 1976, § 20-19) 
Sec. 86-35. - Service charges. 
    The following rates and charges for water service shall apply to users within the city: 
Commodity Charge 
Domestic, per 100 cubic feet       $ 0.66 
Commercial, per 100 cubic feet       0.66 
Industrial, per 100 cubic feet       0.66 
Monthly Service Charge 
Meter size Charge  
 3/4-inch or less       $  4.76 
1-inch       7.79 
11/4-inch       11.69 
11/2-inch       16.46 
2-inch       28.59 
3-inch       63.26 
4-inch       111.79 
6-inch and over       250.46 
The commodity charges and monthly service charges set out in this section shall remain in effect unless and until modified by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 20-20) 
Sec. 86-36. - Customer responsible for cost of facilities from property line to buildings. 
    In addition to any charges imposed by this article, each person connecting to the water system shall be responsible for and pay the cost of all facilities from the property line to the buildings of such person. 
(Code 1976, § 20-21) 
Sec. 86-37. - Delinquent charges; lien; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Frontage charges, connection charges, commodity charges, service charges, service stub charges or any other charges payable under this article which are delinquent for a period of 90 days or more shall be certified by the City of Grand Rapids to the City of Walker and assigned by the City of Grand Rapids to the City of Walker for collection, and after such assignment, such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien in favor of the City of Walker against the premises, which shall be enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended. Any such charges, including any interest and penalties thereon, which are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer, who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises to which the services have been rendered, and the charges shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for taxes. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies provided by this article or by law, water service may be discontinued to any premises to enforce payment of any charges payable under this article in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City of Grand Rapids. Water service shall not be reinstated until all the requirements of such rules and regulations have been complied with. 
(Code 1976, § 20-22.1) 
Sec. 86-38. - Right to amend or repeal article; article not part of any contract. 
    The city specifically reserves the right to amend this article, in whole or in part, at one or more times, or to repeal this article, and by such amendment or repeal to abandon, increase, decrease or otherwise modify any of the fees, charges or rates provided in this article. This article shall not be deemed to be a part of any contractual obligation or bond contract pertaining to the water system. 
(Code 1976, § 20-23) 
Sec. 86-39. - Enforcement of article; violations. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be enforceable through the use of any remedy provided by law. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 20-22) 
Secs. 86-40-86-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLAINFIELD TOWNSHIP WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 86-51. - Delinquent charges; lien; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Pursuant to a contract with Plainfield Township, Plainfield Township provides water services to certain designated areas within the City of Walker which are not served by the Grand Rapids Water System. Any charges payable by customers of the Plainfield Township Water System located in the City of Walker which are delinquent for a period of 90 days or more shall be certified by Plainfield Township to the City of Walker, and after such certification such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien in favor of the City of Walker against the premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with section 21 of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended. Any such charges, including any interest and penalties thereon, which are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises to which the services have been rendered and the charges shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for taxes. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies, water service may be discontinued to any premises to enforce payment of any water service charges payable to Plainfield Township. 
(Ord. No. 92-413, § 1, 12-8-92) 
Secs. 86-52-86-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL/GRAND RAPIDS SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-591, § I, adopted Nov. 8, 2010, amended Art. III in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Art. III derived from Ord. No. 05-538, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2005. 
Cross reference- Environment, Ch. 34. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-71. - Findings. 
    The Walker City Commission finds the following: 
(1)  That there is a need to assure the quality of the wastewater discharged by the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to which wastewater originating in the city is sent to prevent the degradation of the Grand River; 
(2)  That there is a need to protect the biological systems, operation and infrastructure through the regulation of discharge into the POTW; 
(3)  That there is a need for the city to enhance its ability to regulate the discharge of wastewater to the POTW consistent with local, state and federal laws and consistent with the requirements of Grand Rapids as owner and operator of the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-72. - Purposes and objectives. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish standards, rules and regulations, with respect to the use of the POTW, to provide for rates and charges for connection to and use of the system, to establish limits for the discharge of pollutants into the system and to prevent the pollution of the environment pursuant to a water and sanitary sewer service agreement dated January 1, 1999, between Grand Rapids and the city and certain other customer communities as amended and as may from time to time be amended or extended. 
(1)  This article sets forth requirements for dischargers into the Grand Rapids wastewater collection and treatment systems and enables the Grand Rapids system to protect the public health and environment in conformity with all applicable state and federal laws relating thereto. 
(2)  The objectives of this article are: 
a.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
b.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
c.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system. 
(3)  This article provides for the issuance of permits for the regulation of discharges into the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-73. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise: 
    Authorized representative. In general, as described in 40 CFR 403 (1) (1), (2), (3) and (4). See below for details in regard to specific functions. 
(a)  In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or 
(b)  In the case of a limited liability company a principal managing member or the member in charge of the principal business functions; 
(c)  In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor; and 
(d)  An authorized representative of the individual designated above if: 
(i)  Such a representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the POTW originates; 
(ii)  The authorization is in writing; and 
(iii)  The written authorization is submitted to the POTW. 
    BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand is an empirical test in which standardized laboratory procedures are used to determine the relative oxygen requirements of wastewaters, effluents and polluted water. The approved standardized laboratory procedures to be used can be found in part 136 of the Code of Federal Regulations, specifically in the method for the "five day BOD test". 
    Best management practices or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 86-85. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
    Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards. National pretreatment standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged or introduced into a POTW by specific industrial dischargers. 
    City. The City of Walker, Kent County, Michigan. 
    Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC section 1251 et seq., as amended and applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Combined sewer. Any sewer designed or intended to receive both stormwater and sewage. 
    Combined waste stream formula. The waste stream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process. Where required by federal or state law, and only to the extent required by federal or state law, the combined waste stream formula provided in 40 CFR 403.6(e) and rule 323.2311(7) of MAC will apply to the limits applicable to a combined waste stream. 
    Commercial user. A person or entity whose premises are used to offer services and/or products such as retail and wholesale stores, gasoline stations, restaurants, schools, churches, hotels, motels, nursing homes, hospitals, warehouses, private clubs, theaters and governmental buildings. However, some commercial users may also be designated as significant industrial users (SIU) should they meet the criteria established in 40 CFR 403.3(t), rule 323.2302(cc) of MAC and the definition of significant user of this article. 
    Compliance schedule. A schedule consisting of one or more milestone dates required for corrections, additions or modifications of treatment systems or related pollution prevention or control activities as a result of enforcement actions, expansions or changes in operations or changes in local or categorical treatment standards. Compliance schedules do not preclude additional enforcement actions due to violations of requirements of this article. 
    Commodity rate. Means a variable unit charge payable by a user based on metered water consumption. 
    Confined space, permit required. Space defined by reference to part 90 of Act 154 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974, as amended, MCL 408.1001 et seq. 
    Cross-Media Electronic Reporting Regulation (CROMERR). An Environmental Protection Agency approved system allowing states, tribes, and local governments that receive or plan to begin receiving electronic documents in lieu of paper documents to satisfy regulations under an authorized program. 
    Discharge authorization. Written authorization provided by the city manager specifying the conditions for discharge of a one time or short term duration discharge, or other discharges not meeting the definition of significant industrial user including, but not limited to, cooling tower water and silver recovery unit discharges. 
    Discharger. Any person or entity owning, controlling or operating any real property which directly or indirectly utilizes the POTW. Discharger also means any employee, officer, director, partner, member, contractor or other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission which is a violation of this article or which results in a violation of this article. This definition shall be interpreted broadly to include any person or entity who participates in an act or omission that results in a violation of this article. 
    Domestic user. A person or entity whose premises are domiciles for single- or multiple-family use. 
    Effluent. Waste material (as smoke, liquid, industrial refuse or sewage) discharged into the POTW. 
    Enforcement action. Action taken to return a user into a state of compliance with the standards established in this article of this Code. This may include, but is not limited to, fines, penalties and compliance schedules. 
    Garbage. Animal and plant waste resulting from the handling, preparation and cooking of foods. 
    Grand Rapids. The City of Grand Rapids, Kent County, Michigan. 
    Grand Rapids city manager. The city manager of Grand Rapids and any persons designated to act on behalf of the city manager in the administration or enforcement of this article. 
    Industrial effluent. Waste matter or material discharged into the POTW from any nondomestic source subject to regulation under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
    Industrial user. Any person or entity that discharges into the POTW from any nondomestic source subject to regulation under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
    Industrial waste. Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Infiltration. The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground, through such manner as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Inflow. The water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such sources [such] as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm drains and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwater, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
    Interceptor sewer lines. Those lines whose basic function is to collect wastewater from two or more separate trunk sewer lines and to transport such wastewater to the sewage treatment plant. 
    Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW collection, treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes or operations, use, disposal, or causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lateral sewer line. A sewer pipe beginning at the local collector sewer or other connection point and extending to the premises actually served. The lateral sewer includes the stub to which a user connects. 
    MAHL. The maximum allowable headworks loading expressed in pounds per day that the POTW can accept without experiencing: fire or explosion hazards, fume toxicity, pass through, sludge quality impairment, treatment inhibition or causes a violation of state water quality standards. 
    Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    MDNRE. Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment 
    Monthly service charge. A fixed monthly charge payable by a user based on the size of the water meter servicing the user. 
    New source. Any building, structure, facility or installation of which the construction commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) (33 USC) which will be applicable to such source if such standards article thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section provided that: 
(i)  The construction is a site at which no other source is located; or 
(ii)  The process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source is totally replaced; or 
(iii)  The production or wastewater generating processes are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
    See 40 CFR 403.3(k) (2-3) or rule 323.2302(r) of the Michigan Administrative Code for the remainder of the definition. 
    North American Industry Classification System. A six-digit code used by business and government to classify and measure economic activity. 
    NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System, a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342), as amended. 
    Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase of the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person or entity. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, limited liability company or public agency or instrumentality. 
    pH. The logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant. The term includes, but is not limited to: any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean Water Act. 
    POTW (publicly owned treatment works). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act, including any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage and industrial waste. The systems include sewers, pipes and equipment used to convey wastewater to the treatment facility. The term also includes the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works. For purposes of this article, "POTW" shall mean the POTW of the City of Grand Rapids, pursuant to the January 1, 1999, water and sanitary sewer service agreement, as amended, between the City of Grand Rapids, the City [of Walker], and other retail customer communities. 
    Premises. Each lot or parcel of land or building having any connection directly or indirectly to the POTW. 
    Pretreatment. The reduction in the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means. Dilution is not considered pretreatment unless expressly authorized by an applicable national pretreatment standard for a particular industrial category. 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Property owner. Any person having legal or equitable title to real property or any person having or exercising care, custody or control over any real property. 
    Public sewer. Local collector, trunk and interceptor sewer lines including lift stations and all appurtenances that are owned or controlled by the POTW. 
    Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities of a user which causes them to become all or partially inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Sewage. Any liquid or water carried waste received from domestic, commercial and industrial customers, including any infiltration or inflow as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewer. Any pipe or conduit for the conveyance of sewage. 
    Significant change. Any change in a discharger's effluent which causes the constituents of the discharge to be different and/or increases in the concentration or flow by 20 percent over those reported on the discharger's permit application. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU). Any discharger to the POTW who: (a) has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater per day (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater) or contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW, or as determined by the city manager under authority of 40 CFR 403.12(a) and in Rule 323.2302 of the Michigan Administrative Code on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(1)(6) and Rule 323.2306(h) of the Michigan Administrative Code); (b) is found by the city manager, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing users, on the wastewater treatment system the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system, or; (c) is subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and Rule 323.2311 of the Michigan Administrative Code and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N. Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting criteria (a) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement the city manager may at any time, on his/her own initiative, or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or the POTW, and in accordance with 403.8(f)(6) and Rule 323.2306(h) of the Michigan Administrative Code, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance. Any industrial user with a violation that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit, instantaneous limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(b)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit, instantaneous limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(c)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Grand Rapids city manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(d)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under section 86-108 to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(h)  Any violation or group of violations, which the Grand Rapids city manager determines will adversely effect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. As required by federal regulations, Grand Rapids shall at least annually publish a list of industrial users which during the previous 12 months were in significant noncompliance with applicable standards or pretreatment requirements. 
(i)  Failure to meet BMP requirements. 
    Slug discharge. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
    Storm drain. Any underground pipe or any facility intended to convey only storm water runoff, street wash waters, groundwater and drainage. This also includes discharges allowed by state or federal discharge permits. 
    Suspended solids. All matter existing in nonliquid state which is removable by filtration in accordance with 40 CFR 136 referenced as "residue, nonfilterable", or an alternative method approved by the EPA administrator in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5)(vi) and rule 323.2310(e)(vi) of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
    System. Refers to the POTW. 
    Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307 of the Clean Water Act, or pursuant to part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, or pursuant to any other applicable laws or regulations. 
    Uncontaminated industrial effluents. Water which has not come into contact with any substance used in, or incidental to, industrial processing operations, such as noncontact cooling water and to which no deleterious or toxic substance has been added. 
    Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards (or other limits of this article) because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance or careless or improper operation. 
    User class. Either a domestic, commercial or industrial group of users. 
    USEPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Wastewater. Water, or any liquid, whether or not containing pollutants, which is discharged or permitted to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
    Water business office. The division of the Grand Rapids water system that is responsible for the reading of meters, submitting bills for water and/or sewer service, collection of payment for bills and the preparation and maintenance of the customer accounts including applications for service. 
    Water and sewer agreement. The January 1, 1999, water and sanitary sewer service agreement, as may be amended from time to time, between the City of Grand Rapids, the City [of Walker], and other retail customer communities. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, §§ 1, 2, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-74. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BETX Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene CFR Code of Federal Regulations MTBE Methyl tertiary butyl ether MAC Michigan Administrative Code Mg/1 Milligrams per liter TSS Total suspended solids MAHL Maximum allowable headworks loading  
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 86-76. - Management of the POTW; enforcement authority. 
    The POTW shall be and remain under the management, supervision and control of the Grand Rapids city manager. The Grand Rapids city manager may make such rules, orders or regulations as are deemed advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system, subject, however, to the rights, powers and duties with respect thereto which are reserved by law to the city commission of Grand Rapids and which, by law or contract, are reserved to the city. Pursuant to the water and sewer agreement and the interjurisdictional pretreatment agreement dated February 11, 1986, as may be amended, between the City of Grand Rapids and the City [of Walker], the City of Grand Rapids and the Grand Rapids city manager are hereby appointed, authorized, and directed to act as the city's authorized representatives with the legal authority to administer and enforce this article on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-77. - Grand Rapids city manager's emergency authority. 
    When a necessary or advisable emergency protective measure or action is required, the Grand Rapids city manager is authorized to cause such measures and actions to be taken as authorized by law. The cost of such protective measures or actions shall be at the expense of the property owner responsible for such measure or action. Failure to pay such cost will constitute a lien upon the property as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-78. - Inspection. 
    Under current federal and state laws, rules and regulations, the City of Grand Rapids is held responsible for the discharge of wastewater into the POTW; therefore, the City of Grand Rapids has the right and obligation to inspect connections and discharges to the system in order to confirm compliance with state and federal laws and provisions of this article. 
    The Grand Rapids city manager and other duly authorized employees of Grand Rapids bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person who uses, applies for use and/or is connected to the POTW under this article shall be deemed to have consented to inspections pursuant to this section, including entrance upon that person's property at reasonable times to make inspections. In the event that a violation of this article is identified the property owner shall be responsible for all costs of inspection and remediation if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-79. - Standards, rules, regulations and administrative reference guide. 
    The standards, rules and regulations established in, or pursuant to, this article are deemed to be the absolute minimum consistent with the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent pollution of the environment and to fulfill the obligations of Grand Rapids with respect to state and federal law, including all rules and regulations adopted in conformance thereto. All such additional standards, rules and regulations not contained in this article shall be approved by the city commission. The discharge into the POTW of any substance which exceeds the pretreatment requirements contained herein, or in any manner fails to conform hereto, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-80. - Use of the POTW. 
    Any person or entity conforming to the standards, rules and regulations established in, or pursuant to, this article shall be permitted to discharge effluent into the POTW provided there exists adequate sewer service available to which he/she can connect. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-80.1. - Sewer use of Plainfield Charter Township sanitary sewer system. 
    In addition to complying with the provision[s] of this chapter, any user or potential user located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city who uses or desires to use the Plainfield Charter Township sanitary sewer system for the transport of sewage for treatment and disposal by he North Kent Sewer Authority POTW pursuant to a sewer service agreement effective October 28, 2008, between the city, Plainfield Charter Township and the North Kent Sewer Authority, as may from time to time be amended, shall comply with the provisions of the North Kent Sewer Authority rules and regulations and with the provisions of chapter 38, article III, division 2 of the Code of Ordinances of Plainfield Charter Township, both as may be amended from time to time, all of which are incorporated in this chapter by reference. In the case of a conflict between any other provision of this chapter and any provision of the North Kent Sewer Authority rules and regulations and/or the Code of Ordinances of Plainfield Charter Township adopted by reference pursuant to this section, the North Kent Sewer Authority rules and regulations and/or the Code of Ordinances of Plainfield Charter Township shall control. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-80.2. - Enforcement of sewer use requirements and limitations of Plainfield Charter Township sanitary sewer system. 
    The city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the rules and regulations and ordinance provisions adopted by reference to section 86-80.1. As contemplated in the sewer service agreement effective October 28, 2008, between the city, Plainfield Charter Township and the North Kent Sewer Authority, as may be amended from time to time, the city may designate the director of the North Kent Sewer Authority POTW and/or the public utilities director of Plainfield Charter Township as his/her representative(s) for purposes of administration and enforcement of the rules and regulations and ordinance provisions adopted by reference in Section 86-80.1. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-81. - Mandatory connections; connections as prerequisite to approvals. 
(1)  Premises within the city to which sewage service through the sewage disposal system is available shall not be used or occupied in any manner that would create sewage unless the premises is connected to the sewage disposal system. 
(2)  Permits to improve platted or unplatted premises shall not be issued and plats shall not be approved when the property lies within a part of the city served by the sewage disposal system, unless lateral sewers to serve all of such premises, as subdivided or to be improved, and connection of such lateral sewers to the premises and to the system are provided, unless it is shown that the improvement contemplated will not result in the creation of sewage or unless the city commission shall determine, by resolution, that compliance with this section would work an unreasonable hardship upon the owner of the premises involved. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Secs. 86-82-86-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 86-85. - General discharge conditions and prohibitions. 
(1)  All premises connected to the POTW shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Minimum size of the building drain/sewer, including required cleanouts, shall be four inches or greater in diameter; 
(b)  A grease interceptor, with a maintenance cleaning schedule appropriate for its intended use, shall be required to receive the drainage from fixtures and equipment having grease-laden waste, located in food preparation areas such as in restaurants, commercial kitchens, bars, clubs or similar facilities. The grease interceptor shall not be less than a three-compartment, 1,000-gallon system, or equivalent, unless the city manager approves an alternative system. Food waste grinders shall not discharge to the building drainage system through the grease interceptor, unless the interceptor is appropriately sized to handle the solids loading and approved per the plumbing code. Grease interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. At no time shall the level of grease and sludge in any compartment of the trap be greater than 25 percent of the tank liquid level. Proof of maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon request. 
(c)  Sand traps and similar interceptors for removal of heavy solids by commercial users, as determined by the Grand Rapids city manager, shall be designed and installed, according to the Grand Rapids sand trap for garages design specifications. They shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and shall have a water seal of not less than six inches. Sand traps and similar interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. Proof of maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon request. 
(d)  Oil/water separators are required at repair garages, gasoline stations with grease racks, grease pits or work racks and at factories, or other facilities, where oily and flammable liquid wastes are produced. Separators shall be installed into which all oil-bearing, grease-bearing or flammable wastes shall be discharged before emptying in the building drainage system or other point of disposal. Oil separators shall have a depth of not less than two feet below the invert of the discharge drain. The outlet opening of the separator shall not have less than an 18-inch water seal. An alternative design may be approved by the Grand Rapids city manager, as provided for by the state plumbing code. Oil/water separators shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. Proof of maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon request. 
(2)  No discharger shall introduce into the POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. The following general and specific prohibitions of this section apply to each discharger introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the discharger is subject to any federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(a)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(b)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts that will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW or result in interference. 
(c)  Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.0 or a pH greater than 10.5. These pH limits will be evaluated annually as part of the rate study and the limits set forth in this section will be revised as deemed necessary. 
(d)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. 
(e)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly, or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(f)  Any substance which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, may cause a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit or any applicable state or federal water quality standards or interferes with any treatment process, or causes treatment residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation or reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Clean Water Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state standards applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(g)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(h)  Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but, in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the headworks of the POTW exceeds 40 degrees Centigrade (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), upon the request of the POTW, approves the alternative temperature limits. 
(i)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(j)  Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, noncontact cooling water, unless a discharge authorization is approved by the Grand Rapids city manager. 
(k)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration, except as set forth in 10 CFR part 20. Introduction of radioactive wastes that interfere with the operation of the POTW including, but not limited to, the use and disposal of sludge, the recycling of any and all waste products, or if the discharge causes the POTW to violate any local, state or federal laws. 
(l)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(m)  Any discharge of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, animal fat, vegetable fat, oil, grease, products of mineral oil or any combination thereof at a concentration of greater than 100 milligrams per liter, unless it can be demonstrated that matrix interference is responsible for levels greater than this amount, but, in no case in amounts that will cause an obstruction, interference or pass through in the POTW. 
(n)  Any substances not identified in [subsection] (m) above, that will become solid or viscous after entering the POTW. 
(o)  Any effluent having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the POTW's average daily flow. The Grand Rapids city manager, upon review, may approve greater discharges subject to conditions as authorized by this article or special conditions he/she deems necessary in order to preserve and protect public health, safety and welfare, subject to conformance with the applicable federal and state law. 
(p)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Grand Rapids city manager. 
(q)  Any detectable level of mercury using EPA Method 245.1 or 245.2 with a detection limit not to exceed 0.2 ug/l unless the user can demonstrate that matrix interference prevents the attainment of this level. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA method 245.1 or 245.2. In the event that mercury is detected, the user shall develop and implement a mercury elimination plan including elements deemed necessary by the city manager to progress toward the goal of no detectable discharge of mercury. For users whose operation and discharge characteristics are substantially similar a group mercury elimination plan may be acceptable. Dental facilities shall comply with Public Act 503 of 2008, MCL 333.16631, and all best management practices promulgated by the Michigan Department of Community Health in conjunction with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(r)  There shall be no discharge to the POTW of groundwater that has been contaminated with gasoline and related petroleum products that would qualify for a state general discharge permit for gasoline and related petroleum products in accordance with rule 2191 promulgated pursuant to Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended, part 31, except where no other discharge option exists. If discharge to the POTW is desired under these conditions, the discharger must submit a wastewater discharge permit application as specified in section 86-90 which may be approved by the Grand Rapids city manager. Upon approval a permit will be issued with appropriate conditions as set forth in section 86-94. The total BTEX concentration shall not exceed 20 micrograms per liter and the MTBE concentration shall not exceed 20 micrograms per liter. 
(s)  Disposal of septage waste into the POTW is prohibited, except in accordance with the septage waste receiving plan, the Grand Rapids city manager may authorize disposal of portable containers of domestic waste, including waste from recreational vehicles. Septage wastes are to be discharged only at designated locations in accordance with the septage waste receiving plan. 
(t)  Sludge from an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall not be placed into the POTW. Such sludge shall be disposed of by a licensed hauler in a site approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). 
(u)  Any substance that causes excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(v)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized according to Part 138, Medical Waste Regulatory Act of the Michigan Public Health Code 1978 PA 368, as amended. 
(w)  Any detectable level of PCB using EPA method 608, with a detection limit not to exceed 0.1 ug/l unless the user can demonstrate that matrix interference prevents the attainment of this level. PCB sampling procedures, preservation and handling and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with US EPA method 608. 
(x)  Bacteriological, chemical or enzymatic products shall not be added to facility discharge or be used to maintain or clean grease interceptors or grease traps, unless approved by the city manager. 
(3)  Bypass is prohibited, except in cases where the bypass was unavoidable to prevent a loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage, and where there are no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance. In cases where a bypass may occur it shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Anticipated bypass. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if possible, at least ten days before the date of the bypass. Upon notification, the Grand Rapids city manager shall make a determination whether to allow the discharge. 
(b)  Unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall immediately notify the Grand Rapids city manager of the occurrence of any unanticipated bypass. The Grand Rapids city manager shall make a determination whether to allow the discharge to continue. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of becoming aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the dates and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass. 
(4)  Any discharger shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general and specific prohibitions established in subsections (2)(b), (h), (i), and (m), where the discharger can demonstrate that: 
(a)  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and; 
(b)  Either: 
1.  A local limit designed to prevent pass through or interference was developed for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference and the user was in compliance with each such local limit immediately before and during the pass through or interference; or 
2.  A local limit was not applicable and immediately before and during the pass through or interference the user's discharge did not substantially change in volume or constituents from the user's previous discharges when the POTW was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of interference, all applicable requirements for sludge use or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, §§ 3-8, 10-14-13) 
Sec. 86-86. - Limitations on wastewater strength. 
(1)  [Federal standards.] Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subpart N. A new source shall install, and have in operation at startup, all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards before beginning discharge. When the applicable categorical pretreatment standards are expressed in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Grand Rapids city manager may convert these limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as a mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(c) (2-7) and rule 323.2311(5) of MAC. In situations in which nonregulated waste streams are intermixed with the regulated waste stream, the Grand Rapids city manager may use the combined waste stream formula to develop equivalent discharge limits. Whenever equivalent limits are used, they shall be deemed pretreatment standards in determining compliance with the standards. The Grand Rapids city manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12 and rule 323.2310 of MAC. An application for modification of the categorical pretreatment standards may be considered for submittal to the regional administrator of EPA by the Grand Rapids city manager when the system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 CFR section 403.7 and rule 323.2313 of MAC. 
(2)  [Prohibited practices.] No industrial user shall increase the use of water or dilute a discharge as a substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Supplementary limitations. 
(a)  Supplementary limits were established in accordance with EPA guidance and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) approval criteria. Specific permit limits for BOD, Total Suspended Solids, Total Phosphorous, and Ammonia as NH 3 -N, are specified by individual discharge permits and were derived from the industrial allocable portion of the MAHLs listed in Table 1. 
TABLE 1. MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE 
HEADWORKS 
MATERIALS LOADING 
(pounds/day) Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 160,800 Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 141,300 Total Phosphorous (TP) 6,990 Ammonia Nitrogen (NH 3 -N) 15,100  
(b)  Table 2 contains a list of technically based local limits derived from the industrial allocable portion of the non-compatible pollutant MAHLs shown above as well as limits for toxic pollutants. For users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, which include the following parameters, the following limits, if more restrictive, shall apply, both to the categorically regulated process flow as well as any other flows not specifically regulated by categorical pretreatment standards. For all other dischargers these limits shall apply to the total flow from each connection to the POTW, except silver which is a process discharge limit as noted. All measurements to determine compliance with these limits shall be performed in accordance with EPA approved methods found in 40 CFR 136. The monthly average shall be the average of all samples analyzed by EPA approved methods during a calendar month. 
LOCAL LIMITS 
Daily Maximum (mg/L) Monthly Average (mg/L) Inorganic: Total Arsenic 1.46 NA Total Cadmium 0.817 NA Total Chromium 4.0 NA Hexavalent Chromium 0.72 NA Total Copper 1.5 NA Total Cyanide 1.0 NA Total Lead 1.5 NA Total Mercury ND 1 NA Total Molybdenum 3.4 NA Total Nickel 1.5 1.1 Total Selenium 2.3 1.67 Total Silver 620 2 NA Total Zinc 2.6 2.0 Organic: Total Phenols 3.26 NA Polychlorinated Biphenyls ND 3 NA Tetrachloroethylene 0.25 NA Trichloroethylene 0.16 NA MTBE 0.02 NA  
(1)  Nondetectable or as specified in subsection 86-85(2)(q); 
(2)  Process discharge limit for photo processors and x-ray machines sampled for discharge of silver recovery unit. The analysis of these sample matrixes, photo processing and x-ray machine wastes for silver shall be performed on an unpreserved and undigested sample or an alternative preservation and analytical method that does not interfere with the measurement of silver. 
(3)  Nondetectable per EPA method 608 with a detection limit not to exceed 0.1 [B5]g/l unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
(c)  For compatible pollutants, the Grand Rapids city manager shall establish specific concentration limits, when necessary, that are adequate to ensure that the industrial allocable portion of the MAHL listed herein is not exceeded. Any requests for specific limits must be made at the time of permit application or renewal. Such a determination will be made solely by the Grand Rapids city manager. The establishment of any such limits shall not create any vested right or property rights for the user. Accordingly, no right of appeal from such a determination will exist and the approval may be terminated, modified or subjected to special condition either at time of approval or thereafter, at the discretion of the Grand Rapids city manager. 
(d)  The Grand Rapids city manager determines that all comments received during the public comment period have been adequately addressed. 
The Grand Rapids city manager may implement a system for setting special alternative specific limits for batch discharges. Special alternative specific limits may be approved when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The user requests a special alternative specific limit through the special alternative limit process. 
2.  The Grand Rapids city manager makes a determination that adequate treatment capacity exists to allow the special alternative specific limit consistent with the MAHL for those pollutants present. 
In no event shall a special discharge permit be granted or effective which authorizes a discharge in excess of the limitations imposed by any applicable final federal or state pretreatment standard or discharge limit. In addition the Grand Rapids city manager shall not consider any request for an increase above any limits that were calculated based on health or safety criteria. 
(e)  The Grand Rapids city manager may develop BMPs by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits and the requirements of section 86-85. 
(4)  Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Prevention plan. 
1.  Industrial and commercial users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the POTW by developing spill prevention plans. If the materials of concern are on the state critical materials list, a pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) pursuant to part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended, MCL 324.3101 et seq. must be submitted. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial or commercial user's expense. Detailed spill prevention plans certified by a Michigan licensed professional engineer, including the facilities and the operating procedures, shall be submitted to the POTW for review prior to construction. 
2.  Industrial and commercial users who store hazardous substances shall not discharge to the POTW after the effective date of this article until a state-required pollution incident prevention plan has been submitted to the Grand Rapids city manager. Receipt of such plans shall not relieve the industrial or commercial user from complying with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage and transportation of hazardous substances. 
(b)  The Grand Rapids city manager shall evaluate each significant industrial user at least once every two years, and other industrial users as necessary, to determine whether such user needs a plan to control slug discharges. If the Grand Rapids city manager decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain at a minimum the following elements: 
1.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
2.  Description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under sections 86-85 and 86-86, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
4.  When deemed necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(c)  Any upset or accidental discharge shall be reported to the Grand Rapids city manager immediately upon occurrence. A detailed report shall be filed within five days. The report shall include location of the upset or discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration, volume and corrective actions. Failure to file a report shall be a separate violation of this article. 
(d)  Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on discharger's premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug upset or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause, or discover such upset or discharge, with respect to emergency notification procedure. 
(e)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the Grand Rapids city manager prior to any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, §§ 9-11, 10-14-13 ) 
Secs. 86-87-86-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 

Sec. 86-90. - Permit application. 
(1)  All new non-domestic users connecting to, or discharging to, the POTW, and all existing non-domestic users connected to, or discharging to, the POTW, shall complete a wastewater discharge survey to establish whether a non-domestic user should be classified as a significant industrial user or require a discharge authorization as defined in section 86-73 and require a discharge permit. New water service will not be initiated until a complete survey is submitted. In the case of a transfer account, water service will be disconnected if a complete survey is not submitted within ten days of the transfer. If, upon review, the city manager determines a permit may be required, the non-domestic user shall file a permit application which may include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(a)  Disclosure of name, address and location of the discharger; 
(b)  Disclosure of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) number(s) according to the NAICS manual, Office of Management and Budget, 1997, as amended. 
(c)  Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, toxic pollutants as determined by bona fide chemical and biological analyses. Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the USEPA and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended; 
(d)  Disclosure of time and duration of discharges; 
(e)  Disclosure of average daily and maximum daily wastewater flow rates in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All flows shall be measured, unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the Grand Rapids city manager; 
(f)  Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sanitary and storm drain systems, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; 
(g)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are, or may be, discharged to the POTW; 
(h)  Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this article in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this article on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the discharger to comply with this article; 
(i)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this article by an existing source, the discharger shall enter into a consent agreement consistent with the law, and approved by the Grand Rapids city manager, of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. The compliance date for such a schedule shall not be later than the compliance date for any applicable standard. A new source (40 CFR 403.3(k) and rule 323.2302(r) of MAC), or an expansion of an existing source, must have in place all necessary equipment to abate pollution. For a new source this will be prior to the commencement of the discharge. For an expansion of an existing source this shall be before any additional wastewater is introduced to the system. 
(j)  The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, dates related to hiring a Michigan licensed professional engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing a contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article. 
(k)  Under no circumstance shall the Grand Rapids city manager permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds six months. 
(l)  Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the city manager, including a statement as to whether or not they complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which they expect to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. 
(m)  Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(n)  Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized; 
(o)  All permit applications shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger, and a Michigan licensed professional engineer, where pretreatment facilities are required; 
(p)  When required by the Grand Rapids city manager, the discharger shall provide an inspection and sampling manhole(s) or structure(s), nonpermitted confined space where feasible, with an opening of no less than 24 inches [in] diameter and an internal diameter of no less than 36 inches containing flow measuring, recording and sampling equipment as required by the Grand Rapids city manager to assure compliance with this article. 
(2)  Nondomestic users who have previously submitted a survey, as prescribed in this section, are also required to complete a wastewater discharge survey periodically, at a frequency to be determined by the Grand Rapids city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, §§ 12, 13, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-91. - Significant changes. 
    All industrial users shall promptly notify the control authority (and the POTW if the POTW is not the control authority) in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) and Chapter 27, Sec. 2.75(4) of the City of Grand Rapids Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 14, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-92. - Permit issuance (significant industrial users). 
    The Grand Rapids city manager will evaluate the completed application and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. Within 30 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the Grand Rapids city manager shall make a determination as to whether the applicant is a significant industrial user or authorized discharger. For every applicant the Grand Rapids city manager shall issue or deny a discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-93. - Permit modifications. 
    The Grand Rapids city manager shall have the right to amend any discharge permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the POTW with applicable laws and regulations and prevent a violation of any NPDES limit, water quality standards or interference with residuals management as specified in subsection 86-85(2)(f). Upon the promulgation of a federal categorical pretreatment standard, the significant industrial user discharge permit of each discharger subject to such standards will be revised to comply with such standards. Where a discharger, subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for a significant industrial user discharge permit as required by section 86-90, the discharger shall apply for a significant industrial user discharge permit from the Grand Rapids city manager within 30 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard and provide the information required. The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit may include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, which does not exceed any compliance dates set by 40 CFR 403.6(b) and rule 323.2311(3) of MAC. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-94. - Permit conditions. 
    Significant industrial user discharge permits shall specify the following: 
(1)  Statement of duration (not more than five years) including issuance and expiration dates; 
(2)  Effluent limitations based on the more stringent of categorical pretreatment standards, BMPs or local limits as established by this article and state law; 
(3)  General and specific discharge prohibitions as established by sections 86-85 and 86-86 of this article; 
(4)  Requirements and specifications for monitoring programs including sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(5)  Requirements for collecting/retaining and providing access to plant records relating to the user's discharge and for providing entry for sampling and inspection; 
(6)  Requirements for notification of spills, bypass or potential problems to the POTW including slug loadings, upsets or violations; 
(7)  Requirements to develop and implement spill and slug control plans; 
(8)  Requirements for notification and approval of changes prior to discharge. The POTW shall be notified of any proposed substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) and rule 323.2310(15) of MAC and operational shift changes of greater than four hours; 
(9)  Special conditions as the Grand Rapids city manager may reasonably require under particular circumstances of a given discharge to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(10)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(11)  Statement of nontransferability; 
(12)  Conditions for modification or revocation of permit; 
(13)  Schedule of fees and charges; 
(14)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics including BMP, based on applicable pretreatment standards or local limits; 
(15)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(16)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(17)  Compliance schedules; and 
(18)  Requirements for submission of special technical reports, discharge reports or certification statements. These include any reporting requirements contained in a federal categorical standard or pretreatment requirement. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-95. - Permits duration. 
    All significant industrial user discharge permits shall be issued for up to five years, subject to amendment or revocation as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-96. - Permit changes. 
(1)  Permit transfer. Individual discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the Grand Rapids city manager and the city manager approves the individual discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city manager must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(a)  States that the new owner and/or operator have no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(b)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(c)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit; and 
(d)  Includes all modifications. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(2)  Permit renewal/reissuance. SIUs with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 86-90, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the SIU's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-97. - Baseline monitoring report. 
(1)  Baseline monitoring report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination request, or 90 days prior to the commencement of discharge in the case of a new source, the industrial user shall submit a baseline monitoring report, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b) and rule 323.2310(2) of MAC, for any discharge subject to categorical pretreatment standards and requirements signed by an authorized representative. 
(2)  Ninety-day report on compliance with federal categorical standards. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any discharger subject to categorical pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit a report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d) and rule 323.2310(3) of MAC signed by an authorized representative. 
(3)  Significant noncategorical user compliance report. For dischargers who are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, but discharge or have the potential to discharge substances which could adversely affect the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, a report is to be submitted 30 days following the commencement of discharge and every six months thereafter to the Grand Rapids city manager. The report shall specify the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(h) and rule 323.2310(7) of MAC and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if additional pretreatment is necessary, to bring the discharge into compliance with the requirements. The statement shall be signed by an authorized representative, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(1) and rule 323.2310(11) of MAC, of the discharger and certified to by a Michigan licensed professional engineer. 
(4)  Hazardous waste notification. 
(a)  Any industrial or commercial user, except as specified in [subsection] (e) below, who discharges any substance to the POTW which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a listed or characteristic hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261, shall notify the POTW, the USEPA regional waste management division director and the state hazardous waste authorities as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(p) and rule 323.2310(15) of MAC in writing of such discharge. 
(b)  All hazardous waste notifications shall include: 
1.  The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR, part 261; 
2.  The USEPA hazardous waste number; 
3.  The type of discharge (continuous, batch or other); and 
4.  A certification that the user has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(c)  In addition to the information required to be submitted above in this section, the reports from industrial and commercial users discharging more than 100 kilograms of hazardous waste per calendar month to the POTW shall contain the following information: 
1.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the waste; 
2.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and 
3.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
(d)  Hazardous waste notifications shall be submitted no later than 30 days after the effective date of this article or prior to the discharge of listed or characteristic hazardous waste for discharges commencing after the effective date of this article, as required in section 86-91. Any notification under this provision need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged, although notifications of changed discharge must be submitted under section 86-91. This section does not apply to pollutants already reported as part of a significant industrial user discharge permit self-monitoring requirement. 
(e)  Industrial and commercial users are exempt from the hazardous waste notification requirement when they discharge 15 kilograms or less of nonacute hazardous wastes per calendar month. Discharge of any quantity of acutely hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification. 
(f)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of Resource Conservation and Recovery Act identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-98. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Significant industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the Grand Rapids city manager a report as required in 40 CFR 403.12(e) indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent. The reports shall be submitted for the six-month periods of January through June and July through December. Reports are due within 30 days of the end of the reporting period. If the sampling performed by a significant industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Grand Rapids city manager immediately of becoming aware of the violation. At a minimum, the SIU shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Grand Rapids city manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the grand rapids city manager or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine compliance status of SIU. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsection 86-90(1)(e) hereof. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement provided, however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the Grand Rapids city manager may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The Grand Rapids city manager, for good cause shown, considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other extenuating factors, may authorize the submission of said reports on months other than those specified above. 
(b)  SIU with discharges that are not subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards but are subject to local limits shall follow the same sampling and reporting requirements as in [subsection] (a) above. 
(c)  Nonsignificant industrial users with discharges that are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and are not otherwise deemed to be significant by the Grand Rapids city manager shall be required to submit reports as deemed appropriate by the Grand Rapids city manager. 
(2)  Reports of permittees shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow, nature, concentration, production and/or mass, where required by the city manager. Reports required in discharge permits will be accepted in an electronically submitted format only through an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approved Cross-Media Electronic Reporting Regulation (CROMERR) system compliant with the Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 Part 3. CROMERR is an EPA approved system allowing states, tribes, and local governments that receives or plans to begin receiving electronic documents in lieu of paper documents to satisfy regulations under an authorized program. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 15, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-99. - Inspection, sampling and analysis. 
(1)  The Grand Rapids city manager may inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. The discharger shall allow the Grand Rapids city manager to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours, for the purposes of inspection, sampling or records examination. The Grand Rapids city manager shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations and have access to examine and copy any records. All costs associated with this monitoring requirement shall be born by the discharger. 
(2)  The reports required by sections 86-97 and 86-98 shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or as specified in the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  The frequency of monitoring shall be specified by the Grand Rapids city manager to assess compliance by industrial and commercial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3) and rule 323.2310(6)(d) of MAC. Where 40 CFR, part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedure set forth in the USEPA publication Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments thereto or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator of the USEPA. Where the POTW performs all the required sampling and analyses and collects all the information required for the reports required in sections 86-97 and 86-98, the significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. 
(4)  If sampling performed by an SIU indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Grand Rapids city manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. At a minimum, the user is required to resample and analyze within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation. The Grand Rapids city manager may, with the issuance of a modified permit, require more frequent sampling and analysis. Resampling by the SIU is not required if the city performs sampling at the user's facility between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the SIU or city receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the SIU. 
(5)  If an SIU subject to the reporting requirement in sections 86-97 and 86-98 monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(6)  The reports required by sections 86-97 and 86-98 of this article shall include the following certification statement: 
I certify under penalty of the law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information submitted, it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of penalty and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(a)  Signatory requirements for industrial user reports. The reports required by sections 86-97 and 86-98 shall include the certification statement as set forth in section 86-99 and shall be signed as follows: 
1.  By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports required by sections 86-97 and 86-98 is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 
(i)  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or 
(ii)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulation; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
2.  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports required by sections 86-97 and 96-98 is a partnership, or sole proprietorship respectively. 
3.  By a duly authorized representative of the individual described in subsection (6)(a)1. or (a)2.; 
(i)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection (6)(a)1. or (a) 2.; 
(ii)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well filed superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(iii)  The written authorization is submitted to the director. 
4.  If an authorization under subsection (6)(a)3. is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (a)3. must be submitted to the director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-100. - Monitoring facilities. 
(1)  When deemed necessary by the city manager, each discharger shall provide and operate, at the discharger's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, representative sampling and flow measurement of each discharge to the POTW. Sampling requirement shall be flow proportional unless time proportional composite sampling is authorized by the control authority. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the discharger's premises, except where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the city manager may concur with the facility being constructed in the public right-of-way providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. Upon appropriate notice by the city manager for monitoring facilities, a compliance schedule may be issued as a permit condition. 
(2)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition, at the expense of the discharger. 
(3)  All required monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications (nonpermitted confined space structure where feasible). 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 16, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-101. - Confidential information. 
(1)  Information and data furnished to the Grand Rapids city manager with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public unless required by law, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing the report. 
(2)  Information accepted by the Grand Rapids city manager as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public until, and unless, a written notification is given to the discharger. 
(3)  Where a discharger has mass based limits as allowed by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards on a production basis, the production data necessary to determine compliance shall also be available to the public. Where application of the combined waste stream formula is necessary to apply Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards to a discharger, the flow measurements and other data used in the calculation shall be available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 17, 10-14-13 ) 
Secs. 86-102-86-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND LIABILITIES 

Sec. 86-105. - Enforcement. 
    Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this article, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the city's POTW, shall be liable to Grand Rapids for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. This shall include, but not be limited to, penalties levied upon Grand Rapids by the EPA or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) for violation of its NPDES Permit caused by any violation by a discharger, including all actual costs, court, attorney and other related legal fees plus an additional charge of 100 percent of the total costs and/or penalties. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 18, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-106. - Recovery of costs incurred by Grand Rapids. 
    Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this article, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the POTW, shall be liable to Grand Rapids for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. This shall include, but not be limited to, penalties levied upon Grand Rapids by the USEPA or MDNRE for violation of its NPDES permit caused by any violation by a discharger, including all actual costs, court, attorney and other related legal fees plus an additional charge of 100 percent of the total costs and/or penalties. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-107. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person or entity who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a criminal penalty as provided for in section 86-120. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-108. - Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits. 
    The city manager may for good cause shown, suspend the sewage disposal system service and/or the discharge permit of a discharger when it appears that an actual or impending discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the operation of the POTW, violates any pretreatment limits or conditions imposed by this article or any discharge permit issued pursuant to this article. Any discharger notified of the suspension of sewage disposal system service and/or the discharger's discharge permit shall cease all discharges immediately upon notification or as directed by the city manager. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the city manager may take whatever steps are deemed necessary to eliminate the discharge, including cessation of city water service and/or shall commence judicial proceedings for injunctive relief immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's compliance with such order. The city manager may reinstate the discharge permit and/or sewage disposal system service and terminate judicial proceeding upon presentation of proof by the discharger of the elimination of the non-complying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 19, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-109. - Grand Rapids city manager's authority to issue administrative orders. 
    Whenever the Grand Rapids city manager determines that any discharger has violated this article, or any other applicable laws or regulations which Grand Rapids is authorized to enforce, the Grand Rapids city manager may issue administrative orders of the type listed below, as deemed appropriate under the circumstances. Multiple orders may be issued simultaneously or in combination as a single order with respect to a single discharger. 
(1)  Cease and desist order. A cease and desist order directs the noncomplying user to cease illegal or unauthorized discharges immediately or to terminate its discharge altogether. Any person who uses, applies for use and/or is connected directly or indirectly to the POTW shall be deemed to have consented to inspection pursuant to this section including entrance upon the person's property by the Grand Rapids city manager to take such steps as necessary to eliminate the discharge should the discharger fail to comply with such order. Such order shall be final and in effect until a hearing, if requested by the user, is conducted and a final decision is made by the Grand Rapids city manager. A written request for such hearing shall be made within ten calendar days after receiving the order. 
(2)  Consent order. An agreement between the Grand Rapids city manager and the user which may contain compliance schedules, requirements for reimbursement of the City [of Walker] for damages and costs incurred or remedial actions, fines and administrative penalties and signatures of the Grand Rapids city manager and the authorized representative. A consent order shall address every identified and potential deficiency in the user's compliance status at the time of the order. 
(3)  Show cause order. Where the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the Grand Rapids city manager may order any discharger who causes or allows prohibited conduct, to show cause before the Grand Rapids city manager why a proposed permit revocation action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Grand Rapids city manager regarding the violations, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the discharger to show cause before the Grand Rapids city manager why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer or authorized representative of the discharger. The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by the Grand Rapids city manager who shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger. Appeal of such order may be taken by the discharger in accordance with applicable state law. 
(4)  Compliance order. A compliance order directs the discharger to achieve compliance by a date specified in the order. Compliance orders require industrial users to develop management practices, spill prevention programs and related POTW industrial pretreatment program requirements. 
(5)  Stop work order. Where there is work in progress that constitutes causes or is causing a violation of any provision of this article, the Grand Rapids city manager may issue a stop work order to prevent further violations or damage. 
(6)  Administrative fines as specified in [section] 86-120. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-110. - Publishing noncompliance list. 
    A list of all dischargers in significant noncompliance for the NPDES industrial pretreatment program annual reporting period shall be published by Grand Rapids in the Grand Rapids Press by the date specified in Grand Rapids' NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-111. - Grand Rapids city manager's authority to require financial assurances. 
    Pursuant to the Grand Rapids city manager's authority to issue administrative orders, the Grand Rapids city manager may require a noncomplying industrial or commercial user to post a performance bond sufficient to cover expenses which might reasonably be incurred as a result of future violations. Industrial or commercial users who have, in the prior two years, been responsible for causing an upset at the POTW, may be required to obtain liability insurance sufficient to cover the reasonable costs of restoring the POTW in the event of another such incident. These requirements may be made conditions of the Significant industrial user discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-112. - Judicial proceedings. 
    Following the entry of any order by the Grand Rapids city manager with respect to the conduct of a discharger contrary to the provision of this article, the attorney for Grand Rapids or his/her designee the city may, following the authorization of such actions by the Grand Rapids city manager, commence a civil infraction or criminal action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the court of competent jurisdiction. Such relief may include, but is not limited to, the following: injunctive relief against an industrial user for failure to comply with pretreatment standards and requirements; suit for damages and costs to Grand Rapids including legal expense; municipal civil infraction actions and criminal prosecution seeking fines and imprisonment as permitted by section 86-120 and state law. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-113. - Right of interpretation or ruling. 
    Any discharger shall have the right to request, in writing, an interpretation or ruling by the Grand Rapids city manager on any matter covered by this article and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-114. - Operating upsets. 
(1)  Any discharger experiencing an upset in operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this article or a discharge permit issued pursuant hereto shall inform the Grand Rapids city manager immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. The Grand Rapids city manager shall make a determination whether this discharge can continue. Upon the Grand Rapids city manager allowing the discharge to continue, a written followup report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the Grand Rapids city manager within five days. The report shall include: 
(a)  A description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status; 
(b)  The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and time of noncompliance, and if noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur; and 
(c)  All steps taken, or to be taken, to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(2)  A documented and verified operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the Grand Rapids city manager against a discharger for any noncompliance with this article or any discharge permit issued pursuant hereto, which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. It will not, however, be a defense to an action for damages to the POTW or to persons, property or natural resources caused by the upset. An upset will be considered "documented and bona fide" only if the discharger complies with subsection (1) above and with 40 CFR 403.16(c) and rule 323.2315 of MAC. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(3)  The user shall have controlled production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility, until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(4)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of an operating upset shall demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that: 
(a)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
(b)  The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and appropriate manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(c)  The user notified the Grand Rapids city manager immediately upon becoming aware of the upset; and 
(d)  A written submission, containing the following information, was provided within five days of commencement of the upset: 
1.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance was expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Secs. 86-115-86-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 86-120. - Criminal and civil liability. 
(1)  Any person in violation of this article, or of any permit issued pursuant hereto, or standards, rules and regulations, any order of the Grand Rapids city manager issued pursuant to those rules and regulations or this article, shall be: 
(a)  Subject to the municipal civil infractions provisions of chapter 48 of the City Code, which the Grand Rapids city manager is authorized to enforce municipal civil citations pursuant thereto on behalf of the City and shall be subject to the civil fines set forth in section 86-121; and 
(b)  For such violations not covered by the civil infractions provisions of section 86-121, shall, if convicted, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a criminal penalty of up to $500.00 per day or imprisonment for 90 days or both such penalty and imprisonment. 
    Each act of violation and every day upon which any violation is permitted or suffered to exist, shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate fine or penalty. The Grand Rapids city manager may issue a notice of violation calling for corrective action prior to issuing a citation pursuant to chapter 48 of the City Code. In the case of a conviction pursuant to this section of a discharger who is not a natural person, any officer or director of a corporation, any officer or partner of a partnership, or any member of a limited liability company, or any officer or owner of a proprietorship is hereby deemed to be a proper person to serve any term of imprisonment imposed by the court as a result of the conviction. 
(2)  In addition to, and expressly not in lieu of, the foregoing, any discharger who violates this article, or any permit issued pursuant hereto, or the standards, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, or any order of the Grand Rapids city manager issued pursuant to this article, shall be subject to civil penalties, and to the payment of any damages and costs which may be awarded, by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  In addition to any applicable state and federal penalties, any person who: 
(a)  At the time of a violation knew or should have known that a pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this article, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the Grand Rapids city manager under this article; or 
(b)  Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this article, or in any other correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the POTW regarding matters regulated by this article; or 
(c)  Intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this article; or 
(d)  Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-121. - Civil fines. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions will apply: 
(a)  Isolated means a violation which is infrequent or where there is no pattern of noncompliance. 
(b)  Recurring means that there are violations for two or more consecutive monitoring periods or there is a pattern of noncompliance. 
(c)  Significant means a violation which fulfills any one of the requirements defined as significant noncompliance in section 86-73 unless the Grand Rapids city manager as defined in section 86-73 determines that the significant noncompliance status is due solely to a low number of samples and that based on knowledge of the process(es) employed it is reasonable to conclude that the discharge is not representative for the period in question. 
(2)  The civil fines set forth in subsection 1-11(c) of the City Code shall not apply to violations of this article. The civil fines for violations of this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection numbers 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8: 
Initial offense-Not less than $100.00 
First repeat offense-Not less than $250.00 
Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense-Not less than $500.00 
(b)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 4: 
Initial offense-Not less than $50.00 
First repeat offense-Not less than $100.00 
Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense-Not less than $500.00 
(c)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 5: 
Initial offense-Not less than $500.00 
Second or each day uncorrected-Not less than $1,000.00 
(d)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection numbers 9, 14, 22 and 35: 
For isolated offense-Not less than $500.00 
For recurring offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
For significant offense-Not less than $2,000.00 
(e)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection numbers 15, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34: 
For isolated offense-Not less than $50.00 
For recurring offense-Not less than $250.00 
For significant offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
(f)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 10: 
For first offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
First repeat offense-Not less than $2,000.00 
Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense-Not less than $5,000.00 
(g)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 11: 
For significant offense-Not less than $10,000.00 
(h)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 12: 
Initial offense-Not less than $100.00 
By 60 days-Not less than $500.00 
Every 30 days after 60 days-Not less than $1,000.00 
(i)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 13: 
Initial offense-Not less than $100.00 
First repeat offense-Not less than $500.00 
Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
(j)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 18: 
For isolated offense-Not less than $100.00 
(k)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 20, 26: 
For isolated offense-Not less than $100.00 
For recurring offense-Not less than $500.00 
For significant offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
(l)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 21, 25: 
For isolated offense-Not less than $50.00 
For recurring offense-Not less than $500.00 
For significant offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
(m)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 16, 23: 
For isolated offense-Not less than $500.00 
For recurring offense-Not less than $500.00 
For significant offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
(n)  For violation of the violations listed in the table in subsection (3) below with subsection number 17, 19: 
For significant offense-Not less than $1,000.00 
(3)  The following offenses are municipal civil infractions under subsection 1-11(c) and chapter 48 of the City Code provided, however, that the provisions of this article (including, but not limited to, the period for "repeat offenses") shall control in the event of a conflict between this article and subsection 1-11(c) and chapter 48: 
Subsection Violation Type Nature of Violation Sections Period for Repeat Offense 1 Building sewers and connections Failure to obtain a sanitary sewer connection 86-150(1), 
86-154 1 year 2 Opening or connecting with public sewer without permission 86-155(1) 1 year 3 Failure to install an interceptor device; failure to install separator 86-85(1)(b), 86-85(1)(c), 86-85(1)(d) N/A 4 Discharge of wastes not containing sewage 86-85(2)(j) 1 year 5 Failure to disconnect roof drain after notification 86-153(5) N/A 6 Failure to have building sewer connection inspected 86-155(2) 1 year 7 Failure to maintain grease trap 86-85(1)(b) 1 year 8 Failure to submit grease trap maintenance cleaning records 86-85(1)(b) 1 year 9 Pretreatment discharge violation Unpermitted discharge; no permit was obtained 86-90(1) 1 year 10 Any discharge that causes pass through or interference (see note 3) 86-85(2)(f) 1 year 11 Any discharge that endangers human health or the environment or has caused the POTW to exercise its emergency authority 86-85(2)(a) 
86-85(2)(d) 
86-85(2)(e) 
86-77 N/A 12 Failure to meet compliance date by 30 days 86-86 Permit 1 year 13 Failure to accurately report noncompliance 86-98(1) Permit 1 year 14 Waste stream is diluted in lieu of treatment 86-86(2) 1 year 15 Discharge of waste that causes obstruction 86-85(2)(b) 
86-85(2) (m) 1 year 16 Violation of discharge limit 86-85 
86-86 1 year 17 Violation of applicable technical review criteria (see note 2) 86-85 
86-86 1 year 18 Pretreatment recordkeeping Failure to develop spill prevention and slug control plans (No harm) 86-86(4)(a) 
86-86(4)(b) Permit N/A 19 Failure to develop spill prevention and slug control plans (Harm) 86-86(4)(a) 
86-86(4)(b) Permit N/A 20 Copies of records denied 86-99(1) 21 Pretreatment reporting violation Failure to provide reports within (30) days 86-98(1) Permit 1 year 22 Failure to report spill or changed discharge (No harm) 86-91 
86-86(4)(c) Permit 1 year 23 Failure to report spill or changed discharge (Harm) 86-91 
86-86(4)(c) Permit 1 year 24 Incomplete or missing records or reports 86-98 N/A 25 Failure to report additional monitoring 86-99(5) 1 year 26 Failure to notify of bypass 86-85(3) 1 year 27 Pretreatment monitoring violation Failure to monitor all pollutants according to permit 86-92 
86-94(4) 
86-99 1 year 28 Failure to install monitoring equipment 86-100 1 year 29 Sampling at incorrect location 86-94(4) N/A 30 Sampling using incorrect sampling collection technique Permit N/A 31 Failure to follow proper analytical requirements 86-99(3) 1 year 32 Other pretreatment violations Failure to post POTW phone number in facility 86-86(4)(d) 1 year 33 Failure to train employees in emergency notification procedure 86-86(4)(d) 1 year 34 Entry for site visit denied or consent withdrawn 86-99(1) 1 year 35 Failure to meet compliance deadlines for existing or new source 86-86(1) 1 year  
;adv=6fq; Note 1: N/A means the offense accumulation time is not applicable or each offense is considered to be a separate and new offense. 
Note 2: Technical review criteria (TRC) = 1.4 times the limit for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.20 times the limit for all other pollutants except pH which has no TRC. 
Note 3: Mercury elimination plans as described in subsection 86-85(2)(q) may be employed for mercury violations. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Secs. 86-122-86-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RECORD RETENTION 

Sec. 86-125. - Record retention requirement. 
(1)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with BMP. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. 
(2)  Any and all records which pertain to matters which are the subject of a notice of violation, administrative order, show cause hearing, or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant to this article, shall be retained and preserved for five years, or until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
DIVISION 8. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 86-126. - Removal credits. 
    Where applicable, the Grand Rapids city manager may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of this article to reflect the POTW's ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7 and rule 323.2313(a) of MAC. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-127. - Net/gross calculations. 
    The Grand Rapids city manager may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15 and rule 323.2313(c) of MAC. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Secs. 86-128-86-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - USER CHARGES 

Sec. 86-130. - Purpose of charges. 
    Charges for the installation of, connection to and use of the POTW are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, operation and replacement of the system. Such charges shall be made in accordance with USEPA regulations and the provisions hereinafter set forth and shall be made against all users of the system. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-131. - Local collector sewer line installation charges. 
(1)  Any property owner requesting service who has not previously paid his or her share of the cost of constructing the local collector sewer shall pay those costs before service is permitted. 
(2)  The charge shall be known as the front foot rate and be determined by multiplying the rate per foot by the number of feet the property owner has fronting on the local collector sewer line from which he or she will receive service. The front foot rate shall be as follows: 
(a)  Domestic user ..... $60.00. 
(b)  Commercial or industrial user. 
1.  The same as a domestic user if the connection is made to a local collector sewer line under eight inches or less in diameter. 
2.  For a line eight inches or larger ..... $81.00. 
    This charge will be annually reviewed and may change to reflect the current average cost of installation of local collector sewer lines pursuant to the water and sewer agreement. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-132. - Integrated sewer connection fee schedule. 
    When a property owner or user is requested or required to connect to the system and has not previously paid or been assessed a connection fee, the following connection fee schedule shall apply: 
Integrated Connection;eol;Base Fee;eol;Schedule 
Meter Size 
(inches) 1/1/10 3/4 or less $ 2,625.00 1 4,400.00 11/2 8,750.00 2 14,050.00 3 30,750.00 4 55,300.00 6 and over 122,950.00  
Integrated Connection;eol;Base Fee;eol;Schedul> 
    Except as otherwise provided in the immediately succeeding paragraph, the foregoing integrated sewer connection base fee schedule for single-family and multifamily residential dwelling units shall be adjusted upward and downward as follows: A single-family residential dwelling unit located on a parcel containing 20,000 square feet shall pay the applicable integrated connection fee in accordance with the forgoing schedule. To the extent such parcel is greater than or less than the applicable square footage, one-half the applicable integrated connection fee will increase or decrease by the same percentage increase or decrease in the parcel above or below the applicable square footage. In the case of multifamily residential dwellings, in order to determine the size of the parcel assigned to each dwelling unit for purposes of calculating the integrated connection fee to be paid by each multifamily residential dwelling unit, the total square footage of the parcel on which the multifamily residential dwelling is located shall be divided by the total number of residential units. Notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection, the integrated connection fee for a single-family residential dwelling unit or multifamily residential dwelling unit shall not exceed four and one-half times the applicable base integrated connection fee set forth in foregoing schedule. 
    Effective January 1, 2006, and January 1 of every year thereafter, pursuant to the water and sewer agreement, the integrated sewer connection base fees shall be adjusted by a percentage which is determined by the annual change in the Consumer Price Index (the "index") calculated as follows: 
(1)  The Consumer Price Index shall be that index referred to as the Consumer Price Index, U.S. City Average, All Urban Consumers, published by the U.S. Department of Labor-Bureau of Statistics ((1982-84)=100). In the event the method of determining the index is substantially altered, the basis for determining the annual change thereafter shall be the index which is most comparable to the Index described above. 
(2)  For the purpose of computing the percentage change each calendar year, the index for the month of August for the prior calendar year shall be subtracted from the index for the immediately preceding August. The result so obtained (if positive) shall be divided by the index for the month of August for the prior calendar year to obtain the percentage increase which shall be applied to the then current integrated sewer connection base fee schedule to determine the new calendar year schedule. 
    The foregoing integrated connection fee is due and payable at the time a user receives a permit to connect to the sewer system. A permit issued to connect to the sewer system shall expire 180 days from the date the permit was issued. 
    The user receiving services who applies for a larger water meter than the one presently in service shall pay an integrated connection fee which is the difference in cost between the meter size in service and the one applied for in accordance with the integrated connection fee in effect at the time of application. No credit or rebate shall be made in the case of application for a smaller meter size. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-133. - Use charges. 
    Rates and charges for sewage disposal service furnished by the system shall be charged to all persons using the system. Such charges shall be established in accordance with the water and sewer agreement. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-134. - User classes. 
    For the purposes of determining user charges three user classes are established: domestic, commercial and industrial. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-135. - Determination of user charges. 
    The charges herein established shall be based upon the water consumption of the user's premises, including water from public and private supplies, as determined by this article and the standards, rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, or at the election of the user upon the actual amount of sewage discharge into the system. However, a monthly service charge shall be based upon the size of the water meter and as determined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Secs. 86-136-86-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 86-140. - Applicability. 
(1)  Users of the system complying with the provisions of this article shall pay rates and charges as set forth below. Such rates and charges shall be designed to produce revenues which are proportionate to the cost of providing service to each user class of each customer class. Such cost shall include but not be limited to operation, maintenance, replacement, depreciation and a reasonable rate of return of the system's investment. 
(2)  A surcharge shall also be imposed on those users who exceed normal BOD, TSS, phosphorus or ammonia concentrations established as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 20, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-141. - Rates for users within the city. 
    Subject to section 86-145, the following rates and charges for sewage disposal service shall apply for users within the city: 
Commodity Rate 
per 100 Cubic Feet 
Domestic $2.78 Commercial 2.78 Industrial 2.78 Monthly Service Charge Water Meter 
Size (inches) Charge 3/4 or less 30.83 1 52.40 11/4 80.13 11/2 114.02 2 200.29 3 446.78 4 791.86 6 or larger 1,777.82  
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-142. - 2012 surcharges and discharge authorization fees. 
(1)  If the Grand Rapids city manager determines that a discharge will not cause pass through or interference as defined in this article, industrial or commercial users shall be charged a surcharge if the concentration of their discharge exceeds a five-day BOD of 250 mg/l, and/or TSS of 250 mg/l, or any phosphorus of 15 mg/l. That charge shall be $0.231 per pound of BOD and $0.285 per pound of TSS and $1.160 per pound of phosphorus in excess of the above limits. In addition, all industrial or commercial users shall be charged a surcharge for ammonia concentrations exceeding 38 mg/l. The charge shall be $0.298 per pound of ammonia in excess of the above limit. Discharge concentrations of these substances and the resulting surcharge shall be based on at least three composite samples per quarter. This sampling shall be performed by either Grand Rapids or the industrial user as determined by the Grand Rapids city manager. 
(2)  The fee for a significant industrial user discharge permit or discharge authorization as provided for in section 86-92 of this chapter whether they are located within a retail service area or a bulk service area shall be $400.00 per year and an analytical fee based on subsection (3), below. 
(3)  The following schedule of charges shall apply to any analysis which may be required as part of a significant industrial user discharge permit: 
Metals $ 7.00 TSS 7.00 BOD 14.00 each Total phosphate 13.50 pH 5.00 EPA 624 60.00 EPA 625 115.00 BTEX/MTBE 35.00 each Sulfide 12.00 each Oil and grease 25.00 each Total cyanide 15.00 each Hexavalent chromium 10.00 each Fecal coliform 45.00 each Labor 56.16 hour Sampler 35.00 day Vehicle 3.18 hour  
(4)  These charges will be reviewed annually and may change to reflect the current cost of providing these services, as provided in section 86-145. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, §§ 21, 22, 10-14-13 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-619, § 21, adopted Oct. 14, 2013, changed the title of § 86-142 from "surcharges and permit fees" to "2012 surcharges and discharge authorization fees." 
Sec. 86-143. - Review of rates and charges. 
    Annually, after the close of Grand Rapids' fiscal year and prior to the adoption of the system's budget, there shall be a review of rates and charges. Upon completion of the review, a report shall be prepared and presented summarizing the review and recommending rates and charges which assure that all the costs of the system will be recovered from customer and user classes proportionately to the cost of providing service to them. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-144. - Enforcement. 
    Delinquent bills shall be collected as provided for in section 86-151. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-145. - Effective date. 
    The rates and charges set forth in sections 86-141 and 86-142 shall be effective on January 1, 2010. Such rates and charges may be changed in accordance with the water and sewer agreement. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Secs. 86-146-86-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - SEWER USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 86-150. - Sewer service applications and notification. 
(1)  A user desiring to obtain sewer service shall make application on forms prescribed by Grand Rapids. In the event that sewer service at a premises is continuous through a change of ownership, the new owner must file a notification of change of ownership within ten days. Failure to complete an application or notification may result in discontinuance of service. 
(2)  Whenever a condominium has a single sewer connection servicing the premises, the account shall be made in the name of the condominium association. Sewer service shall not be provided until the condominium association has filed with the Grand Rapids water business office written proof that it has the authority to enter into such an arrangement. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-151. - Grand Rapids billing practice. 
    The current water system rules and regulations shall be utilized for billing practices. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 23, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-152. - Sewer lines. 
(1)  Oversizing shall mean the enlargement of a local collector sewer so that the enlargement will serve as a trunk or interceptor sewer. When the system requires a local collector sewer line to be oversized, it will pay the cost of such oversizing as computed in the following manner: 
(a)  In a residential assessment district or a new residential plot, the oversizing share is the material difference in cost of the oversized sewer; 
(b)  In a commercial, industrial or high density residential development assessment district, the oversizing share is the material difference in the cost of the oversized sewer; and 
(c)  In cases where the larger than normal size sewer line is required solely to provide adequate service to a local service area and is not used as part of the larger network, then the entire cost of the enlargement will be treated in the same manner as a normal sized local collector line and the system will not participate in the oversizing cost. 
(2)  All new sewer lines shall conform to the City of Grand Rapids Standard Construction Specifications and shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter in most residential areas and a minimum of 12 inches in diameter in commercial, industrial or high-density residential areas. The Grand Rapids city manager reserves the right to determine the minimum acceptable sewer lateral size in those cases where drainage problems exist. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-153. - Sewer laterals and appurtenances. 
(1)  The property owner shall maintain, at his/her expense, the sewer lateral to ensure continuous flow of sewage from the structure to the local collector trunk or interceptor sewer, and shall be responsible for replacement of lateral sections existing between the structure and property line of public easement boundary. The City of Grand Rapids shall only be responsible for the replacement of lateral sewers existing within the street right of way or public easement. 
(2)  Whenever a sewer lateral is to be extended into the premises, the plumber or contractor may obtain location measurements from Grand Rapids. However, Grand Rapids does not assume responsibility for the accuracy of such location measurements. 
(5)  Roof drains shall not be connected to the system. The city manager shall order the immediate disconnection of all such connections. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for any and all costs associated with these disconnections and all costs including, but not limited to, legal and inspection service required to enforce provisions of this article. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. Roof drains not disconnected shall be subject to the same monthly charge as footing drains except the dry weather flow (DWF) and wet weather flows (WWF) shall be calculated on an individual basis. The calculation shall be the roof area in square feet multiplied by the normal rainfall (3.2 ft.) multiplied by 7.48 gals./cu. ft. to determine the gallons per year. 
(4)  When a structure is to be demolished, satisfactory arrangements shall be made with Grand Rapids to disconnect and seal the sewer lateral at the property line or at the point designated by Grand Rapids. The lateral disconnection shall be inspected by Grand Rapids prior to sealing. Failure to make arrangements for inspection and the proper termination of the connection shall cause the Grand Rapids city manager to order excavation of the lateral for the required inspection with all associated costs to be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(5)  Roof drains shall not be connected to the system. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for any and all costs associated with disconnections and all costs including, but not limited to, legal and inspection service required to enforce provisions of this article. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(6)  Footing drains shall not be connected to the system on any structure built after 1968. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for any and all costs associated with these disconnections and all costs including, but not limited to, legal and inspection service required to enforce provisions of this article. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(7)  Basement waterproofing systems shall not be connected into the system or discharged in such a manner as to cause a public or private nuisance. Given due cause, the Grand Rapids city manager may order the owner to discontinue the discharge of water from a basement waterproofing system. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(8)  Disposal of garbage into the POTW shall be permitted only after it has been pulverized by an installed food-waste-grinder unit. Such units shall be installed in accordance with the then-current state plumbing code. 
(9)  Storm drains shall not be connected into the system or discharged in such a manner as to cause a public or private nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, § 24, 10-14-13 ) 
Sec. 86-154. - Connection permits. 
    In addition to any other permits required by the City [of Walker], persons shall obtain a permit for sewer lateral connection from the City of Grand Rapids and the City [of Walker] in accordance with the state plumbing code. Said permits shall be obtained before any such work may begin. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-155. - Sewer connections. 
(1)  If at any time it is found that any sewer lateral connection has been installed contrary to or in violation of this article or rules or regulations governing such installation, the Grand Rapids city manager shall issue an order requiring compliance within 30 days after notification. If compliance has not been obtained within 30 days of the notice, the Grand Rapids city manager may authorize termination of water/sewer service until the corrections are made. The owner or user will not have redress for any such charges occurring because of shut-off or termination. In addition, the violator may be subject to a municipal civil infraction action. 
(2)  Each new sewer lateral installation, or repair of an existing sewer lateral, shall be inspected and approved by Grand Rapids prior to backfilling. 
(3)  If a piece of property that has an existing sewer lateral serving more than one building is subdivided into separate lots or parcels, then the owner of the building that does not have direct sewer service must install his/her own sewer service across his/her property or on an easement and the original sewer lateral to the adjoining subdivided property must be disconnected. Any required easements shall be recorded by the Kent County clerk. 
(4)  Whenever a new sewer lateral is installed or repaired by a contractor or plumber, it shall be guaranteed to be free from any defective material or poor workmanship, in the public right-of-way, for a period of one year from the date of installation. 
(5)  Wastewater metering facilities may be installed by a user or as required by the city manager to measure sewage discharge from the user's premises to the sanitary sewer. All such arrangements shall be made subject to acceptance by the city manager and the expense thereof, including the installation, maintenance and operation, shall be borne by the user. Plans and specifications for the installation of any wastewater meter must be sealed by a Michigan licensed professional engineer and submitted to the city before actual installation begins. Such metering facilities shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  A Michigan licensed professional engineer must develop installation plans. Drawings of the location of the primary measuring device and the meter, the location of the meter's data output(s) and specifications for the meter, including its manufacturer, model and logging frequency, must be included with the plans. 
(b)  A plan location map, which accurately shows where the primary measuring device, flow meter and flow meter totalizer are located in relation to the facility building, and shall be submitted as part of the drawings. 
(c)  Meter reading provisions shall be convenient meter installation sites or any existing water meter reading location. 
(d)  Underground structure, and all associated piping, which contain the primary measuring device and the meter shall be installed in accordance with the Grand Rapids plumbing code. 
(e)  If possible, the primary measuring device must be located in an open or non-permitted confined space. The recording device may not be located in a confined space. 
(f)  The meter must include a data logger capable of recording and displaying continuous flow data in 100 cubic feet units. The data must be inspected each business day, by the user, with documentation of the inspection in the form of the inspector's initials, date and time. All data records must be maintained for a minimum of three years and be available for inspection by Grand Rapids. 
(g)  The meter installation must be inspected and found to be acceptable by the Grand Rapids city manager before any data from the meter will be used for billing purposes. 
(h)  The user must maintain a meter service contract provided by the manufacturer or the manufacturer's approved representative. The meter shall be checked and calibrated quarterly, or more frequently as conditions require, by the service provider. All calibration records must be maintained for a minimum of three years and be available for inspection by Grand Rapids. 
(i)  If failure of the meter occurs, the user must notify the Grand Rapids city manager within three business days. Repairs to the meter, which are the responsibility of the owner, must be completed within five business days. If repairs cannot be completed within five business days, a timetable for completion of repairs must be submitted to the Grand Rapids city manager. If, as a result of failure, or suspected failure, the sewer meter readings are in dispute, the volume of water indicated by the water meter during the disputed time will be used as the wastewater volume. 
(j)  Grand Rapids, at its discretion, must be allowed to inspect the meter and all records pertaining to the meter. At the Grand Rapids city manager's discretion, the acceptance of any wastewater metering device and/or data may be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 13-619, §§ 25-27, 10-14-13 ) 
Secs. 86-156-86-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SYSTEM 

Sec. 86-160. - Creation of system. 
    Pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Act Amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder (CFR industrial cost recovery period), each industrial user of the system shall pay its share of any grant, including any amendments thereto, awarded to the city for construction of the system by the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the federal water pollution act. An industrial user's share shall include only that portion of the grant assistance allocable to its use. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meanings: 
    Industrial cost recovery period shall be equal to 30 years from the date the system is placed in operation. 
    Industrial user means industrial users as defined in 40 CFR 35.905-8(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e), other than those users which describe primarily nonprocess, segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Industrial user's share means an industrial user's proportionate share of the cost to be recovered based upon that user's flow in any given year. 
    System or the system means that portion of the sanitary sewer system located within the city and constructed as part of grant number C 263203-1, received from the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-162. - Rates and charges. 
(1)  Each industrial user shall pay as its share $0.0034 per 100 cubic feet of flow discharged into the system. 
(2)  Industrial users shall be billed and shall make payments of the rates and charges established in this section annually, and the first payment shall be due and payable one year after the industrial user begins to receive the benefit of the system. The City of Grand Rapids shall act as billing and collection agent for the City [of Walker]with respect to charges under this division. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-163. - Monitoring. 
    The City [of Walker], and the City of Grand Rapids as its designated agent, and their employees shall have the right to monitor each industry which discharges into the system in order to determine whether such industry is an industrial user as defined in this division, and in order to determine the appropriate rates and charges to be imposed. All industrial users shall be monitored on a regular basis as determined by the City [of Walker], or the City of Grand Rapids, as its agent, but not less often than annually. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 86-164. - Appeals. 
(1)  Any industrial user shall have the right to appeal the reasonableness of the allocations of industrial cost recovery rates and charges it is required to pay. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the city manager and shall include an analysis of the industrial user's discharge by an independent laboratory. The city manager shall review the appeal and respond to the industrial user in writing. 
(2)  Any other party affected by the industrial cost recovery system and this division may also request, in writing, a review by the city manager of the rates and charges imposed, stating specifically the reason the review is requested and how such party is affected by the industrial cost recovery system. The city manager shall review all information presented and respond in writing. 
(Ord. No. 10-591, § I, 11-8-10) 
Secs. 86-165-86-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NORTH KENT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM 

Sec. 86-170. - Delinquent charges; lien; discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Pursuant to a contract with Plainfield Township and the North Kent Sewer Authority, Plainfield Township provides sanitary sewer services through its participation in the North Kent sewage disposal system, to certain designated areas within the city which are not served by the Grand Rapids sewage disposal system. Any charges payable by customers of the North Kent Sewer Authority system located in the city which are delinquent for a period of 90 days or more shall be certified by Plainfield Township to the city, and after such certification such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien in favor of the city against the premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with section 21 of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, as amended. Any such charges, including any interest and penalties thereon, which are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises to which the services have been rendered and the charges shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for taxes. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedies, water service may be discontinued to any premises to enforce payment of any sewage disposal charges payable to Plainfield Township. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 2, 11-28-05; Ord. No. 09-575, § 1, 10-12-09) 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY; DEFINITIONS; CONNECTION TO AN EXTENSION OF SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, added § 86-171, including §§ 86-171.1-86-171.11, to the Code. At the editor's discretion and in consultation with the city, § 86-171 has been redesignated as division 1 to maintain the organization of the Code. 

Sec. 86-171.1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "North Kent Sewer System Connection, Use and Rate Ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.2. - Intent. 
    This article applies only to properties served by the North Kent Sewage Disposal System ("wastewater system") located in the service district as herein defined. This article shall not apply to the customers and Premises served by the Grand Rapids Sanitary Sewer System. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.3. - Objectives regarding contract requirements. 
    This article is adopted in accordance with and in furtherance of the city's obligations as set forth in the sewer service agreement, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.4. - Findings regarding public health, safety and welfare. 
    The city hereby determines that the wastewater system is immediately necessary to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the city. This determination is based upon the express determination of the state legislature set forth in section 12752 of the Michigan Public Health Code, which reads as follows: 
    "Sec. 12752. Public sanitary sewer systems are essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the state. Septic Tank disposal systems are subject to failure due to soil conditions or other reasons. Failure or potential failure of Septic Tank disposal systems poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare; presents a potential for ill health, transmission of disease, mortality, and economic blight; and constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of this state. The connection to Available Public Sanitary Sewer Systems at the earliest, reasonable date is a matter for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare and necessary in the public interest which is declared as a matter of legislative determination." 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.5. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater system and to enable the city and the North Kent Sewer Authority (the "authority") to protect public health in conformity with all applicable local, state and federal laws relating thereto. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with its normal operation or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment in the WWTP, and which will pass through the wastewater system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater system; 
(c)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the wastewater system; 
(d)  To protect both wastewater system personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public. 
(e)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the wastewater system; and 
(f)  To enable the authority to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the wastewater system is subject. 
    This article shall apply to all users of the wastewater system in the city. This article authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.6. - Rules applying to text. 
    The following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this Article. 
(a)  The particular shall control the general. 
(b)  Except with respect to the definitions which follow in section 86-171.8, the headings which title a division, section or subsection are for convenience only and are not to be considered in any construction or interpretation of this article or as enlarging or restricting the terms and provisions of this article in any respect. 
(c)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(d)  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; 
(2)  Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; and 
(3)  Words used in the plural number shall include the singular number. 
(e)  Words imparting masculine gender shall apply to feminine and also to firms, associations, partnerships, joint ventures, corporations, trusts, and municipal or other public entities. 
(f)  With regard to any conflicts between this article and the applicable federal regulations, the federal regulations shall control. 
(g)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, trust, municipal or public entity, or equivalent entity or a combination of any of them as well as a natural person. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.7. - Words not defined. 
    Any word or term not defined herein shall be considered to be defined in accordance with its common or standard definition. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.8. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of their use in this Article, the following terms and words are hereinafter defined. 
(a)  40 CFR 403. The general pretreatment regulations outlined at 40 Code of Federal Regulations part 403. 
(b)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials. 
BMP. Best management practice. 
BMR. Baseline monitoring report. 
CFR. Code of Federal Regulations. 
CIU. Categorical industrial user. 
COD. Chemical oxygen demand. 
ERP. Enforcement response plan. 
gpd. Gallons per day. 
l. Liter. 
MAHL. Maximum allowable headworks loading. 
MDL. Method detection limit. 
mg. Milligrams. 
mg/l. Milligrams per liter. 
MRP. Mercury reduction plan. 
NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIC. Standard industrial classification. 
SIU. Significant industrial user. 
SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act. 
TSS. Total suspended solids. 
ug/l. Micrograms per liter. 
USC. United States Code. 
WEF. Water Environment Federation. 
WWTP. Wastewater treatment plant. 
(c)  Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act and the Water Quality Act of 1987, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq. 
(d)  Authority. The North Kent Sewer Authority. 
(e)  Authorized representative. An authorized representative of a user is: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
(i)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(ii)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager: is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and to whom authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  [Duly authorized representatives.] The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3 above may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the director. 
(f)  Availability fee. The charge imposed for the availability of the sewer main for a sewer connection, regardless of whether a sewer connection is actually made. 
(g)  Available public sanitary sewer. A public sanitary sewer system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon the property and passes not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates; provided, however, that a sewer lateral connection point must be present on the same side of a paved road as the structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
(h)  BMPs (best management practices). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in sections 86-174.1 and 86-174.2. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plan site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
(i)  BOD or BOD5 (denoting biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight or in milligrams per liter. 
(j)  Building sewer. The extension of the building drain which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall and continues to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
(k)  Bypass. The diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility as outlined in 40 CFR 403.17. 
(l)  Categorical industrial user (CIU). An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
(m)  Categorical pretreatment standard. A regulation promulgated by the U.S. EPA under sections 301 or 307 of the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC sections 1311 or 1317). 
(n)  Charges for sewage disposal services or charges. The amount charged to each premises in the city for sewage disposal services, which may include a debt service charge and operation and maintenance costs. 
(o)  City. The City of Walker. 
(p)  City engineer. The engineer retained, employed or contracted by the city to advise the city with respect to the wastewater system. 
(q)  COD (denoting chemical oxygen demand). The amount of oxygen required to chemically oxidize organic and inorganic constituents of wastewater as measured under the standard laboratory procedures. 
(r)  Combined wastestream. The wastestream at facilities where effluent from one regulated process is mixed, prior to pretreatment or treatment, with wastewaters other than those generated by that regulated process. Where required by federal or state law, the combined wastestream formula provided in 40 CFR 403 will apply to limits applicable to a combined wastestream. 
(s)  Composite sample. A series of representative samples taken over a specific time period which are then combined into one sample for testing purposes. 
(t)  Connection fee or trunkage connection fee. The amount charged at the time and in the amount hereinafter provided, to each premises for connecting or being connected to the construction of the wastewater system and represents the proportionate cost allocable to such premises for the wastewater system's facilities except those that are covered by other charges or fees contained in this article. 
(u)  Daily maximum concentration. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
(v)  Daily maximum limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that calendar day. 
(w)  Debt service charge. A charge to offset all or a portion of the capital costs, including principal and interest, of the installation of Wastewater collection and/or treatment facilities 
(x)  DEQ. The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or any successor governmental agency having similar regulatory jurisdiction. 
(y)  Director. The Walker City Manager or his or her designated representative responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. As determined in the best interest of the city, the director may designate the director of the PARCC-Side Clean Water Plant as his or her representative for purposes of part or all of this article. 
(z)  Discharge. Includes, but is not limited to, any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping into the wastewater system. 
(aa)  Domestic user. A user of the wastewater system from which the discharge into the wastewater system is primarily domestic waste. 
(bb)  Domestic waste. A water-carried waste from, but not limited to, toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities used for household purposes, but excluding industrial wastes. 
(cc)  EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(dd)  Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
(ee)  Garbage. The solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
(ff)  Grab sample. A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(gg)  Industrial user (IU). Any person who introduces pollutants into a WWTP from any nondomestic source regulated under the Act, state law, or local ordinance or this article. 
(hh)  Industrial wastes. The liquid or liquid-borne wastes from industrial or manufacturing processes, and/or trade or business operations, as distinct from domestic wastes. 
(ii)  Instantaneous limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial wastewater flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
(jj)  Interceptor device. A device, including but not limited to, grease traps, sand traps, oil separators, etc., designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter. In case of acid or caustic wastes, an interceptor is a device in which the wastes are neutralized prior to their discharge into the wastewater collection system of the premises, the building drain, the building sewer, private sewer, or public sewer. 
(kk)  Interference. Any discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the wastewater system and any of its process or operations, or its sludge use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the WWTP's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude of duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sludge use or disposal in compliance with applicable local, state or federal law. 
(ll)  Local limit. Specific discharge limits developed for the wastewater system and enforced upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1)(b). 
(mm)  Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
(nn)  Monthly average concentration. The sum of the concentrations of the subject pollutant in all of the individual samples from that discharge divided by the number of samples analyzed for that pollutant during a calendar month. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the limit of detection, that value shall be regarded as zero when calculating monthly average concentration. 
(oo)  National categorical pretreatment standard or categorical pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
(pp)  Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
(qq)  New source. A facility from which there is, or may be a discharge of pollutants, construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standard under section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC 1317), which will apply to the facility if the standards are promulgated in accordance with that section, and where the discharge source is the result of: 
(1)  Construction of a facility at a site where no other point source is located; 
(2)  The process or production equipment causing the discharge is totally replaced due to construction; or 
(3)  Production of wastewater generating processes of the facility are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site; and/or as further or otherwise defined in the applicable federal regulations, being 40 CFR 403.3(k)(2). 
(rr)  Nondomestic users. Any user, including SIUs, of the wastewater system that discharges wastes other than or in addition to water-carried domestic wastes. 
(ss)  Nondomestic waste. All water-carried wastes other than domestic wastes. 
(tt)  NPDES or state discharge permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
(uu)  Nuisance. Any condition or circumstance defined as a nuisance pursuant to Michigan statute, at common law or in equity jurisprudence which includes, but is not limited to, any condition where sewage, industrial waste, or the effluent from any sewage disposal facility or toilet device is exposed to the surface of the ground or is permitted to drain on or to the surface of the ground or into any ditch, storm sewer, lake or watercourse, or when the odor, appearance, or presence of this material has an obnoxious or detrimental effect on or to the senses or health of persons, or when it shall obstruct the comfortable use or sale of adjacent property, except as otherwise permitted. 
(vv)  Operation and maintenance. Shall include all costs, direct and indirect, necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport and treatment on a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with all related federal, state and local requirements. (These costs include replacement of sewer lines and appurtenant structures.) 
(ww)  Pass through. A discharge which exits the WWTP in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation of the authority's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) and/or as further defined in 40 CFR 403.3(n). 
(xx)  p H. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution. 
(yy)  Plainfield. The Charter Township of Plainfield. 
(zz)  Point source. Any discernable confined and discrete conveyance or vessel from which pollutants are or may be discharged into a public waterway or public sewer system. 
(aaa)  Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
(bbb)  Premises. The lands included within the boundaries of a single description as set forth, from time to time, on the general tax rolls of the city as a single taxable item in the name of the taxpayer or taxpayers at one address, but, in the case of platted lots or site condominiums, shall be limited to a single platted lot or site condominium unit unless an existing building or structure is so located on more than one lot as to make the same a single description for purposes of assessment or conveyance now or hereafter. 
(ccc)  Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction, elimination, or alteration of pollutant properties to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharge or introduction into the wastewater system. This can be accomplished by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d). 
(ddd)  Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user. 
(eee)  Pretreatment standard or standard. Any local, state or federal regulation containing Pollutant Discharge limits. This term includes Local Limits; prohibitive Discharge limits including those promulgated under 40 CFR 403.5, and categorical pretreatment standards. 
(fff)  Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in sections 86-174.1 and 86-174.2. 
(ggg)  Public sewer. A sewer which is owned by, or under the operational responsibility and control of the city, Plainfield, or the authority. 
(hhh)  Replacement costs. Those expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works are designed and constructed. 
(iii)  Residential equivalent unit, REU, unit or units. : Shall be related to the quantity of sanitary sewage ordinarily arising from the occupancy of a residential building by a single family and the benefit derived therefrom, and shall be determined from time to time by the city. Said determination of units shall be based upon the studies made as to benefits derived, need of public sewer for reasons of public health, and the quantity of sewage generated, by different types of use and occupancy of premises and shall be kept up to date and reviewed as needed as new studies are made and through experience gained by the city and other area local units of government in actual operation. 
For nonresidential structures, the applicable number of units shall be determined using the unit factor formulas established by Plainfield, as may be amended by resolution from time to time. 
(jjj)  Residential user. All noncommercial premises used only for human residency and which are connected to the wastewater system. 
(kkk)  Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
(lll)  Service district. All geographic areas located within the city served by the wastewater system in accordance with the sewer service agreement. 
(mmm)  Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage or property damage to the wastewater system which causes all or part of the wastewater system to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(nnn)  Sewage. The water-carried wastes from human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing, etc.) from residences, business buildings, industrial establishments and/or other premises together with such infiltration as may be present. 
(ooo)  Sewage disposal services. The collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage originating from premises now or hereafter. 
(ppp)  Sewer lateral charge. The amount charged to each premises in the wastewater system for the actual construction of one or more sewer laterals from the wastewater system to the property line of the premises. 
(qqq)  Sewer lateral inspection and approval fee. The amount charged to each applicant by the city to connect a premises to the wastewater system to cover the cost of inspecting and approving the physical connection of the sewer lateral to the wastewater system and the issuance of a connection permit. 
(rrr)  Sewer rates and charges. The Availability fee, trunkage connection fee, sewer lateral charge, debt service charge, sewer lateral inspection and permit fee, charges for sewage disposal services, and interest and penalties thereon, as established by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(sss)  Sewer service agreement. The North Kent Sewer System Sewer Service Agreement dated as of November 24, 2008, and entered into by and between the city, Plainfield and the authority, as said agreement may be amended by the parties from time to time. 
(ttt)  Significant industrial user (SIU). Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this definition, the term SIU means: 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; and 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the wastewater system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the WWTP; or is designated as such by the director as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWTP's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)[6]). 
(3)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWTP's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (as defined in 40 CFR 403.12[a]) the director may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial User, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(0(6), determine that such industrial user is not a SIU. 
(uuu)  Significant noncompliance (SNC). The event of any one or more of the following having occurred: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as where 66 percent or more of all the measurements accepted by the director taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) any applicable maximum limit including an instantaneous limit. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as where 33 percent or more of all the measurements accepted by the director for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of any applicable maximum limit including an instantaneous limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease; and 1.2 for any other pollutant except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment limit that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination of other discharges, interference or pass through, or endangerment of the health of WWTP personnel or the general public. 
(4)  Discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge under 40 CFR 403.8(0(1)(vi)(B), by the city, Plainfield, or the authority. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order (administrative or judicial) for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, including, without limitation, such reports as BMRs, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failure to accurately or fully report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include violation(s) of BMPs, which the director determines will [have] or has an adverse affect on the operation of the wastewater system or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(9)  Any other violation which meets one or more of the listed criteria to assure compliance as set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii). 
(vvv)  Slug discharge. A discharge of nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
(www)  Structure in which sanitary sewage originates or structure. A building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities which generate water-carried sanitary sewage, are used or are available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. 
(xxx)  Total suspended solids (TSS). The solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
(yyy)  Upset. An exceptional incident in which a user unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the requirements of this article due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof and as further defined in 40 CFR 403.16. 
(zzz)  User. Any person (including any domestic or foreign corporation, partnership, governmental unit or other legal entity) who contributes causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the wastewater system. 
(aaaa)  Wastewater. Water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, industrial establishments and/or other premises together with such infiltration as may be present. 
(bbbb)  Wastewater system. The WWTP as well as all public sewers and other facilities owned by or over which the authority and/or Plainfield has operational responsibility and control for collecting, sampling, monitoring and pumping Wastewater which discharges to the WWTP. 
(cccc)  Wastewater treatment plant or WWTP. The authority's PARCC-Side Clean Water Plant, located at 4775 Coit Avenue, Grand Rapids, MI 49525. 
(dddd)  Waters of the state. Waters of the state include the following: 
(1)  Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of this state subject to its jurisdiction, including all ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems within this state, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of wastewater; and 
(2)  The floodplain free-flowing waters determined by the DEQ on the basis of 100-year flood frequency; and 
(3)  Any other waters specified by state law. 
(eeee)  Watercourse. A channel, natural or artificial, in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.9. - Connection to system. 
    All owners of structures in which sanitary sewage originates, now situated or hereinafter constructed within the service district, including premises connected as part of a plat, site condominium or planned unit development, are hereby required at their expense to install suitable plumbing fixtures and connect such facilities to an available public sanitary sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 86-171.10. - Connection from outside service district. 
    All owners of structures in which sanitary sewage originates located outside of the service district shall not be permitted to connect to the wastewater system unless Plainfield, the city and the authority consent in writing to the expansion of the service district; and: 
(a)  The wastewater system is an available public sanitary sewer system as defined in Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended, and this article; 
(b)  The Kent County Health Department determines that connection to an available public sanitary sewer system is required due to failure or partial failure of the on-site septic system; or 
(c)  Connection of all improved properties within the area in which said premises is located is declared a necessity by the township board for the public health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-171.11. - Connection to system; plats, site condominiums; exception. 
    Where a public sewer is required to be extended or constructed to serve a plat or site condominium, said plat or site condominium and permits to improve premises within said plat or site condominium shall not be approved or issued on behalf of the city, and none of said premises shall be improved by the erection thereof of a structure unless lateral sewers are provided to each lot, parcel, or unit included in said plat or site condominium. Connection of each lot, parcel or unit shall be made to the wastewater system when the sewer has been approved and connections thereto are permitted. 
    Where a public sewer is available within 500 feet of a platted lot or site condominium unit, measured along the right-of-way, easement, highway, street, or public way, and the city engineer and Plainfield determine that said public sewer may be feasibly extended wholly within the public right-of-way or road and utility easement to serve said lot or unit, no structure may be built without said sewer extension and connection to the wastewater system unless Plainfield otherwise determines and informs the city that there is insufficient capacity to connect said lot or site condominium unit to the wastewater system. 
    Subject to Plainfield's consent, the city commission may, at its discretion, grant a waiver for any requirement of this article if it determines by specific resolution that compliance therewith will work an unreasonable hardship on the owner of the premises involved. In making such determination, the city commission shall consider such matters as the topography, the density of the proposed development, soil types and conditions, available capacity in the wastewater system, and any other factor it deems to be relevant. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 2, 10-12-09) 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER RATES AND CHARGES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, added § 86-172, including §§ 86-172.1-86-172.15, to the Code. At the editor's discretion and in consultation with the city, § 86-172 has been redesignated as division 2 to maintain the organization of the Code. 

Sec. 86-172.1. - Applicability. 
    All persons connecting to and utilizing the wastewater system shall pay sewer rates and charges as set forth in this ordinance and as required by the sewer service agreement. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.2. - Trunkage connection fee; premises from which sewage originates. 
    Owners of premises within the area served by the wastewater system from which sanitary sewage originates and any owner of premises within the area served by the wastewater system from which sanitary sewage does not originate, who thereafter improve the same by the erection of a structure thereon which has sanitary or industrial sewage facilities, shall pay a trunkage connection fee for connection to the wastewater system. 
    In addition to the trunkage connection fee imposed by this section, an additional charge known as a "trunkage connection fee surcharge" may be imposed for purposes of recouping additional costs specific to certain new or expanded areas of the wastewater system and which additional costs are not included in the trunkage connection fee. The trunkage connection fee surcharge shall be an amount determined according to the unit basis of the use of the premises, and shall be reviewed from time to time to ensure that it, when combined with the trunkage connection fee, reflects an appropriate level of "buy in" for the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.3. - Trunkage connection fees; escalation rate. 
    Owners of premises served by the wastewater system which are hereafter connected directly or indirectly to the wastewater system through other public or private sewers hereafter constructed in the area served by the wastewater system, or where new construction or different processes result in greater demands for the wastewater system capacity, shall pay a trunkage connection fee (and a trunkage connection surcharge fee where applicable) at the time construction or building permit is issued or when the city or Plainfield becomes aware of different processes resulting in greater system demand. The trunkage connection fee shall be in addition to any other fee or charges paid or being paid hereunder with respect to said premises. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.4. - Availability fee, premises with direct connection. 
    Owners of premises within the area served by the wastewater system, which premises are crossed or are hereafter crossed by or abut upon the wastewater system, shall pay an availability fee if direct connection of the said premises to the wastewater system is available. The availability fee charged to each premises shall be an amount based on the project cost of constructing the sewer extension, if known, and as verified by Plainfield, plus any deferred interest charges. The project cost shall include construction costs, design costs, and inspection costs. The project cost may be assigned on a per-front-foot basis or on a proportionate REU share. If the project cost is assigned on an REU basis, the then current table of unit factors shall be used. The availability fee shall be payable on such terms and intervals and at such interest as is established in accordance with this article. Unless otherwise permitted by Plainfield, such amounts shall be paid in full, in cash at the time the township issues a building or construction permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.5. - Deferral of levy of charges. 
    The owner of a vacant parcel may defer the imposition of the availability fee where the vacant parcel becomes subject to an availability fee as the result of new construction of sewers or facilities of the wastewater system, or where the vacant parcel is a newly-created parcel by a split from a parcel upon which an availability fee has previously been imposed but not paid in full prior to the creation of the new parcel. Such deferral shall continue until the time a construction or building permit is issued and an inspection and approval fee is paid. These charges are exclusive of trunkage connection fees and trunkage connection surcharge fees as outlined in sections 86-172.2 and 86-172.3. The city will maintain records of such deferrals and payments. Subsequent splits from each parcel may generate another deferred charge, if the full availability fee is not paid. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.6. - Sewer lateral charge. 
    Owners of premises within the area served by the wastewater system for which premises one or more sewer laterals to the wastewater system are to be provided shall pay a sewer lateral charge equal to the amount of costs to construct the lateral. Plainfield may require the property owner to construct the required sewer lateral at the property owner's expense. A qualified contractor approved by Plainfield shall construct the sewer lateral. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.7. - Sewer lateral inspection fee and permit. 
    All sewer lateral connections shall be inspected and approved by Plainfield. A sewer lateral inspection fee shall be paid to Plainfield. If, however, unusual circumstances demand, Plainfield may charge inspection costs on an hourly basis. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.8. - Number of units assigned. 
    The number of units to be assigned to any particular premises used for purposes other than a single-family residence shall be determined based on unit factors promulgated by Plainfield. Plainfield, if the circumstances justify, may assign more than one unit to a single-family dwelling. No less than one unit shall be assigned to each premises. For purposes of computing the trunkage connection fee, units in excess of one may be computed and assigned to the nearest tenth. Plainfield may revise unit factors by resolution, as it deems appropriate and the unit factors as revised by Plainfield shall apply throughout the service district. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.9. - Amount and review of sewer rates and charges. 
    In accordance with the sewer service agreement, the amount of the sewer rates and charges shall be determined by Plainfield and subject to Plainfield's periodic review and revision. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.10. - Charges; no free service. 
    Charges for sewage disposal services to each premises connected to the wastewater system shall be established from time to time in accordance with this article and subject to any obligations and limitations set forth in any agreement, including the sewer service agreement, pertaining to the wastewater system. No free service shall be furnished by the wastewater system to the city or any person, firm, or corporation, public or private, or any public agency or instrumentality. Following the period of service, charges for services furnished by the wastewater system shall be mailed to users by Plainfield on a quarterly basis, or more frequently at Plainfield's discretion. All bills shall be paid within 20 days of mailing and shall be payable to Plainfield. If any bill shall not be paid as required, a late charge of ten percent of the amount billed shall be applied to the current amount past due and collected therewith. Penalty charges will not be compounded. No availability fee, trunkage connection fee, sewer lateral charge or any other fee or charged imposed herein shall be waived or reduced by the city. 
    The owner of the premises served and the occupants thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for the sewage disposal services provided to said premises. At the discretion of Plainfield, tenants or land contract purchasers requesting sewage disposal services in their name may be required to deposit with Plainfield the estimated bill for three months in advance of receiving service. Deposits shall be applied to any bill, including penalties and interest, for sewage disposal services delinquent more than 30 days. Any deposit so applied shall be promptly redeposited by the user. The deposit, in the case of a tenant, shall be returned, less any balance due, when service is discontinued, unless the depositor wishes to apply the deposit to a new account in the district. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.11. - Pretreatment; surcharge. 
    If it is determined to be in the best interest of the city, Plainfield and the authority in order to provide the necessary service and to meet the city's contractual obligations with Plainfield and the authority as set forth in the sewer service agreement, pretreatment may be required, and an appropriate surcharge may be made against any user who does not otherwise meet the limitations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.12. - Penalties; billing and collection. 
    Plainfield or its agent or designee shall bill and collect all penalties (surcharges), if any, directly from commercial and industrial users. The penalty (surcharge) shall be as determined by Plainfield or the authority in accordance with Plainfield's agreements with the authority for treatment of wastewater in the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.13. - Late payment, charges; penalty, discontinued service. 
    If charges for sewage disposal service are not paid on or before the due date, a penalty of ten percent shall be added thereto. In the event that the charges for any such services furnished to any Premises shall not be paid within 90 days after the due date thereof, then all services furnished by the wastewater system may be discontinued by means of discontinuing public water service to the premises. Service so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing, including penalties and interest, are paid, plus all expenses incurred by the city, Plainfield, and/or the authority for shutting off and turning on the water service. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.14. - Late payment, installation or interest fees; discontinued service. 
    If any installment of a trunkage connection fee, availability fee or sewer lateral charge and/or the interest due is not paid on or before the due date, the aggregate thereof shall draw interest at the rate of one percent per month until paid. In the event that any such installment or interest remains unpaid for 90 days or more after the due date, service may be discontinued as provided in section 86-172.13 and shall not be restored until all amounts due are paid plus the shutoff and turn-on charges so provided are paid. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-172.15. - Unpaid charges, fees; lien. 
    Charges for sewage disposal services furnished by the wastewater system to any premises and any interest and penalties thereon shall become a lien on the premises serviced immediately upon the provision of the sewage disposal service. trunkage connection fees, trunkage connection surcharge fees, sewer lateral charges, or any other fees, rates or charges imposed pursuant to this article and any interest and penalties thereon shall be a lien on the premises upon the date of actual connection or the date of mandatory connection, whichever occurs first. The availability fee and any interest and penalties thereon shall become a lien on the premises as of the date thereof. On or before September 30 of each year, the city treasurer shall certify any such charges, fees and installments and interest which have been delinquent 90 days or more, plus additional interest accrued thereon, plus a penalty of an additional amount of six percent of the aggregate amount, to the city commission, who shall cause the same to be entered upon the next city tax roll as a charge against the premises to which such services shall have been rendered and against the premises such trunkage connection fee, availability fee and/or sewer lateral charge has been placed, and said unpaid charges and unpaid fees, with penalties and interest accrued thereon, shall be collected, and said lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to ad valorem taxes assessed upon such roll. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
DIVISION 3. - USE, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-575, § 4, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, added § 86-173, including §§ 86-173.1 and 86-173.2, to the Code. At the editor's discretion and in consultation with the city, § 86-173 has been redesignated as division 3 to maintain the organization of the Code. 

Sec. 86-173.1. - Use, operation and maintenance of system. 
    The operation, maintenance and management of the wastewater system shall be under the immediate supervision and control of Plainfield and the authority, in accordance with the sewer service agreement. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 4, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-173.2. - Notice and claim procedures applicable to overflow or backup of the public sewer system. 
    This section has been adopted in accordance with Act 222 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2001 ("Act 222") to set forth the notice and claim procedures applicable to an overflow or backup of the public sewer system, which, as defined in Act 222, shall be referred to for purposes of this section as a "sewage disposal system event." To afford property owners, as well as the city, authority, and Plainfield greater efficiency, certainty and consistency in the provision of relief for damages or physical injuries caused by a sewage disposal system event, the city, authority and Plainfield, and any person making a claim for economic damages, which, as defined in Act 222, shall be referred to for purposes of this section as a "claimant," shall follow the following procedures: 
(a)  A claimant is not entitled to compensation unless the claimant notifies Plainfield of a claim of damage or physical injury, in writing, within 45 days after the date the damage or physical injury was discovered by the claimant, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have been discovered by the claimant. 
(b)  The written notice under subsection (a) shall contain the claimant's name, address, and telephone number; the address of the affected property; the date of discovery of any property damages or physical injuries; and a brief description of the claim. As part of the description of the claim, the claimant shall submit an explanation of the sewage disposal system event and reasonable proof of ownership and the value of any damaged personal property. Reasonable proof of ownership and the purchase price or value of the property may include testimony or records. Reasonable proof of the value of the property may also include photographic or similar evidence. 
(c)  The written notice under subsection (a) shall be sent to the Plainfield utilities director, who is hereby designated as the individual at Plainfield to receive such notices pursuant to Section 19 of Act 222, with a copy to the director. 
(d)  If a claimant who owns or occupies affected property notifies Plainfield orally or in writing of a sewage disposal system event before providing a notice of a claim that complies with subsections (a), (b) and (c), the Plainfield utilities director shall provide the claimant with a written explanation of the notice requirements of subsections (a), (b) and (c) sufficiently detailed to allow the claimant to comply with said requirements. 
(e)  If Plainfield is notified of a claim under subsection (a) and Plainfield believes that a different or additional governmental agency may be responsible for the claimed property damages or physical injuries, Plainfield shall notify the contacting agency of each additional or different governmental agency of that fact, in writing, within 15 business days after the date Plainfield receives the claimant's notice under subsection (a). 
(f)  If Plainfield receives a notice from a claimant or a different or additional governmental agency that complies with this section, Plainfield may inspect the damaged property or investigate the physical injury. A claimant or the owner or occupant of affected property shall not unreasonably refuse to allow Plainfield or its duly authorized representatives to inspect damaged property or investigate a physical injury. 
(g)  Prior to a determination of payment of compensation by Plainfield, the claimant shall provide to Plainfield additional documentation and proof that: 
(1)  At the time of the sewage disposal system event, Plainfield owned or operated, or directly or indirectly discharged into, that portion of the public sewer system that allegedly caused damage or physical injury. 
(2)  The public sewer system had a defect. 
(3)  Plainfield knew, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence, should have known, about the defect in the public sewer system. 
(4)  Plainfield, having the legal authority to do so, failed to take reasonable steps in a reasonable amount of time to repair, correct or remedy the defect in the public sewer system. 
(5)  The defect in the public sewer system was a proximate cause that was 50 percent or more of the cause of the sewage disposal system event and the property damage or physical injury. 
(h)  Prior to a determination of payment of compensation by Plainfield or the authority, the claimant shall also provide to Plainfield additional documentation and proof that neither of the following were a proximate cause that was 50 percent or more of the cause of the sewage disposal system event: 
(1)  An obstruction in a service connection, a building sewer or building drain that was not caused by Plainfield; or, 
(2)  A connection on the affected premises, including, but not limited to, a footing drain, sump system, surface drain, gutter, down spout or connection of any other sort that discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted air-conditioning water or unpolluted industrial process waters to the public sewer system. 
(i)  If Plainfield and a claimant do not reach an agreement on the amount of compensation for the property damages or physical injury within 45 days after the receipt of notice under subsection (a), the claimant may institute a civil action in accordance with Act 222. 
(j)  To facilitate compliance with this section, Plainfield shall make available to the public information about the notice and claim procedures under this section. 
(k)  The notice and claim procedures set forth in this section shall be applicable to a sewage disposal system event involving the public sewer system. 
(l)  In the event of a conflict between the notice and claim procedures set forth in this section and the specific requirements of Act 222, the specific requirements of Act 222 shall control. 
(m)  As provided in section 19(7) of Act 222, the notice and claim procedures of this section do not apply to claims for non-economic damages (as defined in Act 222) arising out of a sewage disposal system event. 
(n)  Any word, term or phrase used in this section, if defined in Act 222, shall have the same meaning provided under Act 222. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 3, 10-12-09) 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, added § 86-174, including §§ 86-174.1-86-174.35, to the Code. At the editor's discretion and in consultation with the city, § 86-174 has been redesignated as division 4 to maintain the organization of the Code. 

Sec. 86-174.1. - Prohibited discharge. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the wastewater system any wastewater or waste which (i) contains the substances or possesses the characteristics described in section 86-174.2 or which exceeds the limits set forth on the attached appendix A, except as allowed by a special discharge permit issued pursuant to section 86-174.23, (ii) prevents effective operation of the wastewater system, (iii) will cause pass through or interference or which is otherwise incompatible with the WWTP, or (iv) is prohibited by any federal or state law, regulation, permit requirement or standard which is applicable to the city, Plainfield, the authority, or the wastewater system. With respect to such wastewater or waste, the director shall have the option to: 
(a)  Reject the waste or wastewater; 
(b)  Require satisfactory pretreatment as provided in sections 86-174.10 et. seq.; and/or 
(c)  Require, the payment of extra charges to the city, Plainfield and/or to the authority to pay for the added costs of handling and treating the waste or wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.2. - Prohibited wastes and wastewater. 
    The prohibited wastes and wastewater referenced in section 86-174.1 are as follows: 
(a)  Waste or wastewater for which a discharge permit under section 86-174.15 is required if such permit is not obtained or valid. 
(b)  Materials which can, alone or by interaction with other substances, cause fires or can be explosive including, but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and Stoddard solvents and/or any wastestream with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius (using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 or its successors). 
(c)  Any wastewater or waste with a pH of less than 6.5 or greater than 10.0. 
(d)  Solid or viscous substances which will obstruct the flow in sewers or otherwise interfere with the proper operation of the wastewater system including, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, or paunch manure, or any material which can be disposed of as trash. 
(e)  (1)  Any wastewater or waste containing substances released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which: 
(i)  Causes the WWTP discharge to exceed the allowable concentrations of substances established by the authority's NPDES discharge permit or by the general rules of the water resources commission under Michigan Act 245, P.A. of 1929, as amended; 
(ii)  Causes the WWTP sludges to exceed the allowable levels of substances as established by the U.S. EPA which causes restricted use of these sludges; 
(iii)  Interfere(s) with the operation of the WWTP; 
(iv)  Causes a release(s) to the atmosphere in quantities which violate the rules under Michigan Act 348, P.A. of 1965, as amended; or governmental entity with jurisdiction. 
(2)  When specific substances are present in concentrations which cause the WWTP to establish limits for such substances, the director shall publish such limits or notice of the limits and shall maintain and distribute upon request a list of the limits. These limits shall also be subject to the provisions of section 9.10, entitled special discharge permits. 
(3)  New users or existing users which propose to implement new discharges of wastewater or waste which will contain measurable amounts of any substances detected in U.S. EPA 600 series or 8000 series analytical methods, shall submit to the director an estimate of the concentrations and quantities of these substances prior to implementing the discharge. The director shall determine the need to establish limits for the substances based on these estimates. 
(f)  Any wastewater or waste having a temperature exceeding 140 degrees Fahrenheit or which causes the influent to the WWTP to exceed a temperature of 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(g)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(h)  Any noxious gas, malodorous gas, or any gas or fumes, or a pollutant which results in the presence of such gas or fumes which would injuriously effect the safety or health of the public or the employees of the city, Plainfield, or the authority, or work substantial annoyance, inconvenience or injury to the public. 
(i)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants. 
(j)  Garbage which is not shredded to such a degree that (i) all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers and (ii) no particle is greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(k)  Any wastewater or waste having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the wastewater system. 
(l)  Any substance which may cause a public nuisance, cause hazard to life or prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair, as determined by the city, Plainfield, the authority or other governmental entity with jurisdiction. 
(m)  Any wastewater or waste which: 
(1)  Contains a toxic or poisonous substance or has a high chlorine demand in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the wastewater treatment process or the WWTP, 
(2)  Contains over-strength conventional wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the wastewater treatment process or the WWTP, 
(3)  Constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, or 
(4)  Creates any hazard in the receiving waters or the effluent of the WWTP. 
(n)  Any wastewater or waste containing more than the local limits identified in attached appendix A unless such discharge has first been authorized by a special discharge permit pursuant to section 86-174.23. Where applicable state or federal law mandates lower maximum concentrations, such limits shall supersede the limits set forth in and shall be incorporated by reference into appendix A. The director may impose mass limitations and/or seasonal limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration limitations in appendix A. 
(o)  Any discharge of nitrates, sugars, or other nutrients, or wastewater or waste containing these items, shall be limited as necessary to prevent adverse effects on the wastewater treatment processes and the WWTP and to prevent the stimulation of the growth of algae, weeds, and slimes which are or may become injurious to the water supply, the recreational use of water, fish, wildlife, or other aquatic life. 
(p)  Any wastewater or waste containing very light suspended solids (such as potato skins, fats, or cottage cheese whey) or any other constituent of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required for the WWTP to effectively treat such wastewater or waste. 
(q)  Any hazardous waste, or any waste which if otherwise disposed of would be hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. 
(r)  Any radioactive waste or isotopes. 
(s)  Any sludge, precipitate, or congealed substance which results from an industrial or commercial process or which results from the pretreatment of wastewater, waste, or air pollutants. 
(t)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director. 
(u)  Stormwater, surfacewater, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage from footing drains or otherwise, deionized water, noncontract cooling water, and unpolluted water, unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(v)  Any water from a dewatering operation, without prior written authorization by the director. Such written authorization shall be on the conditions and subject to such charges as determined by the director. Nothing contained in this section or in any written authorization provided hereunder shall excuse compliance by the discharger with any other provision of this article or other applicable law. No recipient of such authorization shall be deemed to have any vested right or property interest to discharge substances as specified in such permit but instead only a temporary permissive right to discharge within the limits of such written authorization. 
(w)  Any water discharged from an environmental remediation project, without prior written authorization by the director. Such written authorization shall be on the conditions and subject to such charges as determined by the director. Nothing contained in this section or in any written authorization provided hereunder shall excuse compliance by the discharger with any other provision of this article or other applicable law. No recipient of such authorization shall be deemed to have any vested right or property interest to discharge substances as specified in such permit but instead only a temporary permissive right to discharge within the limits of such written authorization. 
(x)  Mercury, in any amount detectable at or above the MDL as provided in section 86-174.5. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.3. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Users shall comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471, and such standards are hereby incorporated into this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.4. - Local limits. 
    The director is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c), which shall be and are incorporated into this article as appendix A hereto. The director shall publish such limits or notice of adoption of such local limits and upon request shall make a list of such limits available. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.5. - Mercury provisions. 
(a)  [Sampling procedures.] Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA method 245.1. The MDL developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136 shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for mercury, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
The evaluation of potential matrix interference(s) shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A demonstration that the laboratory conducting the analysis is capable of achieving the MDL of 0.2 ug/l in reagent water; 
(2)  A demonstration that the MDL of 0.2 ug/l cannot be achieved in the effluent; and 
(3)  A demonstration that an attempt has been made to resolve the matrix interference(s). 
In cases where true matrix interference(s) can be demonstrated, a discharge-specific MDL will be developed in accordance with the procedure in 40 CFR 136. Discharge-specific MDLs will be incorporated into the discharge permit of a nondomestic user. 
(b)  Mercury reduction plans. To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the WWTP is not exceeded, the director may require any nondomestic user with a reasonable potential to discharge mercury to develop, submit for approval and implement an MRP. The MRP may be required by permit if the nondomestic user has not violated the local limit for mercury, but the director has determined that a reasonable potential for such a violation may exist. MRPs may be required in notices of violations, orders or other enforcement actions when the non-domestic user has violated the mercury local limit. At a minimum, an approvable MRP shall contain the following: 
(1)  A written commitment by the nondomestic user to reduce all discharges of mercury in nondomestic waste to levels below the MDL within the time frame specified by the director; 
(2)  Within 60 days of notification by the director that a MRP is required, The nondomestic user shall supply an initial identification of all potential sources of mercury which could be Discharged to the sanitary sewer system; 
(3)  Specific strategies for mercury reduction with time frames for implementation as specified by the director; 
(4)  A program for sampling and analysis for mercury of the discharge of nondomestic wastes in accordance with [EPA method] 245.1 methods, if and as specified by the director; 
(5)  A demonstration of specific, measurable and/or otherwise quantifiable mercury reductions consistent with the goal of reducing mercury in discharges to below the specified MDL. Where such reductions can not be demonstrated through normal effluent monitoring (e.g., mercury discharges are already near MDL), the demonstration should incorporate the following: 
(i)  Internal process monitoring, documenting the results of mercury reduction strategies at sampling locations within the facility (e.g., a program of regular monitoring of sink traps where mercury containing reagents had previously been disposed, but have since been substituted for by nonmercury-containing compounds); 
(ii)  Internal and/or effluent sampling utilizing clean and/or ultra-clean sampling and analytical methods as referenced by U.S. EPA Federal Register. Note that the results of such monitoring will not be used for compliance purposes unless performed in accordance with U.S. EPA method 245.1 and collected at the appropriate compliance measurement location. 
(iii)  Loading calculations wherein the nondomestic user calculates the total mass of mercury reduced from the sanitary sewer discharge through reagent substitutions, changes in disposal practices and/or other approved MRP strategies implemented. 
(6)  A report on the status of the mercury reduction efforts, as and when directed by the director. At a minimum, these reports shall: 
(i)  Identify compliance or noncompliance with specific reduction commitments in the MRP; 
(ii)  Summarize the analytical, mass-based or other quantifiable demonstrations of mercury reductions performed to date; 
(iii)  Provide all applicable analytical data; 
(iv)  Provide an evaluation of the effectiveness of actions taken to date; 
(v)  Provide updates to the initial list of mercury-containing compounds discharged to the sanitary sewer; and 
(vi)  Where applicable or necessary, propose for approval new strategies and/or modifications to the current MRP to continue and improve mercury discharge reduction efforts. 
(7)  Any other conditions that the Director deems necessary to ensure that mercury reduction efforts are effective in achieving the goals of this section. 
Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days after the required due date shall constitute significant noncompliance. 
An MRP may be evaluated for adequacy at any time by the director. If such an evaluation determines that the MRP is inadequate, or the nondomestic user has not complied with its approved MRP, the nondomestic user will be notified. Failure to comply with the MRP requirement constitutes noncompliance, and will subject the user to enforcement actions as described in this article. 
A nondomestic user may request a release from MRP requirements if (i) four consecutive samples of the discharge are less than the specified MDL; (ii) the nondomestic user has complied with minimum the monitoring frequency specified by the director; and (iii) the director deems that MRP commitments have been fulfilled sufficiently to ensure continued compliance with the mercury limitation. In order to be effective, any release from MRP requirements, the nondomestic user must obtain such release from the director in writing. 
If the MRP requirement is waived by the director, the nondomestic user remains subject to the local limitation for mercury in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
Rediscovery of mercury in the nondomestic user discharge shall subject such user to the submission of a new MRP, or escalation of enforcement in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.6. - Affirmative defenses. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in subsection (iii) of section 86-174.1 and the specific prohibitions in subsections (d), (e), (f) and (g) of section 86-174.2 where the user can demonstrate that: 
(a)  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and a local limit designed to prevent pass through and /or interference, as the case may be, was established pursuant to section 86-174.4 for which each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(b)  (1)  A local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference, as the case may be, was established pursuant to section 86-174.4 for which each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference, and the user was incompliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  If a local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference, as the case may be, has not been established for the pollutants(s) that caused the pass through or interference, the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the authority was regularly in compliance with the authority's NPDES permit requirements and in the case of Interference, applicable requirements for sludge use or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.7. - Operating upsets. 
    Any user which experiences an upset (as defined in this article and/or in 40 CFR 403.16, as amended, or its successors) in operations which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this article or whose discharge could cause problems or damages to the wastewater system (as determined by the director), including slug loadings, whether planned or unplanned, shall immediately telephone and notify the thereof. A written followup report thereof shall be filed by the user with the director within five days. The report shall specify: 
(a)  Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a user's compliance status. 
(b)  Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(c)  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(d)  A timely documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the director against a user for any noncompliance with a pretreatment standard under this article which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset, if: 
(1)  The user demonstrates, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other evidence: 
(i)  The cause of the noncompliance: 
(ii)  That the noncompliance was unintentional and temporary; 
(iii)  That the facility was being operated in a prudent manner in compliance with all applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(iv)  That the noncompliance was caused by factors beyond the reasonable control of the user and not caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation; and 
(2)  The user reports the non-compliance as required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.8. - Bypasses. 
    Bypasses (as defined in the applicable federal regulations) are prohibited unless the bypass is unavoidable or necessary to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage. An anticipated bypass shall be reported to the WWTP if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass, or as far in advance as reasonably possible if less than ten days. The director may, in his discretion, approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its potential adverse effects, if the bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; if there is no feasible alternative; and if the user submits notice as required above; and/or subject to the provisions of 40 CFR 403.17(d). The WWTP shall be given oral notice of an unanticipated bypass as soon as possible, and not later than 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The director may require a written report of the unanticipated bypass incident. The report shall contain the description and cause of the bypass, duration (exact dates and times), and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. A bypass report shall be signed by an authorized representative. 
    Subject to the requirements and limitations set forth above, a user shall have an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with violations of categorical pretreatment standards if the user demonstrates that: 
(a)  (1)  The bypass did not cause a violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, and 
(2)  The bypass was essential for maintenance necessary to ensure efficient operation, and 
(3)  The user timely submitted any report(s) under this section; or 
(b)  (1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, substantial physical damage to property, damage to treatment facilities that would cause them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, but not merely economic loss caused by delays in production; 
(2)  The user had no alternative to the bypass, such as using auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waters, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime; 
(3)  If the bypass occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or equipment maintenance, reasonable engineering judgment indicates that backup equipment was not justified; and 
(4)  The user timely submitted the reports required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.9. - Dilution. 
    Except as expressly authorized under applicable categorical pretreatment standards, no user shall increase the use of potable or process water nor mix separate wastestreams for the purpose of diluting a discharge, or otherwise dilute a discharge in any way, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.10. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater pretreatment or treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in sections 86-174.1 and 86-174.2 within the time limitations specified by the U.S. EPA, the state or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the director under the provisions of this article. 
    Where preliminary treatment is required by this section for a new source, all pollution control or pretreatment equipment must be installed and started up prior to discharge and such user shall adhere to a compliance schedule which is in compliance with all applicable federal regulations. Where preliminary treatment is required by this section, and the user is already discharging waste or wastewater into the wastewater system, then the user shall, at the request of the director, comply with a schedule established by the director after input from the user which shall specify by date those items which are to be accomplished by the user to complete all necessary preliminary treatment facilities and to bring the waste and wastewater being discharged into compliance with all requirements of this article. The director may require that such compliance schedule include liquidated damage provisions for failure to comply with the schedule. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.11. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the wastewater system and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The director may require any person discharging into the wastewater system to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, shall comply with all other applicable city ordinances and shall also be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required by the director to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.12. - Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans. 
    The director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user, at the user's expense. The adequacy of such plan and frequency at which such plan will be evaluated shall be determined by the director pursuant to the provisions of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). The director shall evaluate the need for such a plan at least once every two years. Such a plan shall include the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 86-174.29; and 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic Pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(e)  The director may require, as part of such plan, that the user provide, at his expense, suitable containment facilities within a time period specified by the director. Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to the proposed containment facilities shall be prepared and submitted for approval by the director, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval by the director is given in writing. Such containment facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory condition by the user at his cost. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.13. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste shall not be discharged to the wastewater system. 
(b)  Trucked or hauled industrial waste shall not be discharged to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.14. - Wastewater analysis and disclosure. 
    All nondomestic users proposing to connect to or to contribute wastewater or waste to the wastewater system shall submit such information as the director shall reasonably request on their processes and wastewater before connecting to or contributing to the wastewater system. All existing nondomestic users connected to or contributing to the wastewater system shall promptly submit such information on their processes and wastewater as the director shall reasonably request, and additionally shall notify the director in advance of substantial change(s) in volume or characteristics of the user's discharge as provided in 40 CFR 403.12(2). Such information shall be submitted for all new sources at least 90 days (or more, if required by applicable federal and/or state statutes or regulations) prior to connection to the sanitary sewer or the commencement of discharges to the wastewater system. The information submitted shall be sufficient for the director to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the wastewater system and the need for pretreatment, shall include a BMR, and shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user who is a legally authorized signatory as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(l). Copies of all such information submitted or required to be submitted by a user shall be maintained on file by the user. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing disclosure requirements, the information which may be required pursuant to this section may include any or all of the following: 
(a)  Disclosure of name, address, and location of the user. 
(b)  Disclosure of standard industrial classification (SIC) number according to the SIC Manual, Federal Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(c)  Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this article, as determined by bona fide chemical and biological analyses. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the U.S. EPA and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended. 
(d)  Disclosure of time and duration of discharges. 
(e)  Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any. All flows shall be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the director due to cost or nonfeasibility. 
(f)  Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans (including noncontact water cooling systems) and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(g)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or may be discharged to the wastewater system. 
(h)  Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this article in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this article on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to comply with this article. 
(i)  New sources shall have in operating condition and shall "start up" all pollution control equipment required to comply with this article before beginning to discharge into the wastewater system. New sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time and in any case within not more than 90 days. 
(j)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this article, the user shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. This schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to comply with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article. No increment in this schedule shall exceed nine months unless the user can establish, to the satisfaction of the director that a time period of more than nine months is required. The director may require revision of any such schedule or schedule increment as a precondition of any and all discharges or the further discharges by the user to the wastewater system. 
(k)  Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(l)  Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized and stored on the user's premises (average and maximum per day). 
(m)  Any other information required by 40 CFR section 403.12, by amendments and/or successors thereto, or by other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.15. - When permit required. 
    All CIUs shall obtain from the director and maintain a valid discharge permit as a precedent to making any discharge to the wastewater system. In addition, any SIU, any other person that exceeds the limits set forth in appendix B, or any other person so directed by the director shall obtain from the director and maintain a valid discharge permit as a condition precedent to making any discharge to the wastewater system. The director may, in his discretion, require that any existing user, potential user or new source procure and maintain in effect a discharge permit, issued by the director, as a condition precedent to making any discharge to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.16. - Permit application. 
    Every existing or potential user required to procure a discharge permit pursuant to this article shall make application for such permit in the form and manner prescribed by the director. The application shall include all facts and information necessary for the director to reasonably consider and evaluate the granting or denial of the discharge permit. To be valid, all permit applications must be certified by an authorized representative of the user as follows: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.17. - Permit approval. 
    Upon receipt of a completed permit application, the director shall, within a reasonable time, grant or deny the requested discharge permit. However, the permit shall not be effective prior to the time that the prospective or current user delivers to the director a copy of the permit executed by an authorized representative of the user. During the pendency of an application, an existing user may continue to discharge to the wastewater system subject, however, to full compliance with this article and all other applicable provisions of local, state and federal law. A discharge permit may be granted with such conditions and restrictions as the director shall reasonably determine to be necessary or appropriate. These conditions and restrictions may be amended from time to time during the term of the permit, on written notice to the permit holder, as the director shall determine to be reasonably necessary or appropriate to permit the WWTP to operate effectively, to comply with all applicable provisions of local, state and federal law, to prevent any detriment to the wastewater system, the receiving stream or the use or disposal of sludge, or to meet the requirements of all permits applicable to the wastewater system operation. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.18. - Permit fee. 
    The director may establish the fee to be paid to the authority for a permit to discharge to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.19. - Permit expiration and renewal. 
    All discharge permits, unless otherwise specified in the permit, shall expire three years following issuance, or such shorter period as stated in the permit. The expiration date shall be stated on the face of the permit. The user shall be responsible to apply for renewal of any existing permit. An application for renewal of a permit shall be filed at least 120 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit, and shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.20. - Transfer. 
    No permit shall be transferred to a different user, different premises or to a new or changed source or operation without the prior written consent of the director. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.21. - Permit denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A discharge permit may be revoked or suspended by the director at any time for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any material false statement or material omission in the application for the permit; 
(2)  Any violation of the conditions and restrictions included as part of the permit; or 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(b)  Written notice of suspension or revocation, stating the cause of causes therefore, shall be delivered to the permit holder personally or mailed, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder's address as shown in the application for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.22. - Substances subject to special discharge permit. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater or waste which exceed the limits set forth on appendix A unless such discharge has first been authorized by a special discharge permit pursuant to section 86-174.23. However, under no circumstances shall any person discharge or introduce into the wastewater system any of the substances described in 40 CFR 403.5(a) and (b), and/or listed or described in subsections 86-174.2(a), (b), (c), (d), (e)(1), (f), (g), (h), (j), (k), (l), (m), (o), (p), (q), (r) or (s). 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.23. - Special discharge permits. 
    Section 86-174.22 authorizes the discharge of substances in excess of identified maximums, as shown on appendix A, if such discharge is authorized in advance by a special discharge permit issued by the director. Such special discharge permit shall be applied for and be otherwise subject in all respects to all of the terms and provisions of this article. The following additional provisions shall be specifically applicable to special discharge permits: 
(a)  No special discharge permits shall be issued by the director, or if issued or existing contrary to applicable state or federal law, shall be valid to allow any exceedances or variances from federally prohibited discharges, unless and until such exceedances or variances are specifically approved by the U.S. EPA region V or by the DEQ, as appropriate. The burden and expense of obtaining such state or federal approval shall be the sole responsibility of the user seeking the special discharge permit. 
(b)  For those substances which may be the subject of a special discharge permit including, but not limited to, those substances listed on appendix A, the authority may by resolution periodically establish the level of each such substance which can be permitted in the WWTP influent without: 
(1)  Preventing the effective operation of the wastewater system, 
(2)  Causing the WWTP to violate the provisions of any local, state or federal law or regulation which is applicable to the WWTP, 
(3)  Having a detrimental effect on the wastewater system, the receiving stream, or the land to which the WWTP sludge is applied, or 
(4)  Causing the WWTP to violate the requirements of any permit applicable to its operation. 
(c)  The director shall determine, from time to time, the actual level of the various substances eligible for a special discharge permit which are in the WWTP influent. 
(d)  For those substances which may be the subject of a special discharge permit, the director shall periodically establish a safety reserve for each such substance which it deems necessary or advisable to protect the WWTP, the receiving stream and the land to which the WWTP sludge is applied (if applicable) and to accommodate any new or modified Discharge to the WWTP. 
(e)  The director may then allocate the balance of the difference between the actual amount of the substance in the WWTP influent and the maximum allowable amount in the WWTP influent, less the safety reserve referenced in subsection (d) above, among those users of the wastewater system (i) who anticipate discharging in excess of the limits specified in this article, and (ii) who apply for a special discharge permit to authorize such excess discharge. To allocate the balance of the difference between the actual level of a substance in the WWTP influent and the MAHL, the director may implement a system for setting special alternative limits which incorporates a component of this allocation for batch discharges. Special alternative limits may be approved when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The user requests a special alternative limit through the special alternative limit application process on an application form provided by the director. This request must include a written acknowledgment whereby the user consents to comply with all terms and conditions which may be imposed by the director. 
(2)  The director makes a determination that adequate treatment capacity exists to allow this special alternative limit consistent with the MAHL. 
(3)  U.S. EPA region V and/or the DEQ, as appropriate, approves the technical basis for establishment of the special alternative limit; 
(4)  A proposed permit containing the increased limitation has been issued by the director in accordance with approved pretreatment procedures developed to satisfy 40 CFR 403.5(c)(3); and 
(f)  The allocation referenced in subsection (e) above between those users applying for a special discharge permit shall be in proportion to their flows unless the director shall determine that some other objective standard is more equitable. 
(g)  In no event shall a special discharge permit be granted or effective which authorizes a discharge in excess of the limitations imposed by any final federal or state pretreatment standard or discharge limit. In addition the director shall not consider any request for an increase above the maximum limit which was calculated based upon health or safety. 
(h)  All special discharge permits may be amended, restricted, suspended or terminated by the director at any time. It is recognized that as new users connect to the wastewater system, or for other reasons, it may be necessary to reduce and restrict the limits on the discharge of substances specified in a special discharge permit. No holder of a special discharge permit shall be deemed to have any vested right or property interest to discharge substances as specified in such permit but instead only a temporary permissive right to discharge within the limits specified in the special discharge permit. 
(i)  Additional fees may be charged to users seeking a special alternative limit to compensate for the costs to review the user's application or request and to establish and administer the special alternative limit program, in addition to all other applicable fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 11-593, § 3, 1-24-11) 
Sec. 86-174.24. - Permit modification. 
    The director may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised, federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements, including establishment of new or different local limits; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the wastewater system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the wastewater system, its personnel, the receiving waters or the use or disposal of sludge; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.25. - Violation of permit. 
    A violation of any condition or restriction in a user's discharge permit or special discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.26. - Sampling facilities. 
    When required by the director to assure adequate monitoring and control of the waste or wastewater discharge, the user of any building or premises served by a building sewer shall install a suitable control vault or station in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste or wastewater being discharged. Such control vault or station shall be equipped by the user with a suitable composite sampler and continuous flow recorder. Such vault or station shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved in writing by the director. Such vault or station shall be installed by the user at his cost and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The person operating and maintaining such facilities shall, at the request of the director, submit to the director records or true copies thereof of the wastewater or waste discharged and such other reports and information as shall be necessary to assess and assure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.27. - Pretreatment compliance reporting. 
(a)  Compliance data report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or discharge limit referenced in sections 86-174.3 or 86-174.4, or, in the case of a new kind of waste or wastewater, following commencement of introduction of the new waste or wastewater into the wastewater system, any user subject to pretreatment requirements pursuant to this article shall submit to the director a written report signed by an authorized representative, which report shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards or discharge limits and the average and maximum daily flow for those process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or discharge limits. The report shall also include a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or discharge limits are being met on a consistent basis and if not, what additional operation and maintenance or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or discharge limits. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. Any CIU or other SIU subject to pretreatment standards or discharge limits shall submit to the director semiannually, unless required more frequently by the applicable pretreatment standard or by the director, or by applicable federal regulations, a report signed by an authorized representative, which report shall indicate the nature and concentration of the pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard or discharge limit. This report shall include a record of all daily flows. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. In the discretion of the director, and after considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(c)  Special reports. In those instances where a schedule of additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities has been submitted pursuant to this article or an order, notice or compliance schedule issued by the director not later than 14 days following each milestone date in that schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit to the director a progress report signed by a representative authorized to do pursuant to applicable federal regulations, which report shall include no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. In addition, any user that anticipates or does make a batch discharge, whether pursuant to a special discharge permit or otherwise, shall provide such additional monitoring report(s) as and when requested by the director in his discretion. Any user shall also provide any additional monitoring reports as and when reasonably requested by the director. 
(d)  [Monitoring facilities.] All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(e)  [Additional reporting.] As required by 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5), if a user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, the user shall report the results of such monitoring to the director. 
(f)  [Reporting violations.] Any user shall report to the director any violation of the terms of its discharge permit and/or of the provisions of this article as soon as possible and in any case within 24 hours of learning of the violation. 
(g)  [Resampling.] In the event any user violates any discharge limit contained in its discharge permit, this article, and/or state or federal statute, rule or regulation, it shall resample its effluent for the pollutant(s) causing the violation(s) and provide the results to the director within 30 days, unless sooner required by the director. Resampling by the user is not required if the director performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the director performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the director receives the results of this sampling, or if the director has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the user. 
(h)  [Sampling by director.] In his discretion, in lieu of or in addition to that required of the user, the director may perform any sampling or analysis required under this section. Such sampling and/or analysis shall not relieve a user from its obligation to perform sampling and/or analysis required by applicable law or this ordinance or otherwise required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.28. - Certification statements. 
    All reports required under this division shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user who is a legally authorized signatory as defined in 40 CFR 403.2(l), and shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the Wastewater System or the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.29. - Accidental spills, or batch or slug discharges. 
(a)  In the case of an accidental spill or unanticipated noncustomary batch discharge, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the WWTP of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the spill, the type of waste, concentration, and volume, and corrective action. 
(b)  In the case of an anticipated noncustomary batch discharge, the user shall provide telephone and written notice to the director as long in advance of the anticipated discharge as possible. The user shall also immediately confirm by telephone the actual occurrence of the anticipated discharge, or notify the WWTP by telephone as soon as possible that the threat of the anticipated batch discharge has passed. 
(c)  The telephone notice(s) shall be followed up, within five days of the spill or discharge, with a detailed written report from the user to the director describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. This notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss or damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the damage to the wastewater system or any other damage to person or property resulting from the spill or discharge. In addition, such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liabilities which may be imposed pursuant to this article or other applicable ordinance, law, rule or regulation. 
(d)  SIUs are required to notify the director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.30. - Sampling requirements. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsections (b) and (c) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate U.S. EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved U.S. EPA methodologies may be authorized by the director as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(c)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in sections 86-174.14 and 86-174.27(a), a minimum of four grab samples must be used of pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required pursuant to section 86-174.27(b), or other reports required from noncategorical SIUs, the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.31. - Recordkeeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by or pursuant to this article, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, any other records related to compliance requirements under this article obtained or generated by the user, and documentation associated with BMPs. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least five years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user, the city, Plainfield, or the authority, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. Such records shall be made available for inspection and copying at the request of the director, the DEQ or the U.S. EPA. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.32. - Hazardous waste notification. 
    A user shall notify in writing the director, the U.S. EPA regional waste management director, and the appropriate hazardous waste authorities of the DEQ of any discharge into the wastewater system of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the information and be made within the time frame as required in 40 CFR 403.12(p) and as required by an other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.33. - Measurement. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of wastewater and waste to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the methods set forth in 40 CFR part 136, or if specifically authorized by the DEQ and/or the U.S. EPA, alternatively in accordance with "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Sewage," as amended; a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association, and the WEF, or similar successor publication. All determinations shall be made based on samples taken at a control vault or station. If no vault or station has been required, then such determination shall be made at the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building sewer is connected to the public sewer. 
(b)  For purposes of BMRs required pursuant to section 86-174.14 and the 90-day compliance reports required under section 86-174.27, samples must be taken and analyzed as required under 40 CFR 403.12 (b)(5). 
(c)  The director may convert pollutant discharge limits expressed as concentration limits to equivalent mass-per-day limits, as determined pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6(c) and/or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.34. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data concerning a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public and other governmental agencies without restriction, subject to the provisions set forth below and applicable state and federal law. 
    A user may specifically request that such information and data not be divulged because it is information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be considered as confidential information. 
    To the extent permitted by law, information accepted by the director as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency other than the city, Plainfield, or the authority or to the general public by them unless authorized by the user. If the user refuses to authorize transmittal of information to a person requesting it, the user shall defend such request and/or indemnify and hold the director, the city, Plainfield and the authority harmless from the costs, expenses and liability resulting from the denial of such request. However, notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the U.S. EPA and/or the DEQ) shall have immediate and unlimited access to (subject to the confidentiality rules applicable to it) any information (whether or not it is otherwise deemed confidential) collected or maintained by the director, the city, Plainfield or the authority with regard to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-174.35. - Inspection. 
    The director and duly authorized employees or agents of the city, Plainfield or the authority, when bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted, with or without advance notice, to enter in and upon buildings and premises and to set up or install equipment on the user's premises as may be necessary or appropriate for the purposes of inspection, surveillance, measurement, sampling and testing to determine compliance with this article. Denial of or unreasonable delays to entry to the Director and/or duly authorized employees or agents of the city, Plainfield or the authority, shall be grounds for immediate termination service to that user. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 5, 10-12-09) 
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS AND REVIEW OF DECISIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, added § 86-175, including §§ 86-175.1-86-175.12, to the Code. At the editor's discretion and in consultation with the city, § 86-175 has been redesignated as division 5 to maintain the organization of the Code. 

Sec. 86-175.1. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the director finds that any user has engaged in conduct which is in violation of this article, or a permit or order issued hereunder, the director may serve or cause to be served upon such user, a written notice either personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice, the user shall respond personally or in writing to the director, advising of the user's position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. This provision shall be in addition to and shall not restrict the director's right to take other enforcement measures allowed by this article or by other applicable law. No actions or responses contemplated in this section shall relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation or the user's response thereto. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.2. - Other administrative actions. 
(a)  Consent orders. The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include compliance schedules, stipulated fines and/or remedial actions, and signatures of the director and an authorized representative of the user. 
(b)  Show-cause order. The director may order any user which causes or contributes to violation of this article, discharge permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be serviced on any principal executive, general partner or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, enforcement action may be pursued as appropriate. 
(c)  Compliance order. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated, and compliance is achieved. Orders may also contain such other requirements as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology; additional self-monitoring; and waste, wastewater and/or hazardous materials management practices. 
(d)  Cease-and-desist orders. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue an order to cease and desist all illegal or unauthorized discharges immediately. 
(1)  In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may be given by telephone. 
(2)  The cease-and-desist order may be used to suspend or permanently revoke industrial wastewater discharge permits. 
(3)  The cease-and-desist order may order the user to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating discharge(s) into the wastewater system. 
(e)  Administrative fines or penalties. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, or permits and orders issued hereunder, shall be subject to a fine or penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or such greater amount as is permitted by law. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the township shall have such other collection remedies as they may have under applicable law to collect other service charges. A user desiring to dispute such fines or penalties must file a request for the director to reconsider the fine or penalty pursuant to section 86-175.3. 
(f)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The director may suspend the wastewater service and/or wastewater permit of a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the wastewater system, or the environment. 
(2)  Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater service and/or its wastewater permit, shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge into the wastewater system. In the event a user fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as he deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damages to the wastewater system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless he institutes termination of the user's discharge permit as provided in subsection (g). 
(3)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment, shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director within ten days, or such other time as determined by the director prior to the date of the administrative review described in this article. 
(g)  Termination of permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be terminated for any of the following: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the Wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharges; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; 
(5)  Falsifying reports or certification statements; 
(6)  Tampering with equipment; 
(7)  Failure to pay any fees, charges, costs or fines. 
(h)  Violation of an order issued pursuant to this Ordinance; 
(9)  Violation of any applicable state or federal law. 
    Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and in nonemergency situations shall be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (b) why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.3. - Administrative review of authority decisions. 
(a)  Introduction. The procedures set forth in this section shall be used to review decisions of the director under this article. 
(b)  Review. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a decision under this article may petition that the director review its decision. 
(2)  The director shall review a decision according to this subsection if he receives a petition for review within 30 days after the person petitioning review received notice of the decision. Failure by the user to timely submit an administratively complete petition for review shall be deemed a waiver of the administrative review. 
(3)  A request for review shall be in writing and shall contain facts and arguments supporting modification or reversal of the decision. 
(4)  Within 15 days after receiving the request for review, the director shall review the decision or provide to the person requesting review notification of when the review will be complete. The director may affirm, reverse, or modify the initial decision. The director shall provide to the person requesting review, a written decision and the reasons for the decision. If the director fails to act within the time indicated in or pursuant to this subsection, the petition shall be deemed denied. 
(c)  [Board of trustees.] The authority's board of trustees may uphold or reverse any determination to issue or to deny the issuance of a permit, the imposition of any condition or restriction, or any revocation of a permit. The authority's board of trustees may also grant or reinstate any permit. 
(d)  Exhaustion. A decision of the director under this article is not final until a person has exhausted all of the procedures of this section. A decision under subsection (b) shall be a final determination for purposes of judicial review by any party. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.4. - Effectiveness of authority decisions during review. 
    During the pendency in any forum of any challenge to a decision of the director, a user affected by the decision shall comply with the decision. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.5. - Subpoenas. 
    The director may issue a subpoena to require the attendance of a witness or the production of documents or other materials at a hearing or to assist an investigation undertaken by the director. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.6. - Citations and appearance tickets. 
    The director may issue a citation or appearance ticket to any person who is reasonably believed to have violated this article. Fines and/or penalties as described in subsections 86-175.8(b)(1) and (c)(1) are applicable to violation(s) which are the subject of such a citation or appearance ticket. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.7. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges wastewater or waste into the wastewater system contrary to the provisions of this article, or otherwise violates any pretreatment standard or requirement (including both discharge and nondischarge violations), the director, township and/or authority may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.8. - Judicial remedies. 
    If any person discharges wastewater, or other wastes into the wastewater system contrary to the provisions of this article, or any order or permit issued hereunder, the director, through the an attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the district or circuit court for Kent County. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article or of a permit or order issued hereunder, the director, may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user. To the extent permitted by applicable law it shall be presumed that violations of this article shall result in irreparable harm to the wastewater system, its personnel, the public and/or the environment. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction of not more than $1,000.00, or such greater amount as is permitted by law, per violation per day for as long as the violation continues, plus actual damages incurred by the director, the city, Plainfield, the authority, and/or the wastewater system. The director is authorized to enforce citations pursuant to the foregoing on behalf of the city. In addition to the foregoing, the director may recover reasonable attorney's fees, engineering fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the investigation, surveillance and/or enforcement activities, such as sampling, monitoring and analysis expenses, including the time devoted by the director and other city, Plainfield and/or authority personnel. 
(2)  The director may petition the court to take other appropriate lawful action to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of a civil fine, municipal civil infraction, or liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions voluntarily taken by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Violations-Generally. Any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, or such greater amount or imprisonment as is permitted by law. 
(2)  Falsifying information. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or any order or permits hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both, or such greater amount or imprisonment as is permitted by law, or be punished under any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.9. - Rules for continuing violations. 
(a)  A separate violation occurs for each pollutant that exceeds an applicable pretreatment standard and for each report that is late; 
(b)  Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation; 
(c)  Any noncompliance with or violation of any pretreatment standard that is a monthly or other average, shall be deemed a violation for each day of the averaging period; 
(d)  If for any period a user has violated both a maximum and an average pretreatment standard for a particular pollutant, then the total number of violations is the sum of the days on which the maximum standard was violated plus the number of the averaging periods for which the maximum standard was violated; and 
(e)  One violation occurs on: 
(1)  Each day (including each additional day) that a report is late; and 
(2)  Each day after an action required to be completed is not completed. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.10. - Public nuisances. 
    Any violation of the prohibitions of this article or permit or order issued hereunder is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director, including reimbursing the director for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance, per se, shall also be subject to the provisions of the applicable city ordinance governing such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.11. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply to the director. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-175.12. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. The director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 6, 10-12-09) 
DIVISION 6. - FEES AND CHARGES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-575, § 7, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, added § 86-176, including §§ 86-176.1-86-176.6, to the Code. At the editor's discretion and in consultation with the city, § 86-176 has been redesignated as division 6 to maintain the organization of the Code. 

Sec. 86-176.1. - General. 
    Standard rates and charges applicable to users for discharges to the wastewater system shall be as duly established by this part or other ordinance or contract. However, the director may impose other charges and fees as it determines to be appropriate, as authorized under this division. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 7, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-176.2. - Industrial surveillance fee. 
    With respect to all users that are required to maintain preliminary treatment facilities or sampling facilities pursuant to this article, the director shall institute a program pursuant to which the director periodically checks and assesses, through the taking of his own samplings, the accuracy and completeness of the sampling records and other reports and information provided to the director pursuant to this article. The cost and expense of the director incurred in conducting this program of periodic review may be recovered from an industrial surveillance charge to be established by the director and charged to the user. The amount of this charge shall be determined for each user or class of users to which it applies and may be billed as part of each affected sewer customer's periodic sewer billing. 
    If, based upon his review, the director determines that the sampling records or other reports and information provided by a user are not substantially accurate, are otherwise inadequate, or due to the facts and circumstances warrant verification by the director, the director may institute such sampling, laboratory analysis and other procedures necessary to accurately sample and measure the waste and wastewater being discharged. All expenses and charges incurred by the director for such sampling, review and analysis shall be charged to the affected sewer customer. 
    In addition, in its discretion, the director may charge a user pursuant to this section if the director performs any sampling and analysis required to be performed by the sewer customer pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 7, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-176.3. - Surcharges. 
    The director may establish a system pursuant to which all nondomestic users of the wastewater system shall pay a surcharge for the discharge of wastewater or waste containing more of a substance than the threshold amount or concentration established by the director. However, nothing contained in this section shall affect the obligation of a user to comply with the discharge limits in its local discharge permit and this article, or to obtain a special discharge permit as necessary or desired by the user where applicable. 
    The amount of such surcharge shall be based on samples taken by the director of a frequency and number as determined by the director. In the alternative, with the prior written approval of the director, the user may utilize an independent company to take such samples, at the user's expense, under conditions and standards determined to be acceptable by the director. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 7, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-176.4. - Recovery of costs. 
    Any user violating any of the provisions of this article or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the wastewater system, shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The director may bill the user for the costs incurred by the director for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 7, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-176.5. - Other fees and charges. 
    In addition to the other fees and charges specifically provided for in this article, the director may impose other charges and fees which may include: 
(a)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the wastewater system's pretreatment program; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by a user; 
(c)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(d)  Fees for permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(e)  Fees for filing appeals or requests for administrative review; 
(f)  Other fees as the director may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 7, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-176.6. - Interest. 
    Unpaid charges, fees, costs, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of one and one-half percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half percent per month. Unpaid charges, fees, costs, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against the user's property. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 7, 10-12-09) 
DIVISION 7. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, added § 86-177, including §§ 86-177.1-86-177.8, to the Code. At the editor's discretion and in consultation with the city, § 86-177 has been redesignated as division 7 to maintain the organization of the Code. 

Sec. 86-177.1. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall enter or maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, equipment or other part of the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-177.2. - Effect of director approval of plans, specifications, or operating procedures. 
    Director approval of plans, specifications, or operating procedures does not entitle a user to relief from enforcement actions if the treatment facilities do not achieve compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-177.3. - Emergency action. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the director may, for good cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment service to a user when it appears to the director that an actual or threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, substantial danger to the environment, interferes with the operation of the wastewater system, or violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this article. Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment service shall cease all discharges at the time directed by the director or as soon as reasonably possible. In the event of failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the director may commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the user's compliance with such order. The director shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service and terminate judicial proceedings upon proof by the user of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-177.4. - Administrative determinations of threat to wastewater system. 
    The director shall have the power to make all determinations (which shall be binding on all users) as to whether any discharge or threatened discharge could threaten, endanger, or cause problems to or threaten the wastewater system, compliance with the authority's NPDES permit, or to the health, safety and welfare of the wastewater system personnel. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-177.5. - Falsification of information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false representation, statements or certification in any application, report, record, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Ordinance, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring or sampling device shall be guilty of violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-177.6. - Annual publication of significant noncompliance. 
    The director shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction served by the wastewater system, a list of the users which have been determined by the director to be in significant noncompliance during the 12 previous months. This notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-177.7. - Administrative liability. 
    Neither the director nor any representative, agent or employee of the director, the city, Plainfield or the authority, shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to any person as a result of any acts, decisions or other consequence or occurrence arising out of the discharge of their duties and responsibilities pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 86-177.8. - Severability. 
    This article and the various parts, sections, paragraphs, subsections, sentences, phrases and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, subsection, phrase or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 09-575, § 8, 10-12-09) 
APPENDIX A 
(Local Limits) 
Inorganic Daily Maximum (mg/l) Arsenic 1.00 Cadmium 0.59 Chromium (Total) 13.64 Copper 3.97 Cyanides (Total) 0.23 Lead 7.50 Mercury ND 1 Molybdenum 84.20 Nickel 6.58 Selenium 0.79 Silver 54.17 2 Zinc 2.3 Organic Daily Maximum (mg/l) Total phenols 0.46 3 Polychlorinated biphenyls ND 4 Organic-Compatible Daily (mg/l) Maximum pounds/day Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) 5 790 165 Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 6 1055 220 Total Phosphorus (TP) 7 35 7 Ammonia-N 8 317 66 1 Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA Method 245.1. The detection limit shall not exceed 0.2ug/l unless higher limits are approved due to matrix interference, or as specified in these rules and regulations. 2 End-of-process discharge limit in lieu of uniform allocation limit method. 3 Total Revocable, per U.S. EPA Method 420.1. 4 Indicates nonquantifiable per U.S. EPA Method 608. 5 Total BOD capacity available for special allocation among all users and safety reserves is 7,358 pounds/day. 6 Total TSS capacity available for special allocation among all users and safety reserves is 10,664 pounds/day. 7 Total TP capacity available for special allocation among all users and safety reserves is 550 pounds/day. 8 Total Ammonia Nitrogen capacity available for special allocation among all users and safety reserve is 6,097 pounds/day.  
(Ord. No. 11-593, § 1, 1-24-11) 
APPENDIX B 
(Reserved) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-593, § 2, adopted Jan. 24, 2011, repealed appendix B, which pertained to compatible pollutants. 
Secs. 86-178, 86-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HAZARDOUS PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 86-180. - Constitution of hazard and nuisance. 
    The city commission hereby declares that septic tanks or sewage disposal systems which contaminate groundwaters or surface waters or from which effluent reaches the surface of the ground or roadside ditches are or may be dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city and therefore constitute a hazard and a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-181. - Investigation of and report on hazardous conditions. 
    The city commission may, by resolution, request the health officer or the city engineer to investigate and report on any such conditions which are or may be dangerous to and thereby constitute a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. Such officer shall report on the existence of the hazard in question, its extent, its causes, if known and determinable, and the means for permanent abatement of the hazard or nuisance. Upon receipt of the report from the health officer or city engineer, the city commission shall, by resolution, make a preliminary determination as to the existence and extent of the hazard or nuisance in question and, if it is determined to exist, the means which must be used for permanent abatement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-182. - Notice to be given to owner of land concerning resolution by city commission. 
(1)  After adoption of the resolution pursuant to section 86-181, the city commission shall give notice by personal service or by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the owner or owners of the land upon which the nuisance or hazard exists. Such notice shall specify the nature of the nuisance or hazard, as follows: 
(a)  If the city commission determined in its resolution adopted pursuant to section 86-181 that the nuisance or hazard can be abated by means other than the installation of a public sewer, the notice shall require the owner to alter, repair, tear down, abate or remove the hazard or nuisance within a specified time; 
(b)  If the city commission has preliminarily determined in its resolution adopted pursuant to section 86-181 that the hazard or nuisance can be permanently abated only by installation of a public sewer, the notice shall so state and shall state that the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider all information on the existence and means for abatement of such hazard or nuisance, and to consider which properties are responsible for such nuisance or hazard and which properties shall bear the expenses of such abatement. 
(2)  The failure of the city clerk to give notice as provided in subsection (1) by mail to any person shall not invalidate any proceedings taken or any assessments made with respect to such abatement. At the hearing or any continuation or adjournment thereof, the city commission shall hear any objections to or comments on the existence of the hazard or nuisance, the means for abatement, report, plans and any estimates submitted by the city engineer or health officer, and upon the proportion of the total cost of abatement to be assessed against the real property on which the hazard or nuisance exists or against the owners thereof, and upon the basis for assessment. Such hearing may be adjourned from time to time without further notice. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-183. - Determination of existence of nuisance or hazard and method of abatement. 
    After the hearing under section 86-182, the city commission shall by resolution determine the existence of such hazard or nuisance, and if it is determined to exist, the method for abatement. No determination to abate the hazard or nuisance by the installation of a public sewer shall be made by the city commission unless it determines that because of soil conditions, water table, drainage, topography or other reasons that the hazard or nuisance cannot or will not reasonably be abated on a permanent basis by other practicable means. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-184. - Preparation of plans and specifications for abatement and written cost estimates. 
(1)  After final determination as provided by section 86-183, the city commission may direct the health officer or city engineer to prepare or obtain plans and specifications for abating the hazard or nuisance and to obtain and submit written estimates of the cost of such abatement. If the hazard or nuisance has not been abated by the date set forth in the notice given pursuant to subsection 86-182(1)(a), or if the city commission has finally determined to abate the hazard or nuisance by the installation of a public sewer, the city commission shall by resolution: 
(a)  Describe the persons or property upon which the hazard is maintained; 
(b)  Provide for the long-term abatement of the hazard by the proper department or agency of the city or by contract or by hire in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted by the health officer or the city engineer, as revised or amended; 
(c)  Describe the persons or property against whom the costs of abatement shall be charged; and 
(d)  Determine the proportion of the total cost of abatement to be charged against the persons or property maintaining the hazard. 
(2)  The city commission may provide that the costs and expenses of making the estimates, plans and specifications and the assessments incidental thereto, the cost of engineering services, and all expenses incidental to the proceedings for abating the hazard and the financing thereof, and not to exceed one year's interest on any bonds issued to finance the abatement, are a part of the cost of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-185. - Hazard abatement roll. 
    After final determination as provided by section 86-183, the city commission shall direct the city assessor to prepare a hazard abatement roll on which shall be entered and described all the persons and parcels of land (together with the names of the owners thereof, if known) to be assessed, and the total amount to be assessed against each person or parcel of land upon which a hazard occurs, or the owner thereof, the amount being allocated against any person or parcel of land being the relative portion of the whole sum to be so levied against all persons or parcels on which the hazard or nuisance as the extent of the hazard due to that person or parcel of land bears to the total hazard to be abated. Upon completion of the hazard abatement roll, the assessor shall affix to it his certificate stating that it was done pursuant to a city commission resolution bearing a certain date, and that in preparing such roll he has, to his best judgment, conformed in all respects to the instructions contained in such resolution, the provisions of this division, and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-186. - Notice of public hearing for review of roll; confirmation. 
(1)  Before confirming the hazard abatement roll returned to it by the city assessor, the city commission shall fix a time and place for a public hearing to review the roll and hear objections to it. Such notice shall be given by personal service or by registered mail to the last known address, as shown on the assessment roll of the city, of the owner of any property to be assessed. Failure of the city clerk to give such notice shall not invalidate any proceedings taken or any assessments made with respect to such abatement. The notice shall state the basis of the assessment and the cost of the assessment and shall state time, place and purpose of the hearing. All persons objecting to the hazard abatement roll shall file their objections in writing with the city clerk before the close of the hearing, or within such further time as the city commission may allow. 
(2)  After the hearing, the city commission may confirm the hazard abatement roll as reported to it by the assessor, or may amend or correct such abatement roll, or may refer it back to the assessor for revision. Upon confirmation of the hazard abatement roll by the city commission, the city clerk shall endorse on the roll the date of its confirmation. Such a confirmed hazard abatement roll and all assessments thereunder shall be final and conclusive unless attacked in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days after the date of confirmation. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-187. - Payment of hazard abatement assessment installments. 
    Upon the confirmation of any hazard abatement roll, the city commission may provide that the hazard abatement roll assessment shall be payable in from one to 30 approximately equal annual installments. The amount of each installment, if more than one, need not be extended upon the hazard abatement roll until after confirmation. The first installment of a hazard abatement assessment shall be due on or before such time after confirmation as the city commission shall fix, and the several subsequent annual installments shall be due at intervals of 12 months from the due date of the first installment, or from such other date as the city commission may fix. All unpaid installments shall bear interest payable annually on each installment due date at a rate to be set by the city commission, not exceeding seven percent per annum from date of confirmation of the roll; provided, however, that within 60 days after an assessment first becomes payable, the assessment may be paid in full to the city treasurer without payment of any interest except such bond interest as may have been capitalized as part of the cost of abatement. Future due installments of an assessment against any parcel of land may be paid to the city treasurer at any time and in full with interest accrued to the due date of the next installment. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-188. - Interest on delinquent payments. 
    If a hazard abatement assessment or any installment thereof is not paid within 60 days after it is first due, then the assessment or installment shall be deemed to be delinquent and there shall be collected thereon interest of one-half of one percent per month from the time that it first became due until paid, and a collection fee equal to four percent of the amount of the installment or assessment so due. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-189. - Constitution of lien. 
    All hazard abatement assessments contained in any hazard abatement roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall from the date of confirmation of such roll constitute a lien upon the respective parcels of land so assessed. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for city taxes, and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree or any act of the city commission vacating a hazard abatement assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the premises, or as by a regular mode of proceeding may be lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-190. - Apportionment of payments. 
    Should any parcel of land be divided after a hazard abatement assessment thereon has been confirmed and before the collection thereof, the city assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts between the several divisions thereof. The assessor shall thereupon give notice by mail to the owner of each of the several divisions of such property insofar as such owners are known to him, and such apportionment by the assessor shall be final unless any of such owners shall file written objections thereto within 15 days thereafter, which written objections shall be filed with the city clerk and shall stand as an appeal of such, apportionment to the city commission. In the event of any such appeal from the apportionment of the assessor, the city commission shall review the appeal and either confirm the assessor's apportionment or make such other apportionment as shall to such commission appear to be equitable in the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-191. - Pro rata assessments. 
    Should the assessments in any hazard abatement roll prove insufficient for any reason to pay for the abatement or that portion or percentage of an abatement for which they were made, or to pay the principal and interest on the bonds issued in anticipation of the collection of the hazard abatement assessments, then the city commission shall make such additional pro rata assessments to supply the deficiency as shall be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-192. - Excess payments. 
    Should the total amount levied on hazard abatement assessments prove larger than necessary by more than five percent of the original roll, then the surplus shall be prorated among the properties assessed in accordance with the amount assessed against each and applied toward the payment of the next city tax levied against such properties respectively, or such excess payments shall be refunded to the persons who are the respective owners of the property on the date of the passage of the resolution ordering such refunds; any such surplus of five percent or less may be paid into the city general funds or disposed of as by this section provided, all as directed by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-193. - Reassessments. 
    Whenever any hazard abatement assessment shall, in the opinion of the city commission, be invalid by reason of irregularities or informalities in the proceedings, or any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the city commission shall, whether the abatement has been performed or not, and whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to proceed from the last step at which the proceedings were legal and cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings in such reassessment and for the correction thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment, and whenever an assessment, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the assessment has been paid and not refunded, the payments so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment to that extent shall be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-194. - Issuance of bonds. 
    The city commission may borrow money and issue the bonds of the city therefor in anticipation of the collection of hazard abatement assessments to defray the cost or part of the cost of any abatement made under this division after the hazard abatement roll therefor shall have been confirmed. Such bonds shall not exceed the amount of the hazard abatement assessments in anticipation of the collection of which they are issued. Collections on hazard abatement assessments to the extent the collections are pledged for the payment of bonds shall be set aside in a special fund for the payment of such bonds. The issuance of hazard abatement assessment bonds shall be governed by the provisions of the general laws of the state applicable to special assessments. The city commission may make any such hazard abatement bonds and the general obligation bonds of the city. Bonds issued under this article shall be executed by the mayor and city clerk, and the interest coupons to be attached thereto shall be executed by such officials; provided, however, that facsimile signatures may be used on any such coupons. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-195. - Hazard abatement revolving fund. 
    The city commission may create and designate a fund to be known as the hazard abatement revolving fund, and in lieu of assessing bonds in anticipation of the collection of future installments of a hazard abatement roll may finance the hazard abatement roll out of such revolving fund as the city commission, by its resolution, may determine. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-196. - Delivery of hazard abatement roll to city treasurer for collection. 
    The hazard abatement roll as finally corrected and reviewed shall be ratified and confirmed by the city commission as prescribed in this division by resolution, and a copy of such resolution shall be attached to such hazard abatement roll, and such roll shall thereafter be delivered by the city clerk to the city treasurer for collection, and the city clerk shall take the receipt of the city treasurer therefor. At the time of the delivery of the hazard abatement roll to the city treasurer, the mayor shall attach his warrant thereto signed by the mayor commanding the city treasurer to collect the assessments therein contained. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-197. - Payment in full. 
    During the period of 60 days after the city treasurer shall first receive the hazard abatement roll on an assessment as prescribed in this division, any person may pay the amount of his assessment in full without further interest or charge of any kind. Thereafter, interest will be charged and collection fees and penalties added thereto as provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-198. - Notice to be served specifying amount of assessment and terms of payments. 
    Upon receipt of the hazard abatement roll, the city treasurer shall cause to be served on each person whose name appears on such roll a written or printed or partly written and partly printed notice specifying the amount of the assessment against such person, the time within which the assessment may be paid without interest or collection fee, and the time when interest and collection fees shall be chargeable with respect thereto. Such notice shall be served in person or by registered mail directed to the person in the same name and at the same address as assessed. The city treasurer shall attach his certificate to such roll showing the date and manner of such service. If such roll shall have been divided into installments, then the collection fee and any penalties shall attach only to the first installment, in the first instance, and thereafter to the succeeding installments as they respectively fall due, and shall be computed with respect to such installments rather than the total amount of such assessment. On the second and subsequent installments of any assessment divided into installments, the city treasurer shall give like notice and add the collection fee and any penalty when such installments shall become due and payable in like manner as provided for the first installment. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-199. - Penalty for unpaid assessments or installments. 
    If any assessment or installment thereof which has been payable for more than 60 days shall be due and unpaid on April 1 in any year, there shall be added a penalty of four percent of the amount of the assessment or installment so due, without regard to interest, and the amount of such assessment or installment thereof, plus the accrued interest with respect thereto, and the four percent penalty provided by this section shall be certified by the treasurer to the assessor for inclusion upon the city tax roll of such year in a column headed "special assessments" and the assessor shall include the assessment or installment thereof in the city tax roll to be prepared by him, and thereafter the assessment or installment thereof shall be collected as the city taxes are collected, anything in this division to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-200. - Delinquent tax roll. 
    All hazard abatement assessments or installments thereof, penalties, charges and collection fees on the city tax roll which remain unpaid on March 1 following the date when such roll was received by the treasurer shall be returned to the county treasurer at the same time and in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the treasurer under the provisions of the Charter and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the state, and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed until paid. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-201. - City authorized to purchase land sold for unpaid assessments. 
    The city is hereby authorized and empowered to purchase any parcel of land which shall be sold for unpaid hazard abatement assessments under the provisions of this division, and in case the parcel of land is not redeemed as provided by law, to hold, occupy and enjoy, use, possess, lease and convey the parcel of land as the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-202. - Correction of imperfect or erroneous land description. 
    Whenever the city commission shall discover that any real estate on which any hazard abatement assessment remains unpaid has been so imperfectly or erroneously described that the real estate cannot, in its opinion, be located with certainty or that the sale thereof would not convey to the purchaser a valid title to the real estate intended to be charged with such hazard abatement assessment by reason of the imperfect or erroneous description thereof, the city commission shall, by an order entered in its minutes, accurately describe such real estate intended to be charged with such tax or hazard abatement assessment, and shall direct the city treasurer to correct the hazard abatement assessment roll in the file in his office containing such imperfect or erroneous description so as to make it correspond with the accurate description contained in such order of the city commission; provided, that no such imperfect or erroneous description shall be corrected until the owner of the real estate shall be notified of such intended correction by printed or written or partly printed and partly written notice either served upon him personally or by leaving the notice at his place of abode or with some person of proper age and discretion at least ten days before such correction shall be made. If such owner is a nonresident of the city, such notice shall be published in a newspaper circulated in the city at least ten days before such correction shall be made, and a notice shall be mailed to the owner at such address as may be shown for him upon the records in the office of the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-203. - Mistake or irregularity in proceedings regarding the declaration or abatement of a hazard or collection of costs not to defeat collection of assessments. 
    No mistake or error in the proceedings in regard to declaring or abating a hazard or the assessment or collection of cost or expenses thereof, or any irregularity, informality, omission or want of any form or substance in the proceedings with respect to hazard abatement assessments under this division that does not prejudice the property rights of the person whose property is charged with a hazard abatement assessment under this division shall defeat the collection of the assessment or any installment thereof, but any such errors may be corrected upon equitable principles under the direction of the city commission as discovered before action is brought thereon or by the court after action is instituted, and the equitable amount due may be enforced as though no such error has occurred. All proceedings in assessing and levying taxes for abating hazards and the correction of the assessments or installments thereof shall be presumed by all courts of this state to be legal until the contrary is affirmatively shown. The absence of any record of proceedings, or the omission of any mention in any record of any vote or proceeding, or of mention of any matter in any statement or certificate that should appear therein under the provisions of this division or any law of this state shall not affect the validity of such proceedings, tax or title depending thereon, provided the fact that such vote or proceeding was had or tax authorized as shown by any other record, statement or certificate made evidence by the terms of this division or any other law of this state. No hazard abatement assessment or proceeding leading up to such assessment or sale of property for such assessment shall be rendered or held invalid by showing that any record, statement, certificate, affidavit, paper or return cannot be found in the proper office, and unless the contrary is affirmatively shown, the presumption shall be that such record was made and such certificate, statement, affidavit, paper or return was duly made and filed. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Sec. 86-204. - Separate accounts to be kept for assessments. 
    A separate account shall be kept in the books of the city for each hazard abatement assessment. 
(Ord. No. 05-538, § 3, 11-28-05) 
Secs. 86-205-86-209. - Reserved. 
Chapter 90 - VEGETATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Vegetation reclamation at mineral mining sites, § 34-303; parks and recreation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 58; visibility at intersections in residential and agricultural districts, § 94-336; fences, walls and hedges, § 94-337. 

Sec. 90-1. - Damaging gardens or orchards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any premises located within the city without the consent of the owner or tenant or his agent and there cut down, damage, destroy, eat or carry away any portion of a garden or orchard, including any growing thing, crop, tree, timber, grass, seed, soil, fertilizer, water supply, tool, implement, fence or any other protective device, or any other thing used for the development, cultivation, maintenance and use of such garden or orchard. 
(Code 1976, § 10-23) 
Sec. 90-2. - Malicious destruction of trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil. 
(a)  A person who wilfully and maliciously or wantonly and without cause cuts down, destroys or injures any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil of another that is standing, growing or located on the land of another within the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person convicted under this section may be required to make restitution for any damage done. 
(b)  A person convicted under subsection (a) who committed the offense with a vehicle (as defined by the uniform traffic code for the city) may have his license to operate a vehicle in the state suspended for up to one year in addition to a penalty imposed under subsection (a). 
(Code 1976, § 10-23.1) 
Cross reference- Soil redistribution, § 34-181 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation prevention, § 34-206; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
Sec. 90-3. - Noxious weeds and other prohibited vegetation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases are defined as follows for purposes of this section: 
    Dwelling means a single-family, two-family, or mobile home dwelling, as defined by section 94-5 of the Code of Ordinances, whether or not actually occupied. 
    Lot means a "lot" as defined by section 94-5 of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Nonplatted residential lot means a lot which is used or intended for use for residential dwelling purposes, whether or not a dwelling is located on the lot, but which is not a platted lot or a lot located within a residential subdivision or a residential site condominium project. 
    Nonresidential lot means any lot other than: 
(1)  A "platted residential lot"; or 
(2)  A "nonplatted residential lot." 
    Noxious weeds includes Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscata), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosial elatoir 1.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodrendron vernix), or other similar plants which are determined by the city commission to be a detriment to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
    Platted residential lot means a lot which is used or intended for use for residential dwelling purposes, whether or not a dwelling is located on the lot, and which is a platted lot or a lot located within a residential subdivision or a residential site condominium project. 
(b)  Noxious weeds. No person shall maintain or allow to be maintained the growth of noxious weeds upon any lot within the city which is owned, leased, rented or occupied or possessed by the person. 
(c)  Prohibited vegetation (other than noxious weeds). No person shall maintain or allow to be maintained the growth of grasses, weeds, brush, underbrush, or other vegetation, to height more than 12 inches (or the accumulation of dead grasses, weeds, brush, underbrush, or other vegetation to a height of more than 12 inches) upon any lot within the city which is owned, leased, rented or occupied or possessed by the person, in any of the following locations: 
(1)  On a platted residential lot (as defined by section 90-3(a)(5)): 
a.  If a dwelling is located on the lot, then the prohibition of this section applies to any area of the lot within 75 feet in any direction from any part of the dwelling; and between any part of the dwelling and the front lot line, and/or within any public right-of-way, even if greater than 75 feet from the dwelling. 
b.  If a dwelling is not located on the lot, but dwellings are located on at least 60 percent of the lots in the plat, subdivision, or project, then the prohibition of this section applies to any areas of the lot within 75 feet from any public right-of-way and/or within 75 feet from any part of a dwelling on any adjacent lot. 
(2)  On a nonresidential lot (as defined by section 90-3(a)(3)): 
a.  If a structure is located on the lot, then the prohibition of this section applies to any area of the lot within 200 feet in any direction from any part of the structure; and between any part of the structure and the front lot line, and/or within any public right-of-way, even if greater than 200 feet from the structure. 
b.  If a structure is not located on the lot, but the lot is a platted lot or a lot within a nonresidential subdivision or nonresidential site condominium project, and structures are located on at least 60 percent of the lots in the plat, subdivision, or project, then the prohibition of this section applies to any areas of the lot within 200 feet from any public right-of-way and/or within 200 feet of a structure on any adjacent lot. 
(3)  The prohibitions of subsections 90-3(c)(1) and (2) shall not apply to: 
a.  Trees and wooded areas; flower gardens; vegetation in vegetable gardens; vegetation planted for ornamental purposes; or vegetation in fields devoted to permitted agricultural purposes. 
b.  Areas of a lot which are not visible from any public right-of-way (including, without limitation, the right-of-way of U.S. 131 and I-96 within the city) or any adjacent dwelling or structure because of intervening structures, trees, topography, distance, or a combination of those factors, as determined sufficient by the building official. 
(d)  Notice of violation and order to abate. Any person determined by the building official to be in violation of section 90-3(b) or (c) shall be served with a written notice of violation and order to abate as provided by this section. 
(1)  Service. The notice and order shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail (return receipt requested), addressed to the owner of the property at the last known address as shown by the city tax records. The notice and order shall also be served to any persons other than the property owner (such as occupants) who the building official believes to be responsible for the violation. A person served with a notice and order shall sign and date the notice and order and return the signed original copy to the building official. The failure to sign or return the notice and order shall not affect a person's obligation to comply with the requirements of the notice and order or this section. 
(2)  Contents. To the extent known by the building official, and as applicable under the circumstances, a notice and order shall include: 
a.  The date and time the notice and order was served. 
b.  The name and address of the person (or persons) responsible for the violation. 
c.  A description of the nature and location of the violation, and the provisions of this section violated. 
d.  The minimum corrective actions required to abate the violation. 
e.  The date by which the violation must be abated. The date specified shall not be less than seven days nor more than 14 days from the date the notice and order is served. 
f.  An order to abate the violation by the date specified in the notice and order. 
g.  The applicable fines or other consequences for failure to abate the violation by the date specified in the notice and order. 
h.  A statement indicating that if the violation is not abated as ordered, then the city may unilaterally act to abate the violation; that the costs to the city of any action by the city to abate the violation, plus an administrative fee and any applicable fines, shall be a personal debt of the person to the city which may be assessed by the city as a lien against the property until paid; and that the refusal to allow the city to abate an uncorrected violation shall constitute a separate and additional violation of this section. 
(3)  Abatement required. Any person served with a notice and order as provided by this section shall abate the violation as specified by the order. 
(e)  Noncompliance with order; abatement by city. 
(1)  Abatement by city. If a person served with a notice and order fails or refuses to abate the violation as required by the order, the city or its authorized representatives may enter the property and take any reasonable actions necessary to abate the violation. 
(2)  Costs of abatement; delinquent payments; lien. The costs, including an administrative fee of $25.00, as incurred by the city in abating the violation shall be immediately due and payable to the city by the owner of the property where the violation occurred. The city shall notify the property owner that the costs are due and owing by certified mail (return receipt requested), addressed to the property owner's last known address as shown by the city tax records. If the costs are not paid in full within 30 days of mailing of notification, they shall be delinquent. The amount of the costs plus any administrative fee shall be certified by the treasurer to the assessor for inclusion upon the next city tax roll, and the assessor shall include the same in the city tax roll. The amount included in the city tax roll shall be a lien against the property which may be enforced and discharged by the city in the same manner as a tax lien. The costs of abatement, if any, recovered by the city shall be in addition to any civil fines, damages, expenses or costs payable to the city as a result of a violation. 
(3)  Abatement by city not defense to violation. The abatement by the city of a violation of this section and subsequent recovery of abatement costs incurred by the city shall not be a defense to any action by the city against any person for the violation, including, without limitation, any action by the city to collect civil fines, damages, expenses or costs as authorized by law. 
(f)  Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this section, including, without limitation, the failure or refusal to abate a violation following service of a notice and order, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. The building official is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the City of Walker Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) for violations under this section as provided by this Code. 
(g)  Nuisance per se; injunctive relief. A violation of this section is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In addition to any other remedy available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person, to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-8; Ord. No. 94-436, § 1, 5-10-94; Ord. No. 16-634 , § 1, 1-9-17) 
Chapter 94 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 71-150, adopted July 1, 1971, formerly printed as appendix A to the 1976 Code, is included herein as chapter 94. Amendments have been added and are indicated by a history note following the amended section. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived unchanged from the original ordinance. Ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property or granting specific use permits are not included in this chapter, but are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Cross reference- Ordinance No. 71-150 and any amendments thereto not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, § 1-5(6); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; soil redistribution, § 34-181 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation prevention, § 34-206 et seq.; floods, ch. 42; planning, ch. 58; planning commission to assist city commission on problems of zoning, § 58-40; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; compliance with zoning chapter required for division of land, § 74-116. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance for the city. 
Sec. 94-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, its terms shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; to encourage the use of lands in accordance with their character and adaptability and to limit the improper use of land; to avoid overcrowding of population; to provide adequate light and air; to lessen congestion on public roads and streets; to reduce hazards to life and property; to facilitate adequate provisions for sewerage, water supply, education, recreation and other public requirements; and to conserve the expenditure of funds for public improvements and services to conform with the most advantageous uses of land, resources and properties having in view the character of each district, its peculiar suitability for particular uses, the conservation of property values and natural resources and the general and appropriate trend and character of land, building and population development. 
Sec. 94-3. - Scope; conflicting provisions. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or of any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage, or requires greater lot areas or larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinances, or by such rules, regulations or permits, or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
Sec. 94-4. - Interpretation. 
    Provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to promote the purposes set forth in this chapter. 
Sec. 94-5. - Definitions and interpretation of terms. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, unless clearly otherwise required by the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural and the words in the plural number include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. Any words not defined in this section shall be construed, if applicable, as defined in the Housing Law of Michigan, Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1917. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the terms and words in this chapter are defined as follows: 
    Abutting, adjoining, or contiguous, means as follows: "Abutting" means to reach, to touch, or to join at a border or boundary; and "adjoining" and "contiguous" have the same meaning, as distinguished from "adjacent" which as used in this chapter means lying near but not necessarily abutting, adjoining or contiguous. 
    Accessory building means a separate building or structure on the same premises with a main building or structure, or attached as an integral part of the main building or structure, occupied or devoted to an accessory use. 
    Accessory use means the use of the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the main use of the premises. 
    Adult foster care camp means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than four adults to be provided foster care. An adult foster care camp is a facility located in a natural or rural environment. 
    Adult foster care congregate facility means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. 
    Adult foster care facility means a facility defined as an "adult foster care facility" by the adult foster care facility licensing act, Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979 (MCL 400.701 et seq.), as amended, having as its principal function the receiving of adults for foster care, and licensed by the state under the act. An "adult foster care facility" includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults who are aged, mentally disturbed, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. 
    Adult foster care family home means a private residence with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be a member of the household, and an occupant of the residence. 
    Adult foster care large home means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. 
    Adult foster care small group home means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults to be provided with foster care. 
    Agriculture means the commercial cultivation, tilling or use of land for the purpose of growing and storing crops thereon, or of animal or poultry husbandry. 
    Alley means a public or private drive which is intended only to provide supplemental access to a lot. An alley is not a part of the certified street system as a "public street." 
    Animal hospital means a building or structure which has as its primary function and purpose the care, treatment and rehabilitation of household pets and domestic animals, and may also include the temporary indoor boarding of such animals. "Animal hospital" does not include a "kennel" or any facility which has outdoor cages or runs for animals. 
    Artisanal manufacturing means a use conducted for the production of tangible goods by skilled craft persons usually involving workers who practice a trade or handicraft and produces unique products often using traditional methods involving the use of hand tools and small-scale, light mechanical equipment (e.g., art, crafts, software products, music, and games). 
    Automobile repair, major, means any activity involving the general repairs, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; wrecker service with storage of vehicles included; collision servicing, including body, frame and fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; or vehicle steam cleaning. 
    Automobile repair, minor, means any activity involving minor automotive repairs to passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles not exceeding 11/2-ton capacity service without storage of vehicles, and in no case including any operation specified under "automobile repair, major." 
    Automobile service station or filling station means a place where gasoline or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for retail sale to the public and delivered directly into motor vehicles and where there is a retail sale of accessories, where greasing, oiling and light motor service, not including activities defined as "automobile repair, major," is carried on. Permissible uses do not include the storage of automobiles not in operating condition or work involving noise, glare, fumes or smoke greater than normally found in automobile service stations. A service station is not a repair garage or a body shop. 
    Backyard Chickens means a specific type of domestic animal (chicken) that is housed and cared for by residents in a non-farm and non-commercial setting for providing fresh eggs for personal consumption. Backyard chickens excludes other poultry and other egg-producing birds or animals. Backyard chickens are subject to the standards contained herein in section 94-359. 
    Bar/night club means premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-site consumption. Subject to state law and other requirements of this Code, the sale of food, packaged alcohol (for either on-site or off-site consumption), dancing and live entertainment may be allowed as accessory uses. 
    Basement means a story of a building having any part of one or more of its exterior walls located below the average finished grade. For purposes of this definition, "average finished grade" means the average level of the top of the ground resting against all exterior walls after construction of the building is completed. 
    Billboard means a freestanding sign which: 
(1)  Has a minimum sign area of 100 square feet; 
(2)  Does not offer to sell or lease the premises on which it is located; 
(3)  Does not identify the owner or occupant of the premises and/or his trade or profession; 
(4)  Does not relate to the sale of products on the premises or services performed by the occupant thereof; and 
(5)  Is not owned or located by the government of the United States, or any state or subdivision thereof, or any public official acting in his official capacity. 
    Board or board of appeals means the board of zoning appeals established by this chapter. 
    Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof's surface for flat roofs, to the deckline for mansard roofs, and to the average height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 
    Car wash means any commercial place or premises open to the public, and used for cleaning or washing of the interior or exterior of an automobile, for a charge or fee, using either a mechanized or manual (self-serve) process. A "car wash" does not include a facility used for washing or cleaning vehicles larger than a regularly manufactured pickup or panel truck of one and one-half ton capacity. 
    Catering office and production center means an enclosed space or spaces devoted to recipe research, development, production and service of foods to be consumed off premises. 
    Cesspool means a cavity in the ground which receives human excrement and domestic wastes to be partially absorbed directly by the surrounding soil. 
    Child care center or day care center means a facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. Child care center or day care center includes a facility that provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group or drop-in center. Child care center or day care center does not include any of the following: 
(1)  A Sunday school, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not more than three hours per day for an indefinite period, or not more than eight hours per day for a period not to exceed four weeks during a 12-month period. 
(2)  A facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not more than three hours while persons responsible for the children are attending religious services. 
    Child care facility means a governmental or nongovernmental facility having as its principal function the receiving of minor children for care, maintenance, training and supervision, notwithstanding that educational instruction may be given. For purposes of this section, the term "child care facility" includes "child caring institutions," "child placing agencies," "children's camps," "child care centers," "day care centers," "foster family homes," "foster family group homes," "family day care homes" or "group day care homes" "nursery schools," and "parent cooperative preschools," as those terms are defined by the child care organizations act, Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et seq.), as amended, and which are licensed or registered by the state as required under that act. 
    Child caring institution means a child care facility, other than a private residence, as defined by the child care organizations act, Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et seq.), as amended, that is organized for the purpose of receiving minor children for care, maintenance, and supervision, usually on a 24-hour basis, in buildings maintained by the institution for that purpose, and operates throughout the year. 
    Child placing agency means an organization or agency (not located in a private residence) as defined by the child care organizations act, Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et seq.), as amended, with the purpose of receiving children for their placement in private family homes for foster care or for adoption. 
    Children's camp means a residential, day, troop or travel camp conducted in a natural environment for more than four school age children, apart from their parents, relatives or legal guardians, for five or more days in a 14-day period. A children's camp provides care and supervision for the same group of children for usually not more than 12 weeks. 
    Commercial special event sign shall mean a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, meant for advertising an on-site business, service or items for sale, and which is not permanently attached to a building wall or to the ground. Commercial special event signs include the following types of signs: 
(1)  Pedestrian sign means a sign held or worn by a person standing, walking or otherwise located outdoors on either public or private property, for the purpose of displaying the sign to passing motorists or pedestrians on a nearby public road or sidewalk, and calling attention to a business, product, service or event. 
(2)  Portable manual reader board sign means a sign that is intended to be moved from place to place and used to display a manually-assembled letter message, which is often enhanced with internal or external light bulbs. 
(3)  Inflatable sign means a sign that is portable and is filled or captures compressed air or another gas. 
(4)  Flag and streamer sign means a sign that is portable and intended to be blown in the wind. 
(5)  Banner sign means a sign that is flexible, portable and affixed to the ground, a building or other structure via wire, posts, string or similar material. 
(6)  Yard sign means a sign that is rigid, portable and affixed to the ground via wire, posts or other similar material. Sometimes called a "corrugated plastic sign". 
    Community center means premises used for noncommercial recreational, social, educational or cultural activities open to the public or a designated part of the public. 
    Community special event sign means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited time for the purpose of calling attention to special events of interest to the general public which are sponsored by governmental agencies, schools or other community organizations. 
    Contractor sign means a temporary sign intended to be displayed for a limited time that identifies an on-site builder, landscaper, architect or other tradesperson. 
    Contractor's shop means an enclosed space or enclosed spaces used for the housing and/or operating of machinery, the provision of services, the fabrication of building-related products, and interior storage, but which does not use any exterior storage area. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street way or alley, either public or private, open only at one end. 
    Day care center. See "child care center." 
    Digital billboard means a billboard that consists of, or has a portion comprised of, a computer or playback device connected to a digital screen that utilizes digital, LCD, LED, plasma or similar technology to change images on the sign face. Digital billboards can be controlled remotely and display electronic images that have the potential to change without the necessity of physically or mechanically replacing the sign face or its components. 
    Domestic animals means animals which are customarily domesticated by man to live and breed in a tame condition, other than household pets. Domestic animals include such animals as horses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats and poultry. 
    Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand means any place or premises used for the sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages to customers (i) in automobiles where it is intended or is common practice for such food, refreshments or beverages to be consumed in the automobile while parked upon the restaurant or refreshment stand premises; or (ii) where such customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages on the premises outside the building. Restaurants which supply indoor seating capacity for a minimum of 40 customers and also utilize a drive-up window where customers, while remaining in their automobiles, place orders and/or receive food, refreshments or beverages intended for consumption off the premises shall not be considered drive-in restaurants. 
    Dwelling, mobile home means a detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels (whether or not such wheels have been removed) complete and ready for occupancy upon arriving at the site where it is to be located except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobile home. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a detached residential dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one family only. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a detached residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    Dwelling unit means a room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for one family occupancy, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities. 
    Entrance ramp means a roadway connecting a feeder road with a limited access highway and used only for access to such limited access highway. 
    Essential services means and includes the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, sewers, communication systems, including mains, drains, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, police callboxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings except those reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health or safety or general welfare. Notwithstanding the foregoing, essential services shall not include wireless telecommunications towers or antennas as provided for in section 94-355 of this chapter. 
    Exit ramp means a roadway connecting a limited access highway with a feeder road. 
    Facade means any exterior wall of a building that faces and is visible from a public or private street, a freeway, a parking lot or area serving the premises on which the building is located, or an adjoining residential zoning district or residential use, except as otherwise provided in subsection 94-357(b)(6) for industrial buildings. 

Traditional Facade 
    Family means a person living alone in a single dwelling unit or two or more persons whose domestic relationship is of a continuing, nontransient character and who reside together as a single housekeeping unit in one dwelling unit. "Family" does not include a collective number of individuals occupying a motel, fraternity, sorority, society, club, boarding or lodging house, or any other collective number of individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transient or seasonal nature. 
    Family day care home means a private home in which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes homes that given care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. Any outdoor play areas required by the state for a family day care home must be located in the rear yard. 
    Feeder road means a street or road intersecting on the same plane with a limited access highway or having traffic interchange facilities with such limited access highway. 
    Fence means an enclosure or barrier used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening, or confinement, composed of materials other than hedges, screen plantings, or other planted landscaping materials. 
    Fitness center and health club means a facility where individuals use equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise. 
    Foster care means the provision of "supervision," "personal care" and "protection," as those terms are defined by the adult foster care facility licensing act, Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979 (MCL 400.701 et seq., MSA 16.610(51) et seq.), as amended, in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
    Foster family home means a private home in which one but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
    Foster family group home means private home in which more than four but fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage or adoption, are provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign or signboard supported by poles, braces, frames or similar devices, having a permanent foundation in the ground. This definition shall not be construed to include a sign or signboard affixed, in whole or in part, to a building. 
    Freeway means the right-of-way of U.S. 131 and the right-of-way of I-96 within the city. 
    Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or a compartment of a residential dwelling used for noncommercial storage of passenger vehicles or not more than one truck of a rated capacity not exceeding 11/2 tons, or both. An unenclosed or partially enclosed structure commonly called a carport shall not be considered a garage. 
    Garage, public, means a building other than a private garage used for the purpose of parking, storing, repairing or equipping motor vehicles therein as a commercial use. 
    Government research, testing and development laboratories means research, development and testing laboratories and offices, without manufacturing, owned and operated by a federal, state, county, or municipal government. 
    Group day care home means a private home in which more than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care home includes a home hat gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    Home occupation means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: 
(1)  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
(2)  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
(3)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one nonilluminated sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building. The sign must match the exterior color of the house or be earth tone in color. 
(4)  The aggregate sign area on the premises shall comply with section 94-409. 
(5)  No home occupation shall be conducted in an accessory building; 
(6)  There shall be no sales from the premises in connection with such home occupation; 
(7)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; and 
(8)  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
    Household pet means an animal such as a dog, cat, fish or bird, customarily kept within the residential living quarters for the pleasure of the occupants of a dwelling and not for sale or commercial purposes. 
    Housing for the elderly means a residential facility that provides room, board and supervised personal care to unrelated, nontransient individuals 60 years of age or older, licensed as a "home for the aged" by the state department of public health under article 17 of the public health code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.20101 et seq., MSA 14.15(20101)), as amended. 
    Independent living facility means a residential facility not subject to license or registration by the state, but that is eligible for public financial assistance under state or federal laws, having as its principal purpose the provision of barrier-free housing for individuals with permanent physical disabilities due to injury, disease or age, which result in functional limitations in major life activities, including disabilities which cause a person to use a wheelchair; cause a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity; affect sight or hearing to the extent that a person is insecure or exposed to danger; or cause impaired mobility, flexibility, coordination or perceptiveness. "Independent living facilities" shall include architectural design features which eliminate the type of barriers and hindrances that deter physically disabled persons from having access to and free mobility in and around the facility, and shall be specifically and primarily intended, designed, operated and located to allow its physically disabled occupants increased opportunities to function independently in the community. 
    Junk means any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise with parts missing; or scrap metals or materials that are damaged or deteriorated; or vehicles or machines in a condition which precludes their use for the purpose for which they were manufactured. 
    Junkyard means any area of more than 200 square feet for the storage, sale, processing, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals, other scrap materials or reclaimed materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof as a commercial use. 
    Kennel means a building or structure which has as its primary function and purpose the board of household pets on a temporary basis and may include indoor or outdoor cages or runs for such household pets. "Kennel" shall not include establishments used for the sale of household pets. 
    Limited access highway means a highway, street or roadway with respect to which the owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from such highway, street or roadway except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Liquor store/party store/convenience store means a commercial retail use where the majority of the gross income of the business is from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Such uses must be operated with an SDD and/or SDM license, or similar off-premises liquor license, from the state. 
    Loading space, offstreet, means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required offstreet parking spaces are filled. Required offstreet loading space is not to be included as offstreet parking space in the computation of required offstreet parking space. 
    Lot means a parcel of land which is contiguous to an improved public street (or a private street approved in connection with a site condominium development) for an uninterrupted distance at least equal to the applicable minimum required lot width (as provided by section 94-188), which has sufficient size to meet the other applicable minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, area, yards, and other open spaces and which provides convenient access for servicing and fire protection. A lot may consist of any of the following, or a combination of any of the following, excluding any portion of property subject to a public easement or right-of-way for highway purposes, and provided that in no case shall a division or combination of properties create a residual lot or parcel which does not meet the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  A platted lot, or a portion of a platted lot. 
(2)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, or a portion of a parcel of land described by metes and bounds. 
(3)  A "building site" as defined by section 94-307 in connection with a site condominium development project. 
    Lot frontage, street frontage and frontage mean the borders or boundaries of a lot or a parcel of land which abut an improved public street (or a private street approved in connection with a site condominium development). 

Figure 1: Lot Types 
    Lot types. The diagram (Figure 1[: Lot Types]) which follows illustrates terminology used in this chapter with reference to "corner lots," "interior lots," and "through lots": 
In the diagram, "A" indicates a corner lot, defined as a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. See lots marked A (1) in the diagram. 
"B" indicates an interior lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. 
"C" indicates a through lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
_____
    Major recreation, commercial indoor means a commercial recreational land use conducted entirely within a building and occupying greater than 5,000 square feet or greater of gross floor area, including by way of example a court or rink sport facility, indoor paintball facility, arcade, maze, obstacle course, jungle gym, rock climbing and adventure sport facility, trampoline park, laser tag facility, bumper car facility, art center, bowling alley, billiard hall, and similar activities. 
    Marginal access road means a service roadway which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Mechanical billboard means a billboard that uses rotating panels, slats, blades, or the equivalent to change images at regular or irregular intervals. Tri-vision billboards are a type of mechanical billboard. A digital billboard is not a mechanical billboard. 
    Medical marihuana dispensary [means] Any business, facility, association, cooperative, firm business, location, or operation, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marihuana (also commonly known as marijuana or cannabis) is made available to, sold, used, grown, processed, delivered, or distributed by or to one or more of the following: 
(1)  A primary caregiver (i.e., a person who is at least 21 years old and who has agreed to assist with a qualifying patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs, as provided for and authorized pursuant to Michigan Initiated Law 1 of the Public Acts of 2008, as amended). 
(2)  A qualifying patient (i.e., a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition, as provided for and authorized pursuant to Michigan Initiated Law 1 of 2008, as amended). 
(3)  Members of the public. 
    A medical marihuana dispensary shall also include any place, location, facility, or operation, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marihuana is smoked or consumed by three or more persons at one time. 
    A medical marihuana dispensary shall not be deemed to include (i) a qualifying patient's medical use of marihuana in strict compliance with Michigan Initiated Law 1 of 2008, as amended, and all applicable state and local laws, (ii) the dispensation of medical marihuana by a primary caregiver personally dispensing to not more than five qualified patients in strict compliance with Michigan Initiated Law 1 of 2008, as amended, and all applicable state and local laws, or (iii) any other action taken or permitted in strict compliance with Michigan Initiated Law 1 of 2008, as amended and all applicable state and local laws. 
    Mezzanine means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    Mineral mining means the excavation and removal of peat, gravel, sand, clay, or other soils, including overburden, or the separation and transporting of those materials on a mining site, or the reclamation of the site after removal or excavation of materials. However, the following excavation activities are not included within the definition of mineral mining: 
(1)  Excavation approved by a governmental body of competent jurisdiction in conjunction with the installation or maintenance of publicly owned or operated utilities, drainage facilities, roads, or other publicly owned or operated improvements, where the excavation is limited to the site of the public utility or improvement. 
(2)  Excavation which by its nature is of limited scope and duration and which is undertaken primarily for the immediate use and development of the land excavated, such as for purposes of building construction, septic tanks, swimming pools, graves, and similar limited excavations. 
(3)  Excavation in conjunction with farming operations in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices, including agricultural drainage work incidental to farming operations and irrigation or stock watering ponds, if no material is removed from the property. 
(4)  Other excavations determined similar by the board of zoning appeals because of the type of excavation involved or the limited scope and duration of the excavation and if no material is removed from the property. 
    Mineral processing and material storage means the processing and/or storage of peat, gravel, sand, clay, concrete, asphalt, wood, or other similar minerals or materials. For purposes of this definition, "processing" includes, but is not limited to, crushing, dissolving, breaking up, pulverizing, grinding, shredding, mixing, combining, and other similar operations. Mineral processing and material storage does not include mineral mining as defined in this section. 
    Minor recreation, commercial indoor means a commercial recreational land use conducted entirely within a building and occupying less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, including by way of example a court or rink sport facility, indoor paintball facility, arcade, maze, obstacle course, jungle gym, rock climbing and adventure sport facility, trampoline park, laser tag facility, bumper car facility, art center, bowling alley, billiard hall, and similar activities. 
    Motel or motor hotel means a building or buildings providing lodging for transients with motor vehicle parking in an area contiguous to the building. 
    Movie studio means a facility for the production of motion pictures, television entertainment, music and music-video entertainment, and similar products. A movie studio may include, but is not limited to, soundstages, sets, cafeterias, production studios, research and development operations and training and education areas. On-site housing of personnel and talent is allowed as an accessory use, subject to state law and other requirements of this Code. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto which does not conform to the regulations of the zoned district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which was lawfully made of a structure or land at the time of the adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto and which does not conform with the regulations of the zoned district in which it is located. 
    Nursing home means a nursing care facility licensed as a "nursing home" by the state department of public health under article 17 of the public health code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.20101 et seq.), as amended. A "nursing home" as defined by this section shall include "extended care facility" and "convalescent home." 
    Official signs means signs owned, leased, constructed or located by the United States government, the state or any of its political subdivisions or municipalities for the purpose of providing directional traffic control, lodging, service, historic or other information to the general public and signs required by any court or statute. 
    One-family or single-family residence means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Online auction operations means a site of a business that conducts public auctions via the internet to sell new, used or repossessed vehicles, furniture, electronic equipment, appliances or similar items. The items being auctioned are stored on the site until purchased. Items being stored on the site shall not be displayed for sale. 
    Outdoor recreation, commercial means commercial recreational land uses conducted outside of a building which do not require major site modification, including by way of example outdoor paintball facilities, adventure parks with features such as zip lines, rope climbing and high ropes features, orienteering, laser tag, and similar activities. 
    Parking space, off-street means, for the purposes of this chapter, an off-street parking space shall consist of the space designed or used for parking a vehicle which is not located within the public streets or rights-of-way. 
    Political sign means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited time and communicates an upcoming election, ballot or noncommercial message. 
    Private home means a private residence as defined by the child care organizations act, Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1973 (MCL 722.11 et seq.) as amended, in which a child care facility licensee or registrant permanently resides as a member of the household, which residency is not contingent upon caring for children or employment by a licensed or approved child placing agency. Private home includes a full-time foster family home, a full-time foster family group home, a group day care home, or a family day care home, as defined by this section. 
    Reader board means an accessory component of an approved on-site sign which displays a changeable message or image using manually-placed letters, text or images. 
    Realtor sign means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time which offers real property or building for sale, rent or lease. 
    Recycling/composting operations means a business that receives, stores and processes waste products and organic materials. These products and materials are often transformed into new and different products via mechanical, organic or physical processes. This operation shall not be confused with the uses mineral processing and material storage or junkyard as defined herein. 
    Residential zoning district or residential district means an A, A-2, SA, 5, PA, ARM, ARM district one, RMT, RPUD-1, or RPUD-2 district. 
    Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed on-site or as take-out. Drive-up windows and outside seating are allowed as accessory uses, subject to other requirements of this Code. 
    Satellite dish antenna means an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
    Seepage pit means a dry well, leaching pit or any other cavity in the ground which receives the liquid discharge of a septic tank. 
    Self-storage, exterior access means a building or group of buildings consisting of individual, self-contained units leased or licensed for self-service storage of personal property which allows access to each individual unit via exterior doors and is not temperature controlled. 
    Self-storage, interior access means a building or group of buildings consisting of individual, self-contained units leased or licensed for self-service storage of personal property which allows access to each individual unit via interior doors and is temperature controlled. 
    Septic tank means a septic toilet, chemical closet, and any other watertight enclosure used for storage and decomposition of human excrement and domestic wastes. 
    Sign means any drawing, message, placard, poster or device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons; provided, however, that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations in this chapter: 
(1)  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, name of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations. 
(2)  Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with a commercial promotion. 
(3)  Official signs and legal notices. 
(4)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights. 
Signage: 
    Canopy/ awning/marquee sign means a sign that is mounted on, painted on, attached to or imbedded within a canopy, awning or marquee. 
    Community entrance sign means a ground-mounted sign with the sole purpose of displaying the name of the associated residential development. Background artwork is an accepted component of a community entrance sign. 
    Directional sign means signs limited to directional messages, principally for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, such as "drive thru" "entrance" or "exit." 
    Electronic reader board means an accessory component of an approved on-site sign not exceeding 50 percent of the total sign area that uses digital or similar electronic technology to display a changeable message or image. 
    Freestanding/pylon sign means any sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support. 
    Ground-mounted sign means signs, not including freestanding/pylon signs, in which the entire bottom of the sign is in contact with or is close to the ground and is independent of any other structure. 
    Wall-mounted sign means signs fastened to or painted on the wall of a building in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign. 
    Single ownership means a lot which is in separate and distinct ownership from adjacent lots when such adjacent lots are not at the applicable date owned by the same owner or the same owner in joint tenancy, tenancy in common or tenancy by the entireties with any other persons and where such adjacent lots are not owned by the same owner or by any person with whom he may be engaged in a partnership or joint venture or a corporation in which he owns more than 50 percent of the stock issued and outstanding. 
    Small animal clinic means a building or structure which provides for the medical treatment and care of household pets only and may include temporary indoor boarding of household pets limited to the duration of the treatment. A "small animal clinic" does not include an animal hospital or kennel, or any use which has outdoor cages or runs. 
    Special exception use means a use or structure which, because of its unique characteristics, requires individual review and approval by the planning commission to ensure compatibility with the character of the surrounding area, the adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacities of public services and facilities, and the public health, safety and welfare. Special exception uses may be permitted only in those zoning districts as expressly provided by this chapter. 
    State licensed residential facility (six or fewer persons) means a structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the state pursuant to the adult foster care facility licensing act (Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979; MCL 400.701 et seq., as amended) or the child care organizations act (Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended), which provides resident services or care for six or fewer persons under 24-hour supervision for persons in need of that supervision or care. A "state licensed residential facility (six or less persons)" as defined by this section shall not include an establishment commonly described as an alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, a residential facility for persons released form or assigned to adult correctional institutions, a maternity home, or a hotel or rooming house that does not provide or offer to provide foster care. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor or, if there is no floor above, the ceiling next above. 
    Story, half means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the usable floor area of which does not exceed 75 percent of the floor area of the story immediately below and which is not used or designed or intended to be used as an independent housekeeping unit or dwelling. 
    Structural changes or alterations means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such location. 
    Temporary construction site sign means a sign or signboard, either freestanding or affixed to a building, which is placed on the site of a development project for a limited period of time and which conveys information specifically related to the ownership, location, design, financing or construction of the project. A temporary construction site sign shall include only the following items of information: 
(1)  The name and site address of the project. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or developer of the project. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the institutions or agencies which have provided financing for the project. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the architects, engineers or contractors connected with the work under construction on the site. 
(5)  The type of development, including the number of units, square footage and dates when the project will be available for occupancy. 
(6)  A depiction of the development plat or of the layout of proposed lots within the development. 
(7)  Other similar items of information that are specifically related to the ownership, location, design, financing or construction of the development project. 
    Two-family residence means a building primarily designed for or occupied by two families. 
    Unique use means a use or structure which is similar to a special exception use, but which may be permitted in any zone district within the city upon approval of the planning commission and which may have the potential to affect a greater surrounding land area than a normal special exception use. Because of their unique characteristics, unique uses require individual review and approval by the planning commission to ensure compatibility with the character of the surrounding area, the adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacities of public services and facilities, and the public health, safety and welfare. Unique uses may be permitted only as expressly provided for by article XVII, and in accordance with the standards and requirements of article IX of this chapter. 
    Yard means an open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed except as specifically permitted by this chapter. 
    Yard, front means the minimum distance between the principal building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches, and the nearest edge of the street right-of-way, extending for the full width of the lot and unoccupied between the principal building and the nearest edge of the street right-of-way, except as permitted by this chapter. A lot which abuts two or more improved public streets (such as a corner lot or a through lot) may have more than one front yard, except in those districts where a side yard abutting a street is specifically permitted under less stringent requirements than those required for a front yard, and subject to the requirements of section 94-354. 
    Yard, rear means the minimum distance between the rear lot line and the rear line of the principal building, extending for the full width of the lot and unoccupied except for that area occupied by a permitted accessory building. 
    Yard, side means an open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building extending between the building and the side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of through lots, side yards extend from the rear lines of the required front yards. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 72-168, 4-20-72; Ord. No. 75-213, 2-25-75; Ord. No. 77-239, §§ 3, 4, 7-12-77; Ord. No. 79-266, § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. No. 80-278, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-80; Ord. No. 83-314, §§ 3, 4, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 83-315, §§ 2-4, 11-8-83; Ord. No. 84-319, § 2, 1-13-84; Ord. No. 85-321, §§ 2-4, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 85-322, § 1, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 86-340, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-86; Ord. No. 86-343, § 4, 10-28-86; Ord. No. 87-353, §§ 2, 3, 10-13-87; Ord. No. 87-354, § 1, 10-13-87; Ord. No. 88-361, §§ 1, 7, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 88-367, §§ 40, 41, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 88-368, § 1, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 88-369, § 2, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 91-392, §§ 9-11, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 91-395, § 9, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 92-408, § 2, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 93-421, § 3, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 94-456, § 1, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 96-478, § 2, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 96-479, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 95-491, §§ 1-3, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-499, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 97-500, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 97-503, § 1, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 98-513, §§ 1, 2, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 98-523, § 1, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 03-502, §§ 1, 2, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 06-547, § 1, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 07-551, § 1, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 08-558, §§ 1, 2, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 09-571, § 1, 4-13-09; Ord. No. 10-579, § 3, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 10-588, § 1, 10-11-10; Ord. No. 11-595, § 7, 3-28-11; Ord. No. 11-602, § 3, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 11-603, § 1, 9-26-11 ; Ord. No. 12-610, § 1, 9-29-12 ; Ord. No. 17-635 , § 1, 7-10-17; Ord. No. 17-636 , § 1, 7-10-17; Ord. No. 17-638 , § 1, 7-10-17; Ord. No. 18-641 , § 1, 4-23-18) 
Sec. 94-6. - Amendments. 
(a)  This chapter and the zoning districts established under this chapter may be supplemented or amended from time to time as provided by Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. Amendment may be initiated by the city commission on its own motion or the planning commission may initiate amendments to this chapter and recommend such amendments to the city commission for adoption. 
(b)  The planning commission shall, from time to time at intervals of not more than one year, examine the provisions of this chapter and the location of district boundary lines and shall submit a report to the city commission recommending changes and amendments, if any, which the planning commission deems desirable in the interest of public health, safety and the general welfare. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 58-26 et seq. 
Sec. 94-7. - Separability. 
    Sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable, and should any section, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
Sec. 94-8. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    The zoning ordinance of the city adopted November 6, 1963, together with all amendments thereto is hereby repealed. Also, any other ordinance or ordinances or part or parts of ordinances of the city which are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 94-9. - Publication of ordinance. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be published in accordance with section 4.5 of the Charter by placing not less than 100 copies in the office of the clerk for public distribution and inspection and by publishing notice of this fact in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
Sec. 94-10. - Effective date of ordinance. 
    This ordinance from which this chapter is derived became effective on July 1, 1971. 
Secs. 94-11-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 94-31. - Administrative officials. 
(a)  It is hereby provided that the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official and designees of the same. The building official shall, among other duties, interpret this chapter, and issue all permits and notices of violation provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Any use, use of land, activity, structure, or development activity not expressly allowed by this chapter is prohibited, unless the building official finds that the use is substantially similar in character to a use or item listed in this chapter. An individual may apply to the planning commission for consideration of an amendment to this chapter to include a proposed use in one or more of the zoning districts of this chapter, either as a permitted use or a special land use. At their option and discretion, the planning commission and city commission may consider an amendment to this chapter, but are not required to do so. 
(Ord. No. 82-300, § 3, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 94-443, § 1, 9-27-94 ; Ord. No. 12-610, § 2, 9-29-12 ) 
Sec. 94-32. - Permits required. 
    Before proceeding with the excavation for or the construction, erection, conversion or repair of any dwelling, building or other structure, or any part of such dwelling, building or structure, and before moving any dwelling, building or structure either into or within the city, either to be used as a unit or as a part of another dwelling, building or structure, a permit therefor shall first be obtained from the building official. No permit shall be issued with respect thereto until an application has been submitted showing to the satisfaction of the building official that the work proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the building code, section 18-26 et seq.; the subdivision regulation control ordinance, chapter 74; and any other applicable ordinance of the city, nor shall any permit be issued with respect thereto until the city engineer has certified on the application that he has reviewed the effect of the proposed work on drainage, water or sewage system within the city. 
(Ord. No. 75-224, § 1, 12-23-75; Ord. No. 94-443, § 2, 9-27-94) 
Cross reference- Building code, § 18-26 et seq.; permit to move buildings, § 18-181 et seq. 
Sec. 94-33. - Fees. 
    Before any permit shall be issued under this chapter, an inspection fee in an amount determined according to the provisions of the building code shall be paid. 
Cross reference- Building permit fees, § 18-35. 
Sec. 94-34. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or premises to be altered, moved, extended or erected until the building official has (1) inspected the premises, (2) issued a certificate of occupancy stating that the structure complies with this chapter and, (3) filed a copy of the occupancy permit with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 94-443, § 3 9-27-94) 
Sec. 94-35. - Authorized city officials. 
    The building official, building inspector, and zoning inspector are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 71-155, 9-2-71; Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 94-443, § 4, 9-27-94) 
Sec. 94-36. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter (chapter 94) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-11(c)(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-363, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 94-443, § 5, 9-27-94) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances, § 1-11. 
Sec. 94-37. - Northridge Drive precise plat. 
(a)  Defining precise plat. The city commission finds it necessary to adopt an ordinance defining the exact location of proposed future outside lines of a certain public street known as Northridge Drive. This section hereby defines as a precise plat roadway the area described in exhibit 1 [attached to Ordinance No. 18-643] (the legal description), which is available in the office of the city clerk. The area is located in section 5 of the city and is shown on exhibit 2 [attached to Ordinance No. 18-643.] The purpose of defining this precise plat roadway is to allow for improved traffic flow, an enhanced street network, alternative traffic routing and comprehensive access management in the northern part of the city, bordered by 3 Mile Road, Fruit Ridge Avenue, 4 Mile Road and Alpine Avenue. 
This precise plat for North Ridge Drive is being created with an estimated construction date of 2020 as the limitation of this section. If North Ridge Drive, as provided for herein, has not been constructed and dedicated by December 31, 2025, then this section will be null and void without further action of the city. 
(b)  Erection of buildings; establishment of streets. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued for, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected on any land located within the proposed future outside lines of the precise plat street provided to herein except as otherwise permitted by subsection (c). 
(2)  The adoption of the precise plat ordinance or any subsequent amendments to [do] not constitute, nor shall their adoption be deemed to constitute, the opening or establishment of any street, or the taking or acceptance of any land for any of the purposes set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  Amendments, modifications, additions and appeals. 
(1)  Amendments or modifications to this section, in conformity with lawfully adopted changes or additions to the city master plan, may be made and certified by the planning commission to the city commission. The city commission may then adopt the change or addition by ordinance in accordance with state law. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals may authorize the granting of a permit for the erection of a building or structure, or part thereof, within the precisely platted lines of any street or other public way, upon appeal by the owner of any affected land. Such appeal may be granted, based upon the following findings: 
a.  The entire property of the appellant, located in whole or in part within the lines of such street or public way, cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless the permit is granted; and, 
b.  Balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the adopted map, and the interest of the owner of the property in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of the permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. 
Before taking any such action, the zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing, following not less than ten days' prior notice to the appellant by mail at the address specified by the appellant in his petition. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height, and other details and conditions of size, character and construction, and also the duration of the building or structure, or part thereof, to be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 08-559, § 1, 9-22-08; Ord. No. 18-643 , § 1, 10-22-18) 
Sec. 94-38. - North Ridge Drive East precise plat. 
(a)  Defining precise plat. The city commission finds it necessary to adopt an ordinance defining the exact location of proposed future outside lines of a certain public street known as North Ridge Drive. This section hereby defines as a precise plat roadway the area shown and described on Exhibits 1 and 2, which are available in the office of the city clerk. The area is located in Sections 2 and 3 of the city. The purpose of defining this precise plat roadway is to allow for improved traffic flow, an enhanced street network, alternative traffic routing and comprehensive access management in the northern part of the City of Walker, bordered by 3 Mile Road, Fruit Ridge Avenue, 4 Mile Road and Alpine Avenue. 
    This precise plat for North Ridge Drive East is being created with an estimated construction date of 2025 as the limitation of this ordinance. If North Ridge Drive East, as provided for herein, has not been constructed and dedicated by December 31, 2025, then this ordinance will be null and void without further action of the city. 
(b)  Erection of buildings; establishment of streets. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued for, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected on any land located within the proposed future outside lines of the precise plat street provided to herein except as otherwise permitted by subsection (c). 
(2)  The adoption of the precise plat ordinance or any subsequent amendments do not constitute, nor shall their adoption be deemed to constitute, the opening or establishment of any street, or the taking or acceptance of any land for any of the purposes set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  Amendments, modifications, additions and appeals. 
(1)  Amendments or modifications to this section, in conformity with lawfully adopted changes or additions to the city master plan, may be made and certified by the planning commission to the city commission. The city commission may then adopt the change or addition by ordinance in accordance with state law. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals may authorize the granting of a permit for the erection of a building or structure, or part thereof, within the precisely platted lines of any street or other public way, upon appeal by the owner of any affected land. Such appeal may be granted, based upon the following findings: 
a.  The entire property of the appellant, located in whole or in part within the lines of such street or public way, cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless the permit is granted; and 
b.  Balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the adopted map, and the interest of the owner of the property in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of the permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. 
    Before taking any such action, the zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing, following not less than ten days' prior notice to the appellant by mail at the address specified by the appellant in his petition. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height, and other details and conditions of size, character and construction, and also the duration of the building or structure, or part thereof, to be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 09-574 § 1, 6-22-09; Ord. No. 15-626, § 1, 10-26-15 ) 
Sec. 94-39. - Mullins Avenue precise plat. 
(a)  Defining precise plat. The city commission finds it necessary to adopt an ordinance defining the exact location of proposed future outside lines of a certain public street known as Mullins Avenue. This section hereby defines as a precise plat roadway the area described in Exhibit 1 (the legal description) which is available in the office of the city clerk. The area is located in Section 5 of the city and is shown on Exhibit 2, which is available in the office of the city clerk. The purpose of defining this precise plat roadway is to allow for improved traffic flow, an enhanced street network, alternative traffic routing and comprehensive access management in the central part of the City of Walker, bordered by Richmond Street, Kinney Avenue, 3 Mile Road and Elmridge Drive. 
This precise plat for Mullins Avenue is being created with an estimated acquisition date of 2040. If Mullins Avenue, as provided for herein, has not been acquired, constructed and dedicated by December 31, 2040, then the ordinance [from which this section derives] will be null and void without further action of the city. 
(b)  Erection of buildings; establishment of streets. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued for, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected on any land located within the proposed future outside lines of the precise plat street provided to herein except as otherwise permitted by subsection (c). 
(2)  The adoption of the precise plat ordinance or any subsequent amendments shall not constitute, nor shall their adoption be deemed to constitute, the opening or establishment of any street, or the taking or acceptance of any land for any of the purposes set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  Amendments, modifications, additions and appeals. 
(1)  Amendments or modifications to this section, in conformity with lawfully adopted changes or additions to the city master plan, may be made and certified by the planning commission to the city commission. The city commission may then adopt the change or addition by ordinance in accordance with state law. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals may authorize the granting of a permit for the erection of a building or structure, or part thereof, within the precisely platted lines of any street or other public way, upon appeal by the owner of any affected land. Such appeal may be granted, based upon the following findings: 
a.  The entire property of the appellant, located in whole or in part within the lines of such street or public way, cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless the permit is granted; and, 
b.  Balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the adopted map, and the interest of the owner of the property in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of the permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. 
Before taking any such action, the zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing, following not less than ten days' prior notice to the appellant by mail at the address specified by the appellant in his petition. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height, and other details and conditions of size, character and construction, and also the duration of the building or structure, or part thereof, to be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 19-648 , § 1, 5-20-19) 
Secs. 94-40-94-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; zoning board of appeals designated as building code board of appeals, § 18-64; noise variance board consists of members of board of zoning appeals, § 34-135; plans and specifications for flood damage prevention required by zoning board of appeals, § 42-33; one member of planning commission may also be member of board of zoning appeals, § 58-29. 

Sec. 94-56. - Creation and membership. 
    A board of zoning appeals is hereby established as provided in and having the powers given by Act No. 10 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2006, as amended. The board shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate members, as appointed by the city commission. The alternate members may be called on a rotating basis to sit as regular members of the board in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. An alternate member called to serve in the place of a regular member shall serve in the case until a final decision is made, and shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the board. Each regular and alternate member shall receive a sum for his services in attending each regular or special meeting of the board, and the board shall be allowed an amount for expenses actually incurred in the discharge of its duties, as provided by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 89-279, § 1, 8-8-89; Ord. No. 91-392, § 8, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 16-627, § 1, 3-28-2016) 
Sec. 94-57. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals may fix rules and regulations to govern its procedures sitting as such board of appeals. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be made available to the public. 
(b)  Meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board in its rules of procedure may specify. The chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall maintain a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. 
(c)  Meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be held within a reasonable time following the presentation of matters to the board for its consideration. The presence of four regular members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. The board shall act by resolution and the concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which they are required to pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance, except that a concurring vote of five of the members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land permitted in an ordinance. 
(d)  The minutes of the proceedings of the board of zoning appeals shall show the vote of each member upon each question, or if the member is absent or failing to vote, shall indicate such fact. 
(e)  The board of zoning appeals may call on any other offices or boards of the city for assistance in the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 82-296, § 1(b), 4-13-82; Ord. No. 16-627, § 1, 3-28-2016) 
Sec. 94-58. - Jurisdiction. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector, and shall hear and decide other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the provisions of this chapter. The board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made as to the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers granted under the provisions of Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2006, as amended. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the board of zoning appeals shall have power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify rules, regulations or provisions so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 16-627, § 1, 3-28-2016) 
Sec. 94-59. - Granting of variances. 
    The board of zoning appeals may grant a variance from the provisions or requirements of this chapter if the board finds from reasonable evidence that all the following facts and conditions exist: 
(A)  That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question as to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district. 
(B)  That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a variance. 
(C)  That authorizing such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and will not materially impair the intent and purposes of this chapter or the public interest. 
(D)  That the condition or situation of the piece of property or the intended use of such property for which the variance is sought is not of so general or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such condition or situation. 
(E)  With respect to the use variance, that the property for which a variance is sought cannot reasonably be used in a manner consistent with existing zoning. 
Sec. 94-60. - Conditions. 
    In addition to the specific conditions of approval set forth in this chapter, reasonable conditions may be imposed by the board of zoning appeals upon an affirmative decision. The conditions may include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do all the following: 
(1)  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole. 
(2)  Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(3)  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter; be related to the standards established in the ordinance for approval of the application or appeal under consideration; and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(Ord. No. 86-335, § 1, 7-8-86) 
Sec. 94-61. - Procedure. 
    The following procedure shall be required: 
(1)  An appeal from a ruling of an officer administering any portion of this chapter may be taken by a person or governmental department affected or aggrieved. Any such appeal must be taken within 60 days from the date of the action appealed from. 
(2)  An application for a variance may be taken by a person having a legal interest in the property concerned. 
(3)  The board of zoning appeals shall not consider an application or appeal without payment by the applicant or appellant to 
the city treasurer of a fee, to be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(4)  When an application or appeal has been filed in proper form and with the required information, the secretary of the board of zoning appeals or his designee shall place the application or appeal upon a meeting agenda for a hearing. 
(5)  An application or appeal scheduled for a hearing shall be given public notice in the following manner: 
a.  A public notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing. 
b.  A written public notice of the hearing shall be given to: 
i.  The owners of the property that is the subject of the hearing. 
ii.  All persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the hearing. This notice shall be given regardless of whether the property is located in the city. 
iii.  The occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the hearing. This notice shall be given regardless of whether the structures are located in the city. 
1.  Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons, then one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. 
2.  If a single structure contains more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the public notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
c.  The public notice is considered to be given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United States Postal Service or other public or private delivery service. 
d.  The written public notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the request will be considered. 
e.  If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used for the intended recipient of the notice. 
f.  A public notice shall do all of the following: 
i.  Describe the nature of the request. 
ii.  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. This shall include a listing of all existing street addresses for the property. 
iii.  State when and where the request will be considered. 
iv.  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(6)  Upon the day for hearing an application or appeal, the board of zoning appeals may adjourn the hearing in order to permit the obtaining of additional information, or to cause such further notice as it deems proper to be served upon such other property owners as it decides may be interested in such application or appeal. In the case of an adjourned hearing, persons previously notified and persons already heard need not be notified of the time of resumption of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 37, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 10-579, § 2, 3-8-10) 
Sec. 94-62. - Decisions of the board. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall decide all applications and appeals within 30 days after the final hearing thereon. A copy of the board's decision shall be transmitted to the applicant or appellant and to the building inspector. Such decision shall be binding upon the building inspector and be observed by him, and he shall incorporate the terms and conditions of the decision in the permit to the applicant or appellant whenever a permit is authorized by the board. A decision of the board shall not become final until the expiration of five days from the date such decision is made, unless the board shall find the immediate effect of such decision is necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record. No application or appeal which has been denied shall be resubmitted within 120 days after the denial by the board. 
(Ord. No. 86-335, § 2, 7-8-86) 
Sec. 94-63. - Time limit. 
(a)  No decision of the board of zoning appeals authorizing the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within one year of the decision and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the building permit. 
(b)  No decision of the board of zoning appeals authorizing the use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, such decision shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for the erection or alteration is obtained within one year of the decision and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 86-335, § 3, 7-8-86) 
Sec. 94-64. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal taken to the board of zoning appeals shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the board of appeals, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with the city clerk, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may, on due cause shown, be granted by the board of appeals or by the circuit court on application, after notice to the building inspector. 
Sec. 94-65. - Appeals from the board of appeals. 
    Any person or any department, board or bureau aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals may seek review of such decision by a court of record in the manner provided by the laws of the state. 
Secs. 94-66-94-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP; PROVISIONS FOR MAP AND DETERMINATION OF BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 94-86. - Establishment of zoning districts and adoption of zoning map. 
    The city is hereby divided into zones or districts as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
Editor's note- The zoning map is not included in this Code, but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 94-87. - Identification of map and changes thereon. 
    The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the municipality under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Chapter 2 [article IV of this chapter] of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Walker, Ordinance No. 71-150, adopted July 1, 1971." The official zoning map shall be located in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 94-88. - Prior zoning maps. 
    Unless prior official zoning maps under previous ordinances have been lost or totally destroyed, the prior maps or any significant parts thereof remaining, although superseded by this chapter and the official zoning map adopted hereby, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to their adoption or amendment. 
Sec. 94-89. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal boundaries shall be construed as following such municipal boundaries. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the center of the railroad right-of-way. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6), the board of zoning appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the planning commission may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
Secs. 94-90-94-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 94-111. - Zoning affects every structure and use. 
    Except as specified in this chapter, no building, structure or premises shall be used or occupied, and no structure or a part thereof shall be erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located, provided that nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the building inspector. No building or other structure shall be erected or altered (i) to exceed the height or bulk; (ii) to accommodate or house a greater number of families; (iii) to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or (iv) to have no or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than required in this chapter, or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter, except as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 94-112. - Requirements of yard, open space, or offstreet parking or loading. 
    No part of a yard or other open space or offstreet parking or loading space required in this chapter for one building shall be included as part of a yard, open space or offstreet parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
Sec. 94-113. - Reduction of existing lots below minimum. 
    No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter. 
Sec. 94-114. - New lots to meet minimum requirements. 
    Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter. 
Sec. 94-115. - Zoning of territory to be annexed. 
    All territory which may be annexed to the municipality shall be considered to be in the most restrictive single-family district until otherwise classified. 
Sec. 94-116. - Essential services. 
    Essential services shall be permitted in every district, provided that in residential districts the installation of essential service uses shall be reviewed by the planning commission. Pursuant to its review, the planning commission may prescribe conditions for essential service uses in residential districts, including conditions regarding architecture, landscaping, setback, enclosures, and other conditions as may be appropriate to protect the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 42, 1-10-89) 
Secs. 94-117-94-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Compliance with sound level limits by nonconforming commercial or industrial uses, § 34-137. 

Sec. 94-136. - Continuance of nonconforming use or structure. 
    The lawful use of any land or structure exactly as such use existed at the time this chapter took effect, may be continued even though such use or structure does not meet the requirements of this chapter, provided that this shall not be interpreted as an authorization for or approval of the use of lands or structures which violate the zoning regulations repealed by this chapter. Structures or uses nonconforming by reason of height, area or parking and offstreet loading provisions only may be extended, enlarged, altered, remodeled or modernized, provided that no additional encroachment of such provisions is occasioned thereby. 
Sec. 94-137. - Restoration and repairs. 
    Such repairs and maintenance work as are required to keep a nonconforming building or structure in a safe or sound condition may be made. A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind or other calamity may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building or structure, or part thereof, which existed immediately prior to such damage or destruction, may be continued or resumed, provided (i) the estimated expense of reconstruction does not exceed 75 percent of the appraised replacement cost (as determined by the building official) of the entire building or structure prior to loss, exclusive of foundations; (ii) any reconstruction shall comply with any building code and governmental regulations in effect at the time; and (iii) such restoration shall be started within a period of one year of the time of such damage or destruction and diligently prosecuted to completion; provided, however, that the board of appeals may extend such period of time when a national emergency shall render it impossible to make such restoration in that period of time. If damage or destruction as aforesaid shall exceed 75 percent of the building or structure, the right to continue a nonconforming use shall thereupon terminate and further use of such premises shall conform to the requirements of the zone in which the premises is located. 
Sec. 94-138. - Extensions, enlargements, moving. 
    No nonconforming use of any land or structure shall be enlarged or extended, except that an enlargement or extension may be made of up to 50 percent of the floor area of the existing building or buildings devoted to a nonconforming use, provided (i) such extension or enlargement is made on adjoining land with the same block which was owned by the owner of the nonconforming use at the time this chapter became effective; (ii) if such use was nonconforming under the zoning ordinance repealed by this chapter or any other prior ordinance, the combination of the proposed enlargement or extension and any previous enlargement or extension made after the use became nonconforming by the provisions of the former ordinance or ordinances would not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the building or buildings devoted to the use as it or they existed when the use became a nonconforming use; and (iii) the board of zoning appeals after public notice and hearing shall find that a reasonable need for the extension exists and an absence of injurious effect on the contiguous property is shown, and in its order permitting any such enlargement or extension, the board of appeals may provide such conditions and limitations as will safeguard the character of the neighborhood. If any nonconforming structure permitted under the provisions of this article is moved for any reason, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
Sec. 94-139. - Nonconforming use discontinued. 
    No building, structure or premises where a nonconforming use has ceased for more than one year or has been changed to a conforming use shall again be devoted to a use not in conformity with the regulations of the district under this chapter. 
Sec. 94-140. - Plans already filed. 
    In any case where a building permit has been issued for a building or structure which conformed with the zoning regulations effective at the date of such permit but not with the regulations of this chapter and construction work had been started at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such work may proceed, provided it is completed within one year after the effective date of such ordinance. 
Sec. 94-141. - Nonconforming due to reclassification. 
    This article shall also apply to building, structures, land or uses which become nonconforming due to any reclassification of districts under this chapter or any subsequent change in the regulations of this chapter. 
Sec. 94-142. - Change in nonconforming use. 
    If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use if the zoning board of appeals specifically finds that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the zone district than the existing nonconforming use. In approving a change of use, the board of appeals may impose reasonable conditions. The changed use as approved by the board of appeals under this section shall be considered a nonconforming use for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 1, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-143. - Uses permitted as special exception uses, unique uses or by grant of a variance are not nonconforming uses. 
    A use which is permitted and approved as a special exception use, a unique use, or permitted by grant of a variance, shall be considered a conforming use and not a nonconforming use for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 2, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-144. - Nonconforming building/structure due to expansion of right-of-way. 
    When the city, the state department of transportation, or any other entity with the power of eminent domain, acquires additional right-of-way from a lot containing an existing building or structure for the purpose of street construction, street relocation, street widening, or installation, maintenance, repair, or enlargement of utilities, and such acquisition creates nonconformance of an existing building or structure with the minimum setback, lot width, lot area, or parking requirements of this chapter, such building or structure shall thereafter be permitted to be altered, enlarged or rebuilt provided that: (1) the specific nonconformity created when the right-of-way was acquired is not increased; (2) all buildings and structures shall be setback not less than 15 feet from the public right-of-way line; and (3) all such altered, enlarged, or rebuilt buildings or structures shall conform to all other requirements of this chapter and this Code. This section shall control in the event of any conflict with any other provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-532, § 1, 3-22-99) 
Secs. 94-145-94-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISTRICTS; DISTRICT AND SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 94-166. - District regulations and supplementary district regulations adopted. 
    District regulations shall be as set forth in this article and in the schedule of district regulations and in the supplementary district regulations. 
Sec. 94-167. - "A" district, single-family residential. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the "A" district, single-family residential, are intended to encourage a suitable environment for families, typically with children. To this end, uses are basically limited to single-family dwellings and permitted accessory buildings together with certain other uses such as schools, parks and playgrounds which provide a neighborhood environment. In keeping with this intent, development is regulated to a moderate density. 
(b)  Principal use. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "A" district, single-family residential, shall hereafter be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  State licensed residential facilities (six or fewer persons). 
(3)  Adult foster care family homes. 
(4)  Foster family homes. 
(5)  Foster family group homes. 
(6)  Family day care homes. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. The following are permitted accessory uses to the principal use in an "A" district: 
(1)  Private garage. 
(2)  Garden house, toolhouse, swimming pool, playhouse or greenhouse, none used for commercial purposes. 
(3)  A home occupation. 
(4)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal use. 
(5)  Racing pigeons and associated lofts, subject to the following: 
a.  The minimum lot size shall be one-half acre. 
b.  No more than 50 racing pigeons shall be allowed per lot. 
c.  The pigeons and the loft shall be subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of this Code (including, without limitation, article 2, chapter 14) and other local, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(6)  Nursery school operated by a church on church property. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses of land and structures may be permitted as special exception uses within the "A" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by this section and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  Churches, parish houses, rectories and convents. 
(2)  Schools. The ratio of pupils to total lot size shall be at least 300 square feet per pupil for nursery schools, and at least 500 square feet per pupil for elementary, junior high and senior high schools. 
(3)  Recreation uses such as parks, playgrounds, golf courses, ballfields, athletic fields and community centers. 
(4)  Federal, state or municipal administrative or service buildings, public libraries, public museums, and public art galleries. 
(5)  Hospitals. The ratio of hospital beds to total lot size shall be at least 1,100 square feet per bed. 
(6)  Nursing homes. 
(7)  Horses (not for commercial use) may be permitted, as follows: 
a.  No more than three horses shall be allowed per dwelling. 
b.  The minimum lot size shall be three acres for the first horse, and one additional acre for each additional horse. 
c.  The planning commission may limit the number of horses and prescribe the manner of keeping the horses as necessary to prevent offensive odors, the pollution of water supplies, or the spread of infection and disease. 
(8)  Adult foster care small group homes and adult foster care large group homes. 
(9)  Group day care homes. 
(10)  Housing for the elderly. 
(11)  Independent living facilities. An independent living facility shall be occupied only by individuals with permanent physical disabilities, the spouses and children of physically disabled individuals, and the personal care attendants of physically disabled individuals. Each dwelling unit within an independent living facility shall be occupied by at least one individual with permanent physical disabilities. An independent living facility, including all of its individual dwelling units, shall meet or exceed barrier-free housing codes, consistent with the needs of its occupants. 
(12)  Reserved. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "A" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "A" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  Public water and sewer are required. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for the special exception uses described in subsection 94-167(d), except for subsections 94-167(d)(7), (8), (9), and (12). 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for any use of property in the "A" district if such property is adjacent to any property which has sidewalks and which fronts on the same public street. 
(Ord. No. 72-182, § 1, 10-24-72; Ord. No. 75-217, § 1, 4-22-75; Ord. No. 77-239, § 1, 7-12-77; Ord. No. 88-361, §§ 2, 3, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 88-367, § 3, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 91-395, § 2, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 95-475, § 1, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 96-491, §§ 4-6, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 00-454, § 1, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 08-555, § 1, 1-14-08) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 86. 
Sec. 94-168. - "A-2" duplex district, two-family residential. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the A-2 duplex district, two-family residential, are intended to encourage a suitable environment for young couples, maturing families and retired individuals. To this end, uses are limited to single- and two-family units and permitted accessory buildings along with certain other neighborhood-type uses such as schools, parks and playgrounds. 
(b)  Principal use. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "A-2" district, shall hereafter be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  State licensed residential facilities (six or fewer persons). 
(4)  Adult foster care family homes. 
(5)  Foster family homes. 
(6)  Foster family group homes. 
(7)  Family day care homes. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. Permitted accessory uses in the "A-2" district are the same as in the "A" district as provided in section 94-167(c). 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The uses specified by section 94-167(d) as special exception uses within the "A" district may be permitted as special exception uses within the "A-2" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX of this chapter. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "A-2" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Water, sewer and drainage requirements. Public water and public sewer and fully improved streets including curb and gutter, enclosed storm drains and sidewalks are required in the "A-2" district. 
(g)  Additional requirements. In the "A-2" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for the special exception uses described in subsection 94-167(d), except for subsections 94-167(d)(7), (8), (9), and (12). 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for any use in the "A-2" district if such property is adjacent to any property which has sidewalks and which fronts on the same public street. 
(Ord. No. 77-240, § 1, 9-13-77; Ord. No. 78-251, § 2, 9-12-78; Ord. No. 88-367, § 4, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 96-491, § 7, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 00-454, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 94-169. - "SA" district, suburban residential, single-family. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the "SA" district, suburban residential, single-family, are intended to encourage a suitable environment for families, typically with children, particularly in areas which have public water or sewer, but not both, and in which the percolation characteristics of the soil provide drainage sufficient to protect the public health and safety with only one public utility. 
(b)  Principal use. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "SA" district, suburban residential, single-family, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. Permitted accessory uses in the "SA" district are the same as in the "A" district as provided by section 94-167(c). 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The uses specified by section 94-167(d) as special exception uses within the "A" district may be permitted as special exception uses within the "SA" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX of this chapter. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "SA" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "SA" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  Public sewer must be provided for all property abutting an easement or right-of-way in which a public sewer is located. If a public sewer is not so located, the property may be used if public water is provided. If neither public water nor sewer is available, the property may be used in compliance with the area, height, bulk and placement requirements set forth in the schedule of district regulations for the "S" district. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for the special exception uses described in subsection 94-167(d), except for subsections 94-167(d)(7), (8), (9), and (12). 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for any use in the "SA" district if such property is adjacent to any property which has sidewalks and which fronts on the same public street. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 72-171, 8-3-72; Ord. No. 88-367, § 5, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 00-454, § 3, 2-14-00) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 86. 
Sec. 94-170. - "S" district, suburban residential. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the "S" district, suburban residential, are intended to encourage development of a suburban area of limited density and large lots in which neither public water nor public sewer is available. 
(b)  Principal use. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "S" district, suburban residential, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. Permitted accessory uses in an "S" district are the same as in the "A" district as provided by section 94-167(c). 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The uses specified by section 94-167(d) as special exception uses within the "A" district may be permitted as special exception uses within the "S" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX of this chapter. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "S" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "S" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for the special exception uses described in subsection 94-167(d) except for subsections 94-167(d)(7), (8), (9), and (12). 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for any use in the "S" district if such property is adjacent to any property which has sidewalks and which fronts on the same public street. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 6, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 00-454, § 4, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 94-171. - "AA" district, agricultural. 
(a)  Intent. Agricultural districts are those open areas of the city where farming, dairying, forestry operations and other rural activities are found. Vacant, fallow land and wooded areas may also be included where such areas are interspersed among farms. Gradually and under a comprehensive plan for urban development, agricultural districts may be converted to other land uses. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "AA" district, agricultural, shall be used, erected, altered, or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following principal uses: 
(1)  If the individual parcel is five acres or more in area, it may be used for both general and specialized farming, including horticultural, dairying, livestock and poultry raising, farm forestry, orchards, vineyards and apiaries, and other similar uses, but no farm shall be operated as a piggery or for the disposal of garbage. 
(2)  One-family dwelling. 
(3)  Nurseries. 
(4)  Golf courses and golf clubs and bowling alleys in connection therewith. 
(5)  Churches, parish houses, rectories and convents. 
(6)  Schools. 
(7)  Community and public buildings 
(8)  Horses (for personal, noncommercial use) may be permitted on lots of less than five acres, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The minimum lot size shall be three acres for the first horse and one additional acre for each additional horse. 
b.  The zoning administrator may limit the number of horses and prescribe the manner of keeping the horses as necessary to prevent offensive odors, the pollution of water supplies, or the spread of infection or disease. In making such a decision, the zoning administrator shall consider recommendations from animal control agencies who regularly deal with similar issues. 
c.  The keeping of horses and other animals on parcels of five acres or more in this district shall be controlled by subsection (b)(1). 
(9)  Mineral mining, as defined in section 94-5. Mineral mining does not include mineral processing and material storage as defined in section 94-5. 
(10)  Racing pigeons and associated lofts, subject to the following: 
a.  The minimum lot size shall be one-half acre. 
b.  No more than 100 racing pigeons shall be allowed per lot. 
c.  The pigeons and the loft shall be subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of this Code (including, without limitation, article 2, chapter 14) and other local, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(11)  State licensed residential facilities (six or fewer persons). 
(12)  Adult foster care family homes. 
(13)  Foster family homes. 
(14)  Foster family group homes. 
(15)  Family day care homes. 
(16)  Parks operated by governmental bodies or agencies. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal uses. The following are permitted accessory uses to the principal uses in an "AA" district: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to any and all of the foregoing uses may be erected and used as accessory to the principal use. 
(2)  Agricultural warehouses and storage plants shall be an accessory use. 
(3)  Additional dwellings on any farm for the use of farm or domestic employees of the owner or his lessees, provided there is only one such tenant house in addition to the main dwelling for each ten acres of farmland, and provided that each such tenant house is surrounded by sufficient land to provide a future separate lot of 20,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of 100 feet. 
(4)  Migrant workers' facilities for seasonal occupancy, provided they are approved by the building inspector and that adequate provision is made for water and sanitary facilities. 
(5)  Roadside stands selling products that are grown on the premises may be erected adjacent to the highway provided that the roadside stand is located on a lot having a minimum of one acre and adequate off-street parking is provided for customers (except that the parking area shall not be required to have a dustless and durable all-weather surfacing material, notwithstanding subsection 94-468(8)). In addition, notwithstanding section 94-409, a roadside stand shall be permitted to have signs on the same premises to identify the location of the roadside stand provided that the signs are not more than an aggregate of 16 square feet and the signs otherwise comply with all applicable requirements. 
(6)  Greenhouses where customarily incidental to any of the principal uses set forth in subsection (b) and where used for cultivating, propagating or nurturing flowers, plants, shrubs, trees or other similar natural living products. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses of land and structures may be permitted as special exception uses within the "AA" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by this section and as provided by article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Kennels, animal hospitals and establishments raising fur bearing animals, provided that for kennels, the following minimum requirements shall apply: 
a.  The minimum lot size for each kennel approved under this section shall be at least two acres in area. 
b.  Cages or runs located outdoors shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from residential districts and uses. 
c.  Cages and runs may be located indoors or outdoors. All cages and runs at kennels shall be kept and maintained in a manner so as to minimize to the greatest extent possible any adverse impacts to the property on which they are kept, surrounding properties, and any other areas of the city, including, without limitation, dust, dirt, noise, odor, vermin, the attraction of other birds or animals, the potential spread of infection, disease or contamination or other health or safety hazards or nuisance conditions. All cages and runs shall: 
1.  Be constructed and maintained in compliance with all applicable building code regulations; 
2.  Be of sufficient size and design, and constructed of such material, so that it can be maintained in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition; 
3.  Be kept, at all times, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, in good repair, and in compliance with all applicable health and safety laws and regulations; 
4.  A cage for animals must contain sufficient square footage to allow the animal housed within to move around freely, and provide an interior height of at least six inches higher than the head of the animal in the enclosure when the animal is in the normal standing position. A run for animals shall be of a length, width, and height to provide adequate space for an animal to exercise and train. 
d.  All animals at kennels shall be fed only within the confines of the kennel structure. All feed for the animals shall be stored in sealed containers that will prevent intrusion by insects, rodents and other vermin. 
e.  All animals shall be confined to the kennel except for limited periods as necessary for exercise and training. 
(2)  Animal hospitals, if public water and sewer are available. 
(3)  Cemeteries, crematories and mausoleums, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums and related structures shall be developed under a unified plan. 
b.  Cemetery, crematory and mausoleum structures shall be located at least 250 feet from a residential district. 
c.  A greenbelt shall be installed between a cemetery, crematory or mausoleum and any adjacent residential zone district, either contiguous or across a street, as provided by section 94-344. 
(4)  Stables open to the public, if the minimum area is 40 acres. 
(5)  Semipublic recreation facilities which provide large open space areas, such as Girl Scout camps, Boy Scout camps, church camps, picnic areas, and athletic grounds. 
(6)  Mental hospitals. 
(7)  The disposal of waste from septic tanks, cesspools or seepage pits, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  License. Prior to the disposal of wastes, a license shall be obtained under Part 117 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended, MCL 324.11701 et seq., as amended. 
b.  Permits. All permits required by law shall be obtained prior to the disposal of wastes. Further, prior written approval for the disposal shall be obtained from the county health department as provided by Part 117 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL 324.11701 et seq., as amended. 
c.  Bonds. Prior to the commencement of any disposal of wastes, a surety bond of $5,000.00 shall be posted with the city to guarantee compliance with the provisions of this subsection. 
d.  Minimum site size. Wastes shall be disposed of only on approved dumping sites of five acres or more in area. 
e.  Floodplain. Wastes shall not be disposed of on sites within a state or federal 50-year floodplain. 
f.  Setback; nuisance. Wastes shall be disposed of at locations having a minimum distance of 200 yards from any residence, public or private place of business, public gathering place, or local streets or state highways, subject to the prior written approval of the property owner and the county health department. All wastes shall be disposed of so as not to create a public nuisance or health hazard. 
g.  Signs. The boundaries of the site on which wastes are disposed shall be posted with legible signs having the minimum dimensions of 12 by eight inches and horizontally spaced no more than 100 feet apart. The signs shall be posted not lower than four feet and not higher than six feet from ground level. The signs shall contain the licensee's name and shall bear the following warning in substantially the following form: 
WARNING! 
HEALTH HAZARD 
DO NOT ENTER 
SEPTIC WASTE DISPOSAL SITE 
_____
(name of licensee) 
h.  Compliance with laws. The disposal of wastes shall comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations, including, without limitation, Part 117 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL 324.11701 et seq., as amended. 
i.  Plowing of soil. The soil on which wastes are disposed shall be plowed or turned under to a minimum depth of six inches at least once every 30 days or as may be more frequently required by the county health department or the building official of the city to prevent odor or to protect public health and safety. 
j.  Violations. The disposal of wastes shall immediately cease upon the violation of any of the provisions of this subsection. 
(8)  Children's camps (on lots of at least five acres). 
(9)  Adult foster care camps (on lots of at least five acres). 
(10)  Adult foster care small group homes and adult foster care large group homes. 
(11)  Group day care homes. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "AA" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. No piles or accumulations of refuse or manure shall be permitted in the "AA"district unless they are at least 200 feet from all public thoroughfares and from boundary lines, and shall then be so maintained as not to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 75-217, § 2, 4-22-75; Ord. No. 78-251, § 1, 9-12-78; Ord. No. 83-315, § 1, 11-8-83; Ord. No. 88-359, §§ 1, 2, 3-8-88; Ord. No. 88-361, § 4, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 88-367, §§ 7, 8, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 91-395, § 3, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 95-473, §§ 1-3, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 95-475, § 2, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 96-491, §§ 8-10, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-500, § 2, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 99-527, § 1, 2-8-99; Ord. No. 01-474, § 1, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 03-502, § 3, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 10-579, § 1, 3-8-10) 
Sec. 94-171-A. - "P-SP" district, public-semipublic. 
(a)  Design and intent . The public-semipublic zoning district is intended to apply to lands designated in the master plan as "park/open" or "public/semipublic". The district is designed to accommodate governmental, public utility, educational, community service and recreational facilities. Such uses are somewhat unique in that their proximity to sensitive land uses is not generally detrimental to quality of life and in many cases is desirable and convenient. The district is intended to provide space and facilities needed to complement residential and business areas. 
(b)  Principal uses . Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building in a "P-SP" district, public-semipublic shall be used, erected, altered, or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following principal uses, subject to site plan review by the planning commission, consistent with the standards of article X of the Walker Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  Essential services. 
(2)  Public and charter schools. 
(3)  Public community centers. 
(4)  Public libraries. 
(5)  Publicly-owned parking lots. 
(6)  Government offices, public works facilities, fire stations, police stations and court facilities. 
(7)  Mineral mining, as defined in section 94-5. Mineral mining does not include mineral processing and material storage as defined in section 94-5. 
(8)  Outdoor public recreational uses, such as playgrounds, playfields, golf courses, boating areas, swimming areas, fishing sites, camping sites, trails and parks. 
(9)  Health and fitness centers owned by a government agency. 
(10)  Cultural facilities, including, but not limited to, theaters, museums and centers for the arts. 
(11)  Conservation lands, wildlife sanctuaries, forest preserves. 
(12)  Developed open space, such as arboreta and botanical gardens. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal uses . The following are permitted accessory uses to the principal uses in a "P-SP" district, Public-Semipublic: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to any and all of the foregoing uses may be erected and used as accessory to the principal use. 
(2)  Outdoor festivals, fairs, carnivals, craft shows, athletic tournaments and events, concerts, farmer's markets, auto shows and other similar uses, as determined by the zoning board of appeals, subject to a temporary use permit administrated per section 94-522 of the Walker Zoning Ordinance, except that signage shall be regulated per the standards of this section. Events proposed in city parks shall be consistent with the standards of chapter 54, Parks and Recreation, in the City of Walker Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission . The following uses of land and structures may be permitted as special exception uses within the "P-SP" district, public-semipublic if approved by the planning commission as provided by this section and by article IX of the Walker Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  Cemeteries, crematories and mausoleums, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums and related structures shall be developed under a unified plan. 
b.  Cemetery, crematory and mausoleum structures shall be located at least 250 feet from a residential district. 
c.  A greenbelt shall be installed between a cemetery, crematory or mausoleum and any adjacent residential zone district, either contiguous or across a street, as provided by section 94-344 of the Walker Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  Stables open to the public. 
(3)  Semipublic recreation facilities which provide large open space areas, such as Girl Scout camps, Boy Scout camps, church camps, picnic areas, and athletic grounds. 
(4)  Blandford Nature Center. 
(5)  New wireless telecommunication towers and antenna, per the standards of section 94-355 of the Walker Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)  Building setback and height requirements . The building setback and height requirements of the "P-SP" district, public-semipublic shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front building setback equal to 35 feet. 
(2)  Rear building setback equal to 30 feet. 
(3)  Side building setback equal to 30 feet on each side. 
(4)  Maximum building height not to exceed 35 feet. 
(f)  Signage . Requirements for permanent and temporary signs in the "P-SP" district, public-semipublic shall be as follows: 
(1)  All signs shall follow the administrative, measurement, placement and appearance standards found in section 94-406. 
(2)  All permanent signs shall follow the standards of section 94-410 Signs in Mixed Use and Commercial districts, except that freestanding/pylon signs shall not be allowed. 
All temporary signs shall follow the standards of subsection 94-412(1) Commercial special event signs. 
(Ord. No. 11-598, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 94-172. - "ARM" district, residential, multiple-family. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the "ARM" district, residential, multiple-family, are intended to encourage and permit multiple-family housing in areas deemed suitable therefor. Public water and sewer facilities shall be required. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "ARM" residential district, multiple-family, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Principal use permitted in the "A" district as provided in section 94-167(b). 
(2)  Principal use permitted in the "SA" district as provided in section 94-169(b). 
(3)  Principal uses permitted in the "S" district as provided in section 94-170(b). 
(4)  Two-family dwellings, provided the requirements of this section are met. 
(5)  Multiple housing with more than two dwelling units but not more than four dwelling units, provided the requirements of this section are met. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. The following uses accessory to the principal use are permitted in the "ARM" district: 
(1)  Accessory uses as permitted in the "A" district as provided by section 94-167(c). 
(2)  A community garage serving the principal building containing space for no greater number of motor vehicles than two times the number of dwelling units in the principal buildings. 
(3)  A private swimming pool designed and operated only for occupants of the principal buildings and their personal guests. 
(4)  A community building for recreational activities of the occupants of the dwelling units and their guests. 
(5)  A maintenance and management building such as are customarily used in connection with multiple-family dwellings, including a laundromat designed and operated only for occupants of the principal buildings. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses may be permitted as special except uses within the "ARM" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  The uses specified by section 94-167(d) as special exception uses within the "A" district. 
(2)  Adult foster care congregate facilities. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "ARM" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations, except as set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area for multiple housing shall be 15,000 square feet, increased for each unit beyond the first two dwelling units in accordance with the following: 
a.  For each one-bedroom dwelling unit beyond the first two dwelling units, an additional 2,500 square feet of lot area. 
b.  For each two-bedroom dwelling unit beyond the first two dwelling units, an additional 3,000 square feet of lot area. 
c.  For each three-bedroom dwelling unit beyond the first two dwelling units, an additional 3,500 square feet of lot area. 
d.  For each dwelling unit containing more than three bedrooms, an additional lot area of 500 square feet per bedroom shall be required beyond the requirements of subsection (f)(1)c. 
(2)  The yards shall be kept clear and unobstructed and shall not be used for the storage of materials, rubbish or debris, but may be used for gardening and planting. Permitted accessory buildings shall also be allowed as and where specified in this chapter. 
(3)  No building or structure shall exceed a height of the lesser of 21/2 stories or 35 feet from the ground where it stands, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(4)  Each multiple-family unit shall have a floor area, exclusive of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, enclosed and unenclosed porches and utility rooms, of: 
a.  Six hundred square feet for a one-bedroom housing unit; 
b.  Seven hundred fifty square feet for a two-bedroom housing unit; 
c.  Nine hundred square feet for a three-bedroom housing unit; 
d.  An additional five square feet of floor area for each bedroom in excess of three. 
(g)  Sidewalks; additional requirement. In the "ARM" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for the multiple housing use described in subsection 94-172(b)(5), the special exception uses described in subsection 94-167(d) except for subsections 94-167(d)(7), (8), (9), and (12), and adult foster care congregate facilities described in subsection 94-172(d)(2). 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for any use in the "ARM" district if such property is adjacent to any property which has sidewalks and which fronts on the same public street. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, §§ 3, 4, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 88-361, § 5, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 88-367, § 9, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 96-491, § 11, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 00-454, § 5, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 94-173. - "ARM" district one, residential, multiple-family. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the "ARM" residential district one, multiple-family district are intended to encourage and permit low density multiple-family housing in areas deemed suitable therefor. Public water and sewer facilities shall be required. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "ARM" residential district one, multiple-family district shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Principal use permitted in the "A" district as provided in section 94-167(b). 
(2)  Principal use permitted in the "SA" district as provided in section 94-169(b). 
(3)  Principal uses permitted in the "S" district as provided in section 94-173(b). 
(4)  Two-family dwellings, provided the requirements of this section are met. 
(5)  Multiple housing with more than two dwelling units but not more than four dwelling units, provided the requirements of this section are met. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. The following uses accessory to the principal use are permitted in the "ARM" district one residential district: accessory uses as permitted in the "A" district, as provided by section 94-167(c). 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The uses specified by section 94-167(d) as special exception uses within the "A" district may be permitted as special exception uses within the "ARM" district one if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "ARM" district one are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations, except as set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "ARM" district one: 
(1)  Minimum lot area for multiple housing shall be 15,000 square feet, increased for each unit beyond the first two dwelling units in accordance with subsection (f)(2). 
(2)  For each dwelling unit beyond the first two dwelling units, an additional 3,750 square feet of lot area and an additional 25 feet of lot frontage is required. 
(3)  Each unit shall have a floor area in accordance with section 94-172(f)(4). 
(4)  The yards shall be kept clear and unobstructed and shall not be used for the storage of materials, rubbish or debris, but may be used for gardening and planting. Permitted accessory buildings shall also be allowed as and where specified in this chapter. 
(5)  No building or structure shall exceed a height of the less of 21/2 stories or 35 feet from the ground where it stands, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(6)  Parking shall be provided as follows: in a garage or carport enclosed on three sides, with an additional parking space for each unit, which need not be enclosed. 
(g)  Sidewalks; additional requirement. In the "ARM" residential district one, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for the multiple housing use described in subsection 94-173(b)(5) and the special exception uses described in subsection 94-167(d) except for subsections 94-167(d)(7), (8), (9), and (12). 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street for any use in the "ARM" residential district one, if such property is adjacent to any property which has sidewalks and which fronts on the same public street. 
(Ord. No. 79-272, § 1, 1-22-80; Ord. No. 91-395, § 4, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 00-454, § 6, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 94-174. - "RMT" district, mobile home or trailer coach parks. 
(a)  Intent. The "RMT" district, mobile home or trailer coach parks, is for areas of the city suitable for mobile home or trailer coach parks. Such districts shall provide adequate space and facilities for healthful living conditions for occupants of such mobile home parks. All such districts shall have access to a major thoroughfare for easy accessibility. Public water and sewer facilities shall be provided in accordance with state, county and city health regulations, and any such parks shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Principal use. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part thereof in an "RMT" district, mobile home or trailer coach parks, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for trailer coach or mobile home parks. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. The following uses accessory to the principal use are permitted in the "RMT" district: 
(1)  Recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the residents of the trailer coach or mobile home park and personal guests. 
(2)  Storage facilities for residents. 
(3)  Office and residence for manager of the mobile home park. 
(4)  Utility facilities. 
(5)  Laundry facility for the exclusive use of the residents of the trailer coach or mobile home park, to be heated in winter, and to have provisions for furnishing an adequate supply of hot and cold water if such facility is provided. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The uses specified by section 94-167(d) as special exception uses within the "A" district, except horses as provided by section 94-167(d)(7), may be permitted as special exception uses within the "RMT" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "RMT" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. Before a permit for a trailer park or mobile home park in an "RMT" district is issued, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  Development plan. There shall be submitted to the building inspector a development plan of the trailer park or mobile home park in three copies and in sufficient detail to show compliance with the requirements of this article and showing a plat of all of the lots, location of the trailer coach or mobile home thereon, drainage courses, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, lights, storm drainage facilities, streets, parking areas and buffer or screening zone. 
(2)  Streets and street plan. There must be submitted to the building inspector plans of a street system and assurance of the satisfactory construction thereof in accordance with the following: 
a.  All streets within the project shall be private but shall be paved with asphalt or concrete meeting city public street construction specifications except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
b.  The interior street improvements shall extend continuously from the existing improved public street system to provide suitable access to the mobile home stands and other important facilities on the property, to provide adequate connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the property, and to provide convenient circulation for vehicles. 
c.  The street system shall afford two means of entrance and exit to a primary road or state highway, such entranceways to be not less than 300 feet apart and not less than 100 feet from the property boundary lines. 
d.  The street system shall be designed with blocks of proper size and shape to provide desirable trailer coach or mobile home lots and shall provide convenient circulation by means of minor streets and properly located collector streets. Street intersections shall generally be at right angles. All culs-de-sac which are longer than 180 feet shall have an unobstructed width of 20 feet exclusive of parking areas and at the closed end shall have an unobstructed turning circle at least 80 feet in diameter exclusive of parking areas. 
e.  Pavements shall be of adequate widths to accommodate the contemplated parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street, with ten-foot minimum moving lanes for streets and an eight-foot minimum lane for parallel guest parking, in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  All entrance streets and other collector streets with parking on both sides shall have a minimum width of 36 feet. 
2.  Any collector street with no parking shall have a minimum width of 22 feet. 
3.  A minor or cul-de-sac street without parking shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
f.  Streets shall be adapted to the topography and shall have suitable alignment and gradient for safety of traffic, satisfactory surface and groundwater drainage, and proper functioning of sanitary and storm sewer systems. In addition, details must be submitted showing that storm sewers will be installed which are adequate to dispose of storm and surface drainage and which will connect to established storm sewers or suitable natural drainage courses together with any easements necessary therefor. 
g.  Paved sidewalks having a minimum width of three feet shall be provided on both sides of each street. 
(3)  Lot area per trailer. There shall be a minimum lot area for each trailer, which lot area shall not be less than 5,000 square feet; provided that in any mobile home or trailer coach park at least 20 percent of the lots shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet. Areas used for streets, sidewalks and onstreet parking shall not be considered part of the lot area. 
(4)  Proximity to other property. In no case may a mobile home or trailer coach be placed closer than 50 feet to another property outside the mobile home or trailer coach park. 
(5)  Parking spaces. The space between trailers may be used for the parking of motor vehicles, provided that such vehicles are to be parked at least ten feet from the nearest lot line. Car parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to meet the needs of the occupants of the property and their guests without interference with normal movement of traffic and in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Parking space shall be provided at the rate of at least one car space for each mobile home lot plus an additional car space for each three lots to provide for guest parking, for two car tenants and for delivery and service vehicles. 
b.  Required car parking spaces shall be located for convenient access to the mobile home stand, and insofar as practicable one car space shall be located on each lot and the remainder located in adjacent parking bays. 
c.  Each parking space on a mobile home or trailer coach lot shall have a minimum width of nine feet and minimum length of 20 feet and be set back 15 feet from the street. 
d.  Offstreet parking bays shall be constructed to meet the following requirements: 
Parking 
 angle Curb length 
per car Minimum bay length* Minimum backing length* 90 degrees  9 feet 18 feet 26 feet 60 degrees   12.5 feet 17 feet 20 feet 45 degrees   12.7 feet 16 feet 19 feet  
*Perpendicular to curbline. 
(6)  Utilities. 
a.  Every mobile home or trailer coach park shall provide a sanitary sewer system connected to the public sewer system and shall provide for connection of every mobile home or trailer coach to such sanitary system. 
b.  Every mobile home park shall provide water service to every mobile home or trailer coach from the public water system. 
c.  There shall be provided fire hydrants connected to the public water supply having at least the capacity of 500 gallons flow per minute. Such fire hydrants shall be so located that the maximum distance between any mobile home and the closest hydrant shall be 250 feet measured along the centerline of the street or streets between two fixed points on such centerline determined by projecting straight lines, at right angles to such centerline, from the location of the hydrant and the mobile home. 
(7)  Storm shelter. Every mobile home or trailer coach park shall provide one or more storm shelters of such size and capacity as to accommodate the residents of the park. Each such shelter shall be of construction approved to withstand tornadoes and shall have at least the south and west wall thereof entirely below grade and a roof of poured, reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Occupancy of park. 
a.  No mobile homes or trailer coaches shall be permitted within the "RMT" district except when located in a mobile home or trailer coach park on single or full multiple sites for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued. Such sites shall be permanently designated according to the dimensions on the plans submitted pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  No certificate of occupancy shall be given for the entire mobile home or trailer coach park until the work is fully completed according to the plan for the entire park submitted pursuant to this chapter and until a license has been granted by the state. If the work on a mobile home or trailer coach park has not been fully completed according to the plan submitted, but at least 25 percent of the sites shown on that plan have been completed and the roads, utilities and facilities serving those sites and the recreation area, common facilities and other facilities required by this chapter have been completed, a certificate of occupancy limited to a number of sites completed at the time of application may be issued. If an additional 25 percent or more of the sites in the original plan are completed at any time, a new certificate of occupancy for such sites may be issued in the same manner. Provided, that it shall not be necessary to complete the greenbelt required by section 94-344 in order to obtain a certificate of occupancy. Such greenbelt shall be planted within six months after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a mobile home or trailer coach park, the owner shall post a bond with a surety company authorized to do business in the state running to the city, or shall deposit cash in lieu thereof, such bond or deposit to be in the amount of $10,000.00 conditioned upon the fulfillment of the requirements of this chapter and shall be in addition to the bond or cash deposit for greenbelt required by section 94-344. 
(9)  Mobile home requirements. 
a.  No mobile home or trailer coach shall be occupied until it is inspected by the building inspector and approved for occupancy. If the mobile home or trailer coach, and the park in which it is located, comply with all ordinances of the city and statutes of the state, the mobile home or trailer coach shall be approved for occupancy. 
b.  No mobile home or trailer coach shall be permitted in any mobile home or trailer coach park unless it shall have a minimum of one flush toilet, lavatory, and shower or tub. The mobile home or trailer coach shall be connected to the sanitary disposal system, water system, electrical system and other utilities in accordance with the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
c.  No mobile home or trailer coach shall be permitted in any mobile home or trailer coach park unless within 30 days after the mobile home or trailer coach is moved into the park, it is completely enclosed between the ground and its bottom edge with solid aluminum skirting. 
d.  No equipment or other material shall be stored under any mobile home or trailer coach. 
e.  No mobile home or trailer coach shall be permitted in any mobile home or trailer coach park unless it is located on a pad of concrete at least four inches thick having dimensions at least equal to the exterior dimensions of the mobile home or trailer coach to be located on it. No mobile home or trailer coach shall extend beyond the edge of the pad on which it is located. 
(10)  Sale of mobile homes or trailer coaches. No sales of mobile homes or trailer coaches shall be permitted within a mobile home or trailer coach park except sales of mobile homes or trailer coaches which have been skirted and are occupied or approved for occupancy. Provided, that mobile homes or trailer coaches which have been skirted are approved for occupancy and are on a site or sites which have been landscaped, may be used as models for the sale of similar mobile homes or trailer coaches to be located in that mobile home or trailer coach park. No mobile home or trailer coach being used as a model shall be sold unless the purchaser, simultaneous with such purchase, also purchases the site on which it is located or enters into a written lease of such site for a period of at least one year. In no event shall any mobile home or trailer coach be sold within a mobile home or trailer coach park unless it is to be located within that park. No more than three signs relating to or used in connection with the sale of mobile homes or trailer coaches shall be permitted in any mobile home or trailer coach park. All signs used shall conform to the provisions of article XIV. 
(11)  Required recreation area. Every mobile home or trailer coach park shall provide a recreational area of at least eight percent of the total space occupied by the park. For purposes of this section, no lake, pond or unusable land shall be included as part of the required recreational area. 
(g)  Inspection fees. Each and every time a mobile home or trailer coach is located or relocated on a mobile home site within any mobile home park, and prior to the occupancy thereof, it shall be the duty of the owner of the mobile home park to notify the building inspector for the city and request an inspection. The building inspector shall promptly inspect or arrange for inspection of such mobile home as located or relocated for compliance with construction and safety standards established under the manufactured home construction and safety standards act (42 USC section 5401 et seq.), and to the extent applicable, the electrical code, mechanical code, building code and other laws and ordinances. To defray the costs of the inspection provided for in this subsection, there shall be levied against the mobile home park owner an inspection fee in the amount established by resolution of the city commission. Failure of the owner of any mobile home park to comply with the requirements of subsection (g) shall constitute a misdemeanor and render him liable to a criminal penalty for each such failure by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 71-155, 9-2-71; Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 72-178, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 74-207, 4-18-74; Ord. No. 86-339, § 1, 8-12-86; Ord. No. 88-367, § 10, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-175. - "ORP" district, office, research and parking. 
(a)  Intent. The "ORP" district, office, research and parking, is to provide suitable locations for certain uses, primarily of office, laboratory or parking character, which while needing easy access to and from major traffic routes are typically noncommercial and nonindustrial. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as expressly otherwise permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the "ORP" district, office, research and parking, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Office uses resulting from the following occupations: executive, administrative, scientific, scholarly, artistic, architectural, engineering, accounting, law, secretarial services, drafting, designing, real estate offices, sales representatives without sales of goods on premises, and other occupations highly similar in characteristics or activities. 
(2)  Research, development and testing laboratories and offices, without manufacturing, to serve the needs of commerce, industry, education or government, provided that the same do not produce noise discernible at the lot line exceeding the average intensity of the street and traffic noises at the lot lines, nor discernible vibration at the lot lines, nor the production of heat or glare discernible at the lot lines, nor the emission of noxious fumes or odors. 
(3)  Radio and television studios. 
(4)  Electronic data processing centers. 
(5)  Offstreet parking for passenger vehicles. 
(6)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(7)  Photographic studios with only incidental photographic processing. 
(8)  Churches and post offices. 
(9)  Funeral homes. 
(10)  Banks. 
(11)  Telephone exchange buildings. 
(12)  Public, private or trade schools. 
(13)  Federal, state or municipal administrative buildings, libraries, museums and art galleries. 
(14)  Hospitals. 
(15)  Nursing homes. 
(16)  Business offices for building trades or construction contractors. The premises shall be used solely for business office activities. There shall be no manufacturing, fabrication, sale or storage (indoors or outdoors) of products, goods or machinery on the lot at any time. No commercial vehicle larger than a regularly manufactured pickup or panel truck of one and one-half-ton capacity shall be parked or garaged on the lot at any time. 
(17)  Other uses determined by the zoning board of appeals to be similar to the permitted principal uses in this zone district and compatible with the intent of this zone district. 
(18)  Small animal clincs. 
(19)  Catering office and production center (single- or multi-tenant). 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal uses. The following uses accessory to the principal uses are permitted in the "ORP" district: 
(1)  In connection with existing residential uses, accessory uses as permitted in the "A" district as provided by section 94-167(c). 
(2)  In connection with parking as principal use, shelter for parking attendant not to exceed 64 square feet of usable floor area or 15 feet in building height. 
(3)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses shall be a permitted accessory use. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses of land and structures may be permitted as special exception uses within the "ORP" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by this section and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  Drugstore, florist, gift store, bookstore, music store, antique shop, card shops. 
(2)  Personal service establishments and small retail businesses of a type customarily found in, and to serve the occupancy of, an office building. 
(3)  Recreation uses such as parks, playgrounds, golf courses, ballfields, athletic fields and community centers. 
(4)  Child care centers, day care centers, child caring institutions, and child placing agencies. 
(5)  Housing for the elderly and independent living facilities. 
(6)  Fitness centers and health clubs. 
(7)  Outdoor recreation, commercial. 
(8)  Self-storage: Interior access. 
(9)  Government research, testing, and development laboratories. 
(10)  Government offices, public works facilities, fire stations, and police stations. 
(11)  Artisanal manufacturing (single- or multi-tenant). 
(12)  Minor recreation, commercial indoor. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "ORP" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "ORP" district, sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street. 
(Ord. No. 88-369, §§ 11, 12, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 95-467, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 96-491, §§ 12, 13, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-500, § 3, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 99-542, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 18-641 , § 2, 4-23-18) 
Sec. 94-176. - "C-1" district, local commercial. 
(a)  Intent. The "C-1" district, local commercial, is to provide neighborhood convenience shopping zones where retail stores may offer commodities and services for the everyday convenience of the neighborhood. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as expressly otherwise permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the "C-1" district, local commercial, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries, coffee shops, delicatessens and restaurants. 
(2)  Household appliance, radio and television shops. 
(3)  Hardware, paint and wallpaper stores. 
(4)  Bookstores. 
(5)  Florist, gift shops. 
(6)  Laundry pickup, automatic laundry, tailor shops, shoe repair. 
(7)  Barbershops, beauty shops. 
(8)  Clothing stores, dry goods stores, dress shops. 
(9)  Banks. 
(10)  Drugstores. 
(11)  Medical, dental or legal offices. 
(12)  Real estate or insurance offices. 
(13)  Churches. 
(14)  Public, private or trade schools. 
(15)  Federal, state or municipal administrative buildings, post offices, libraries, museums, and art galleries. 
(16)  Hospitals. 
(17)  Nursing homes. 
(18)  Other retail business or service uses determined by the board of zoning appeals to be similar to the permitted principal uses in this zoning district and compatible with the intent of this zoning district. 
(19)  Small animal clinics. 
(20)  Fitness centers and health clubs. 
(21)  Restaurants with outdoor service, provided all of the following apply: 
a.  Outdoor service area does not exceed 20 percent of the enclosed usable floor area of the building. 
b.  No alcoholic beverages are served. 
c.  No music is played or performed outdoors. 
d.  Hours do not extend before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal uses. Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses in the "C-1" district shall be a permitted accessory use. 
(d)  Special exemption uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses may be permitted as special exception uses within the C-1 district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  Child care centers, day care centers, child caring institutions and child placing agencies. 
(2)  Car washes, provided that the car wash complies with the following: 
a.  Structure. The washing of automobiles in a mechanized car wash shall be conducted within a building. The washing of automobiles in a manual (self-serve) car wash shall be under a roof supported by two walls. 
b.  Hours of operation. No mechanized car wash shall be operated or open to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. any day of the week. 
c.  Parking. A car wash shall provide an adequate stacking area, of at least three automobiles per bay, for patrons to wait in line for the next available bay. No car wash owner or operator shall permit automobiles to wait in or on any street. A mechanized car wash shall provide a designated parking area for employee parking. The designated parking area shall include a number of parking spaces equal to the maximum number of employees that may be employed at the mechanized car wash during any shift. 
d.  Vacuuming. A car wash that provides vacuuming services for the interior of vehicles shall comply with the following: 
1.  The vacuums shall be located in the rear or side yard. 
2.  The vacuums shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line for the parcel on which the car wash is located. 
3.  The vacuums shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential district or use. 
e.  Lighting. Any on-site lighting shall be shielded or otherwise directed away from adjacent properties. Poles or lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 35 feet. 
f.  Wastewater. Wastewater shall be filtered or otherwise cleansed so as to minimize the discharge of soap, wax, and any other liquids or solid matter into the public sewer. 
g.  Greenbelt. A car wash shall comply with the greenbelt requirements of section 94-344 of this chapter. 
h.  Exiting. In reviewing any plan for the use of a parcel for a manual or mechanized car wash as permitted by this subsection, the planning commission shall review each plan to ensure that the parcel contains an adequate amount of space for the exiting of vehicles from the car wash. 
i.  Other conditions. The planning commission may impose other conditions, consistent with article IX of this chapter, as determined necessary by the planning commission. 
(3)  Minor recreation, commercial indoor. 
(4)  Restaurants with an outdoor service area which include any of the following: 
a.  A total area used for outdoor service and seating which exceeds 20 percent of the enclosed usable floor area of the building. 
b.  Service of alcoholic beverages. 
c.  Performance or playing of outdoor music. 
d.  Hours which extend before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  Self-storage: Interior access. 
(6)  Artisanal manufacturing (single- or multi-tenant). 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "C-1" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "C-1" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  Except for car washes permitted by this chapter, all business, service or processing shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, provided that an outdoor display and sales area not to exceed 20 percent of the enclosed building area may be used for the display and sale of items normally exposed to the elements in their natural condition of location as to storage and use. Such display and sales area shall not diminish any required front yard setback or required parking area. This section shall not be construed as permitting outdoor storage in this district. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street. 
(Ord. No. 81-282, § 1, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 88-367, § 13, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 96-491, § 14, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-499, §§ 2, 3, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 97-500, § 4, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 99-542, § 2, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 18-641 , § 2, 4-23-18) 
Sec. 94-177. - "C-2" district, community commercial. 
(a)  Intent. The "C-2" district, community commercial, is to provide for the development of sound and efficient shopping and central business districts, a prime characteristic of which is a core of intense pedestrian activity. Most persons entering the district will come by automobile and typically will park once to carry out several errands. The economic welfare of merchandising activities in this district depends on intense development of comparison shopping with each establishment contributing to the whole shopping center by adding to the variety of goods available and to the comparison shopping opportunities. Office building activities are compatible with the purposes of this district if adequate and convenient automobile parking can be provided for both the office and the retail merchandising activities. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the "C-2" district, community commercial, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  The principal uses permitted in the "C-1" district, local commercial. 
(2)  Department stores. 
(3)  Hotels and motels. 
(4)  Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise or services in an enclosed building, except uses which tend to detract or interfere with a high intensity of pedestrian shopping activity, such exceptions including automobile sales, boat sales, mobile home sales and motorcycle sales. Permitted uses in this district include retail shops in which both a workshop and a retail outlet are required, such as interior decorating, dressmaking, tailoring, upholstering, radio and home appliance, photographic supplies and processing, subject to the provision that not more than 50 percent of the total usable floor area shall be used for servicing, repairing or processing activity. 
(5)  Telephone exchange buildings. 
(6)  Other uses determined by the board of zoning appeals to be similar to the permitted principal uses in this district and compatible with the intent of this zoning district. 
(7)  Enclosed theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, or enclosed stadiums or sports arenas. 
(8)  Radio and television studios. 
(9)  Fitness centers and health clubs. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal use in the "C-2" district is permitted in this district as an accessory use. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses may be permitted as special exception uses within the C-2 district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  Child care centers, day care centers, child caring institutions and child placing agencies. 
(2)  Car washes, so long as the car wash complies with section 94-176(d). 
(3)  Minor recreation, commercial indoor. 
(4)  Major recreation, commercial indoor. 
(5)  Outdoor recreation, commercial. 
(6)  Restaurants with an outdoor service area which include any of the following: 
a.  A total area used for outdoor service and seating which exceeds 20 percent of the enclosed usable floor area of the building. 
b.  Service of alcoholic beverages. 
c.  Performance or playing of outdoor music. 
d.  Hours which extend before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(7)  Self-storage: Interior access. 
(8)  Artisanal manufacturing (single- or multi-tenant). 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "C-2" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "C-2" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  All business, service or processing shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, provided that an outdoor display and sales area not to exceed 20 percent of the enclosed building area may be used for the display and sale of items normally exposed to the elements in their natural condition of location as to storage and use. The outdoor display and sales area shall not diminish any required front yard setback or required parking area. This section shall not be construed as permitting outdoor storage in this district. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street. 
(Ord. No. 81-282, § 1, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 88-367, § 14, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 96-491, § 15, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-499, § 4, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 99-542, § 3, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 18-641 , § 2, 4-23-18) 
Sec. 94-177-A. - Standale Downtown District. 
1.  Intent. The Standale Downtown District is intended to promote the redevelopment of property located within Standale in a manner consistent with the city master plan. The intent of this district is to facilitate the development of a traditional, pedestrian-oriented downtown. Forms and patterns of the built environment shall reflect the recommendations outlined in the master plan and meet the requirements of this section. 
Buildings containing retail and service uses on the first floor, and offices, services or residences on upper floors, shall be located along primary and secondary frontage areas. Such mixed-use buildings shall meet the urban design standards contained in this section and shall be linked to and complemented by integrated residential development within the District and nearby neighborhoods. 
Residential development in neighborhood frontage areas shall connect to the core downtown area; shall consist of single-family or multifamily residential units constructed using traditional neighborhood design principles; shall feature pedestrian-oriented streetscapes; and shall feature a system of neighborhood open spaces, all as defined in this Section. 
2.  Site plan review and special exception permits. 
(A)  All new buildings and alterations to existing buildings within this District are subject to site plan review by the city planning commission as follows: 
(1)  Where a new building is proposed, the building, use and lot shall be subject to all requirements of this district. 
(2)  Existing buildings shall undergo site plan review by the planning commission to apply the requirements of this district when the following additions or changes are proposed: 
a.  A footprint change of at least 5,000 square feet. 
b.  A front façade change of at least 50 percent of the façade area. 
c.  A change in building height. 
d.  A change in front, side or rear setbacks. 
e.  A change in land use that will generate significantly increased amounts of vehicular traffic or pedestrian trips, based on data from the ITE Trip Generation Manual or other professional references. 
(3)  In certain cases, the planning commission may limit the application of the architectural requirements of this district based on the following findings of fact: 
a.  The footprint change, façade alteration or change in building height cannot be made entirely consistent with the standards of this section because: 
i.  The existing structure is of an architectural type that is substantially different from buildings prescribed by this section. 
ii.  The changes, alterations or expansion are relatively minor in nature based on the size, scope, and location of the existing structure. 
(4)  The information required for site plans that are submitted for planning commission review shall include that contained in section 94-280. Standards for site plan review by the planning commission are those noted in section 94-283. Conditions of approval may be imposed on a site plan, as noted in section 94-285. Site plan reviews, approvals, changes to an approved site plan, performance guarantee requirements, variances and enforcement provisions shall be processed in accordance with sections 94-282, -286, -287, - 288, -289 and -290. 
(5)  Special exception permit applications shall be processed, reviewed and regulated as provided in article IX. 
3.  Scope of application. 
(A)  Frontage areas. Frontage areas are established within the Standale Downtown District that prescribe requirements for building form, lot dimensions, architectural design, parking lot location, access management and streetscape treatments. Each lot shall be regulated relative to its street frontage as follows: 
(1)  Primary frontage areas. Frontages within the district that abut Lake Michigan Drive or Wilson Avenue may only be commercial or mixed-use in nature. Because these roads are designated state highways, specific design details for access management, parallel service drives and front yard parking, as promulgated by the Michigan Department of Transportation and the city, will apply in the event of a conflict with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Secondary frontage areas. Frontages that abut streets other than Lake Michigan Drive or Wilson Avenue, (e.g., Kinney, Cummings, Parkside and St. Clair Avenues), including any new public or private roads proposed as part of a development, may only be mixed use in nature and must provide an environment that supports pedestrian activity and accommodate on-street parking. 
(3)  Neighborhood frontage areas. Frontages within the district that abut residential streets may only be used for residential purposes. A residential street defines a block where the majority of frontage is residential. 
(4)  [Establishment of frontage areas.] Frontage areas are established on a block-by-block basis and an individual street may be divided into separate frontage areas along its length. Opposing sides of a street shall have the same frontage area designation, which shall be consistent with the regulating plan map found at subsection (5)(u). 
(5)  For lots located at the corner of two intersecting street types, the frontage area may wrap the corner onto the other street frontage. For example, a building on a lot at the intersection of a primary frontage area and a secondary frontage area may be designed based on the requirements of the primary frontage area on both street frontages, as allowed by the planning commission. 
(6)  Civic or institutional use buildings may deviate from the dimensional requirements noted in this section, as allowed by the planning commission. 
(B)  Permitted uses, special exception uses and prohibited uses. Use and development of land within the district shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  The following abbreviations apply to the following Table of Uses: 
P: Permitted Use- Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. 
SE: Special Exception- The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special exception permit approval. 
NP: Not Permitted- The use is not permitted in the district. 
Use Primary 
Frontage 
Areas Secondary 
Frontage 
Areas Neighborhood 
Frontage 
Areas Auto/vehicle wash-Automatic tunnel SE NP NP Auto/vehicle wash-Manual NP NP NP Automobile service, repair and body work NP NP NP Banks with drive-up windows SE SE NP Banks P P NP Bar/night club SE SE NP Bicycle shops P P NP Bookstores P P NP Childcare centers, day care centers, child caring institutions, and child placing agencies SE SE SE Churches, places of worship P P SE Clinics-Medical, dental, veterinary P P NP Community centers P P NP Dry cleaners, laundromats P P NP Entertainment uses-Theaters, art studios, music studios, bowling alleys, assembly halls, fraternal organization halls, concert halls, etc. P P NP Farmer's market/produce market SE SE SE Food stores-Grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries, coffee shops, delicatessens, etc. P P NP Fueling/gas stations SE NP NP Funeral homes P P NP Government administrative, service and public safety buildings P P SE Hardware, paint and wallpaper stores P P NP Health clubs, gyms and fitness centers P P NP Hotels P P NP Household appliance and electronics shops/repair P P NP Housing for the elderly-Assisted or independent living facilities SE SE SE Liquor stores/party stores/convenience stores SE NP NP Libraries, museums and art galleries P P NP Live-work units P P NP Offices-Medical, dental, executive, professional, technical, legal, sales P P NP Outdoor sales of boats, cars, trucks, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, towing trailers, etc. NP NP NP Parking lot/park n' ride lot SE SE SE Personal service establishments-Tanning booths, barbershops, beauty shops, professional massage, nail salons, etc. P P NP Photographic studios with accessory photographic processing P P NP Post office P P NP Public or private schools or trade schools SE SE SE Regulated Uses Per article XIII of Walker Zoning Ordinance Residential units above first story P P P Residential units at first-story level SE P P Restaurants w/drive-up window NP NP NP Restaurants P P NP Retail uses-Clothing shops, department stores, drugstores, florists, gift stores, music stores, antique shops, home improvement stores, card shops, sporting goods, pet shops, etc. P P NP Townhouses NP P P Wireless telecommunication towers SE SE SE Other uses as approved by the planning commission, consistent with the standards and regulations of this district, the principles of the City of Walker "Downtown Standale" Master Plan, and the Standale Downtown Development Authority Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan.  
4.  Dimensional requirements. 
(A)  Primary frontage areas. The following requirements apply to lots that front on Lake Michigan Drive or Wilson Avenue: 
Lot Area Minimum of 5,000 square feet Lot Width Minimum of 50 feet Front Yard and Building Frontage Requirements 1) 4 Corners Intersection: For the purposes of this section, 4 Corners Intersection shall be defined as the lots near the intersection of Lake Michigan Drive and Cummings Avenue, as indentified on the regulating plan map found in subsection (5)(u) and subject to refinement by the planning commission. 2) The required build-to line for any 4 Corners Intersection building shall be parallel to the street and measure 25 feet from the back of the adjacent and existing curb line. The area within this setback shall include a ten-foot-wide greenbelt adjacent to the street and a 15-foot wide sidewalk adjacent to the building. See Figure 1. 3) The required build-to-line for all other buildings in the primary frontage zone shall be parallel to the street and measure 67 feet from the back of the adjacent and existing curb line. The area within this setback shall include: a seven-foot-wide greenbelt adjacent to the street; a six-foot-wide sidewalk adjacent to the greenbelt; a 24-foot-wide paved and curbed service drive; either 18-foot-deep angled or 90-degree parking spaces; and a 12-foot-wide sidewalk adjacent to the building. See Figure 2. 4) A building facade shall occupy a minimum of 75 percent of the lot frontage at the required build-to-line. The planning commission may reduce this requirement if an access drive to a rear parking, loading or maneuvering area is necessary. Such access points must be coordinated with driveway locations, as permitted by MDOT and the city. See Figures 3 and 4. Building Height Minimum 25-foot building height. 
Maximum 45-foot building height or three stories. 
The floor-to-ceiling height of the first story shall be a minimum of 12 feet. Accessory Buildings Accessory buildings shall only be located behind the principal building. All accessory buildings shall be reviewed by the planning commission via the site plan review process. Parking Lot Location  Parking or access drives parallel to Lake Michigan Drive shall not be permitted in the front setback for properties falling under the 4 Corners Intersection requirements of this district. In such cases, off-street parking shall only be permitted in side or rear yards.  All other properties in the district shall have angled parking located between the building and the fronting street. 90-degree parking spaces may be allowed if consistent with the overall circulation and access management plans for the district.  Off-street parking areas shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the lot area. Side Yard A side yard setback is not required, except that the planning commission may require pedestrian or vehicular access to the rear of the lot. If a side yard setback is provided it shall be at least six feet to accommodate pedestrian access and 24 feet for vehicular access. Rear Yard The planning commission may require pedestrian or vehicular access to the rear of the lot. If a rear yard setback is provided it shall be at least six feet to accommodate pedestrian access and 24 feet for vehicular access. The planning commission may require a 20-foot rear yard setback to buffer adjacent residential uses.  
(B)  Secondary frontage areas. The following requirements apply to lots in secondary frontage areas: 
Lot Area 5,000 square feet. Lot Width 50 feet. Front Yard and Building Frontage Requirements  Minimum 15-foot front yard setback. Maximum 20-foot front yard setback. Front setbacks shall be measured from the back of the adjacent street curb line in place on the date this code was adopted.  A minimum eight-foot sidewalk shall be provided in the front setback.  The building façade shall occupy no less than 60 percent of the frontage at the setback.  See Figures 5 and 6. Building Frontage Exceptions  Exceptions to the maximum front yard setback and building frontage requirements may be granted by the planning commission when the front yard is used for the following purposes:   º A gathering area or plaza that offers seating, landscape enhancements, public information and displays, fountains, outdoor seating or other pedestrian amenities.   º Intersection clear vision area.   º The building is used for public or quasi-public/institutional purposes with a plaza or open space area provided in the front yard. Side Yard A zero side setback may be permitted by the planning commission where a firewall is provided along the side lot line, subject to approval of the city building official, whose recommendation shall be based on applicable building code standards. The planning commission may require pedestrian and vehicular access to the rear of the lot. If a side yard setback is provided it shall be at least six feet for pedestrian access and 24 feet for vehicular access. Rear Yard The planning commission may require a pedestrian and vehicular access to the rear of the lot. If a rear yard setback is provided it shall be at least six feet for pedestrian access and 24 feet for vehicular access. A rear yard setback of 20 feet may also be required by the planning commission to buffer adjacent uses. Building Height Minimum 20-foot and two-story building height. 
Maximum 45-foot and three-story building height. 
The minimum first story floor-to-ceiling height shall be 12 feet. Accessory Buildings If authorized by the planning commission, accessory buildings may only be located behind the principal building and are subject to site plan review. Parking Lot Location  On-street parking spaces located along the front of a lot shall count toward meeting parking requirements. At least 51 percent of the length of the space must be in front of the lot to be counted.  Parking is permitted in the rear yard.  Parking in the side yard may not be located in front of a line extending across the front façade of the principal building. A three-foot-high brick screen wall or wrought iron fence with piers shall be provided between the parking and the public sidewalk. Openings may be provided to accommodate vehicular or pedestrian access but shall not be wider than 24 feet for vehicles or six feet for pedestrians.  Parking areas may not occupy more than 50 percent of the lot area.  See Figure 6.  
(C)  Neighborhood frontage areas. The following requirements apply to lots in neighborhood frontage areas: 
Lot Area/Density Townhouses/Attached Single-Family: Up to ten units per acre net. 
Detached Single-Family: Up to seven units per acre net. 
Senior facility/assisted living: As approved by the planning commission. Lot Width Townhouses/Attached Single-Family: Minimum 20 feet/Maximum 32 feet. 
Detached Single-Family: Minimum 50 feet/Maximum 100 feet. Front Yard Requirements Townhouses/Attached Single-Family: Minimum five feet. 
Detached Single-Family: Minimum 20 feet. Side Yard Townhouses/Attached Single-Family: No side yard between units, minimum 15 feet between buildings. Minimum 15-foot setback from any single-family lot. 
Detached Single-Family: Five-foot and ten-foot side setback minimums. Rear Yard Minimum 25-foot rear yard setback for principal buildings. Building Height Minimum 2 stories. 
Maximum three stories-Not including half stories. 
Maximum 35-foot building height. 
The first-floor elevation shall be at least three feet above the sidewalk elevation in front of the building. Accessory Buildings Detached garages and other accessory buildings are permitted only if located in the rear yard and setback at least three3 feet from the rear and side lot lines. Attached garages are permitted, provided the front of the garage is set back at least five feet behind the front façade of the building, and the garage wall facing the street is less than 50 percent of the total façade length of the street-facing dwelling unit. Parking Lot Location On-street parking shall be permitted and may be credited towards meeting off- street parking requirements. At least 51 percent of the length of the space must be in front of a lot in the development to be counted. If on-street parking is not utilized, the planning commission shall determine the appropriate location and number of parking spaces, based on the type of residential use that is proposed consistent with article XVI.  
(D)  Commercial, office and mixed-use architectural requirements. Commercial, office and mixed-use buildings in the district shall meet the following architectural design requirements: 
Commercial, Office and Mixed-Use Buildings Commercial, office and mixed-use buildings shall be designed to reflect traditional architectural elements and character via the following:  All buildings shall front onto a public sidewalk, exhibiting windows, doors, and architectural details that are customary to traditional storefronts, and be characterized by varying materials and appearances.  First-floor facades of commercial, office and mixed-use buildings shall, as determined by the planning commission, have:    Architectural variety in the form of offsets, lintels, expression lines or cornices;    Clearly defined and recessed entryways that orient to the street;    Display windows that orient street-level customers to merchandise;    Changes in texture, color or masonry pattern; pilasters, piers or columns;    Awnings, arcades, or covered porches that protect users from the weather. Commercial, Office and Mixed-Use Building Entrances  Commercial, office and mixed-use buildings shall have a main entrance located at street level, facing the street frontage. Main entrances shall be designed so that architectural details enhance their appearance and prominence and so that they are recognizable from the street and parking areas.  For buildings longer than 100 feet, a minimum of one functional entrance shall be located for every 50 feet of street frontage. Commercial, Office and Mixed-Use Corner Buildings The architectural character of a building situated at a corner shall incorporate accents and details that accentuate its prominent location. This can be accomplished by vertical projections or changes in height that are incorporated into the design. Included are features such as, by way of example, changes in roof design, a building peak, tower, or similar accent with the highest point located at the intersecting corner. Alternatively, a pedestrian plaza may be provided at the corner of the intersecting streets. A main entrance must be on a street-facing wall and either at the corner or within 25 feet of the corner. Commercial, Office and Mixed-Use Building Materials The following requirements apply to a façade facing a street or parking area. These requirements do not include areas devoted to windows and doors.  All walls exposed to public view from a street, or from a parking area, shall be constructed of not less than 75 percent modular brick or stone. Panel brick and tilt-up brick textured paneling are not permitted.  The remaining façade may include concrete block, wood siding or fiber cement siding. Exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS) may be used for architectural detailing above the first floor.  Multistory buildings shall be designed so that there is distinct architectural differentiation between the ground floor and the floors above. This can be achieved, by way of example, by incorporating differences in floor-to-ceiling heights, using an expression line, changing material or textures, or adding an awning or canopy between the first and upper stories. Commercial, Office and Mixed-Use Buildings  At least 60 percent of the storefront/ground floor façade shall be clear glass windows and doorways. Clear glass shall be transparent at the street level and possessing a measurement of greater than sixty (60) percent Visible Light Transmission (VLT).  Required window areas shall be either windows that allow views into retail space, working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall.  Reflective or tinted glass that impedes views into a building is prohibited. Windows shall not be covered with opaque materials or blocked by shelving units.  The bottom of a window must be no more than four feet above the adjacent exterior grade.  The front entranceway shall be inset a minimum of three feet from the front façade.  Window openings above the first story shall be a maximum of 30 percent of the total façade area. Windows shall be taller than wide in proportion. Commercial, Office and Mixed-Use Buildings Roof Design  Unless otherwise permitted by the planning commission, buildings shall have flat roofs, as viewed from the street.  The top of a building shall be clearly defined from the lower floors by a change in materials, such as a cornice line that is proportionate to the size of the building and length of the wall.  A pitched roof is permitted with the approval of the planning commission; provided, however, pitched and mansard roofs shall not be permitted if the eaves are less than 20 feet above grade.  All roof edges shall be accentuated in a manner proportionate to the size of the building and length of the wall.  Flat roofs must be enclosed by parapets.  All rooftop-mounted equipment must be enclosed or screened from view on all sides of a building.  Parapets and other screen treatments shall be composed of high-quality building materials and shall blend with the design of the building, as determined by the planning commission, in terms of color, materials, scale and height. Commercial, Office and Mixed-Use Buildings Awnings  Awnings may project over a public sidewalk if a minimum eight-foot vertical clearance is maintained and where a license has been obtained from the city where public right-of-way encroachment is proposed.  Awnings shall be traditional angled awnings with open sides and shall only be positioned directly above ground floor windows and doors.  Awnings shall be made of durable materials such as canvas or steel. High-gloss or plasticized awnings are prohibited. Awnings shall not be internally illuminated and any awning signs shall be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed downward.  
(E)  Residential architecture. Stand-alone townhouses, multifamily, and single-family residential buildings in the district shall meet the following requirements: 
Building design  Residential buildings shall reflect traditional architectural character and design, such as, but not limited to: Arts & Crafts, Colonial, Gothic Revival, Townhouses Italianate, Tudor, Victorian or other traditional regional styles as approved by the planning commission.  Identical or similar buildings or elevations may not be repeated more frequently than every sixth house along the same side of a street. Front façade  Residential buildings shall have a main entrance that faces the front lot line.  Single-family homes and townhomes shall have a front porch or front stoop with steps. A front stoop or porch (plus steps) shall not extend closer than three feet to the sidewalk.  The front façade of all residential units shall be at least 15 percent windows or doors.  The finished floor elevation shall be no less than three feet and no more than seven feet above the exterior sidewalk elevation in front of the building or from the ground elevation. Building material All buildings shall utilize high-quality exterior building materials that are in keeping with traditional architectural styles. Allowed materials include brick, stone, wood and fiber cement siding. Vinyl siding is not permitted on the front façade, but is allowed on side and rear façades.  
(F)  Streetscape requirements: An interconnected street, service drive and sidewalk network shall be provided that unifies convenient access to businesses, living areas and community facilities. 
Primary Frontage Areas Parallel service drive width 24-foot aisle (excluding 4 Corners Intersection) Service drive parking Angled or 90-degree parking with depth of 18 feet for stalls. (excluding 4 Corners Intersection) Sidewalks Sidewalks adjacent to Lake Michigan Drive or Wilson Avenue shall be a minimum six feet wide concrete and provided on both sides of the street. A 12- to 15-foot wide sidewalk shall be located adjacent to the front of the building. Street trees One three-inch-caliper canopy tree shall be planted for every 50 feet of frontage within a seven-foot-wide parkway located between the sidewalk and the main street. Street lights Pedestrian-scale ornamental street lighting shall be provided along all sidewalks and within parking areas. Street lighting shall be no more than 20 feet high, spaced appropriately and fully shielded. Consistency with established street lighting fixtures in the DDA will be determined by the planning commission based on the proposed fixture location and function. Secondary Frontage Areas Street width Per street design standards of the city. Right-of-Way width Minimum 66 feet. On-street parking Permitted as angled or parallel, as supported by the street. Sidewalks Sidewalks shall be a minimum eight feet wide, concrete and provided on both sides of the street. The planning commission may require a wider sidewalk where frontages will be occupied by uses having outdoor activities such as sidewalk cafes. Street trees One three-inch-caliper canopy tree shall be planted for every 40 feet of frontage. Tree grates are encouraged. Street lights Pedestrian-scale ornamental street lighting shall be provided along all sidewalks and within parking areas. Street lighting shall be no more than 20 feet high, spaced appropriately and fully shielded. Consistency with established street lighting fixtures in the DDA will be determined by the Planning Commission based on the proposed fixture location and function. Neighborhood Frontage Areas Street width Per street design standards of the city. Right-of-Way width Minimum 60 feet. On-street parking Permitted on both sides. Sidewalks Sidewalks shall be a minimum six feet wide, concrete and provided on both sides of the street. Sidewalks shall be seven feet wide where they abut a parking space or a road. Street trees One three-inch-caliper canopy tree shall be planted for every 40 feet of frontage. Street lights Pedestrian-scale ornamental street lighting shall be provided along all sidewalks and within parking areas. Street lighting shall be no more than 20 feet high, spaced appropriately and fully shielded. Consistency with established street lighting fixtures in the DDA will be determined by the planning commission based on the proposed fixture location and function.  
5.  Supplemental standards. 
(a)  Drive-up windows. Accessory drive-up windows are only permitted with special exception use approval by the planning commission for pharmacies and banks. All other drive-up window uses are prohibited. There shall be no more than two drive-up window stalls per use. The drive-up window area shall be located on the side or rear of the principal building. 
(b)  Live/work units. Live/work units are dwelling units attached by common side walls and where the main floor is designed to accommodate a small business with upper floors utilized as living space. The first floor of each unit shall be designed to accommodate office or retail use within a commercial storefront at grade with the sidewalk. The upper floors shall be designed to accommodate a dwelling unit that functions as a single family unit. Live/work units shall meet the design standards applicable to mixed-use buildings. 
(c)  Street design standards. All streets shall meet city street design standards and requirements. Traffic calming measures such as bump-outs may be permitted, as determined by the planning commission upon recommendation from the city engineer, at intersections, crosswalks and at intermediate points along long blocks to enhance pedestrian safety. 
(d)  Traffic calming. The use of traffic-calming devices such as raised intersections, lateral shifts, and knockdowns are encouraged as alternatives to conventional traffic control measures. 
(e)  Alleys. Alleys are permitted in all areas of the district and may be required by the planning commission where determined necessary to provide access to parking lots, loading areas or garages at the rear of dwelling units. Alleys that access residential garages shall have a minimum pavement or concrete width of 20 feet and be located within a 30-foot wide easement. Alleys accessing commercial parking lots and loading areas shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide of paved or concrete surface. 
(f)  Sidewalk cafes. A minimum width of 15 feet of sidewalk from the curb to the front wall shall be maintained for uses with outdoor seating or temporary display areas. Pedestrian circulation and access to the building entrance shall not be impaired by tables, chairs, and other encumbrances. Prior to such use in a public right of way, a license must be obtained from the city. 
(g)  Street connections. An interconnected street network and street connections shall be provided to all parcels within the district. Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets are prohibited unless expressly permitted by the planning commission based on findings of necessity due to physical, natural or engineering restraints. 
(h)  Street furniture. Benches and trash receptacles shall be provided in park and plaza areas, at public transit stops and along sidewalks. 
(i)  Bicycle facilities. The district shall be designed to accommodate and promote bicycle travel by providing bike paths, bike lanes, and bike racks at destination points. 
(j)  Street trees. Street trees shall be planted in a manner appropriate to their size and shape at full maturity. Trees planted along primary and secondary frontages shall complement building façades, shade the sidewalk and frame the streetscape. Tress planted along neighborhood frontages shall provide a canopy shading both the street and sidewalk and serving as a visual buffer between the street and homes. 
(k)  Parking. 
(1)  [Parking standards.] The parking standards contained in article XVI of the city zoning ordinance shall apply; however, the planning commission may modify these standards based on the following factors: 
(a)  The location of and number of spaces in nearby public shared parking lots; 
(b)  The location of and number of spaces in nearby shared private parking lots; and 
(c)  A phased development plan that reserves areas for deferred parking spaces. 
(2)  Deferred parking. The planning commission may approve deferring the construction of the required number of parking spaces if the areas proposed for deferred parking are shown on the site plan and are sufficiently large to construct the required number of parking spaces in accordance with an approved site plan and the standards of this section. 
(a)  Based on findings that the full complement of parking is needed, all or part of a deferred parking shall be constructed by the site owner, if required by the planning commission. 
(3)  Parking limitations. 
(a)  The proposed number of parking spaces shall not exceed the minimum parking space requirements established in this section by more than ten percent. The planning commission may grant additional spaces beyond those permitted. In granting additional spaces, the planning commission must determine that the parking area otherwise permitted will be inadequate to accommodate the minimum parking needs of the particular use and that additional parking will be required to avoid overcrowding. The actual number of permitted spaces shall be based on professionally documented evidence of the parking demand for the specific land use. 
(b)  Shared parking areas. 
(1)  The planning commission may approve a shared parking arrangement for two or more uses to utilize the same off-street parking facility where the operating hours of the uses do not significantly overlap and where assurance of viability of the arrangement is provided in writing to the planning commission. 
(2)  Required parking shall be calculated based on the use that requires the greatest number of spaces. 
(c)  On-street parking. On-street parking, except on Lake Michigan Drive and Wilson Avenue, shall be permitted in the district. 
(d)  Loading areas. Loading areas shall be provided as appropriate and necessary as determined by planning commission. The planning commission may allow shared loading areas and waste receptacles between adjacent uses where reasonable shared use and maintenance easements are provided. All loading areas shall be screened from any adjacent residential areas and from view of any street by a six-foot-tall brick wall. 
(l)  Open space requirements. 
(1)  Standale Downtown District developments shall be designed to create cohesive community neighborhoods through a network of open spaces such as parks, plazas and common areas for passive or active recreation and resident interaction. All site plan submissions shall include an open space and landscaping plan that provides all of the following: 
(a)  Residential open space. Developments dedicated to residential uses shall set aside a minimum of 15 percent of the land area for open space, which shall contain some form of active recreational facility, such as a park, garden or play area. Recreational improvements such as playground equipment, benches, picnic tables, gazebos and pathways shall be provided by the site developer. 
(b)  Nonresidential open space. Developments dedicated to nonresidential or mixed-use shall set aside a minimum of ten percent of the land area for open spaces such as sidewalks, plazas, common areas or parks. The planning commission may permit a portion of the required open space to be transferred into an adjacent residential area that is part of the same development. 
(c)  Focal point. The required open space in a block shall include at least one area that provides a focal point for the district, such as the provision of a central square, landscaped plaza, common green or cultural feature. The focal point design and location shall be determined by the planning commission. The site developer shall install the focal point as part of an approved site plan. 
(d)  Natural areas. The planning commission shall require natural areas with significant mature woodlands, wetlands or landmark trees to be preserved as open space, or otherwise incorporated into the development's design, to ensure the preservation of these natural features. 
(m)  Public art. Art shall be incorporated in the form of sculptures, fountains or murals as part of the open space system, within sidewalk plazas and along sidewalks, at highly visible locations. 
(n)  Signs. 
(1)  The sign regulations in article XIV do not apply to properties in the district, except as noted herein. 
(2)  Pylon/pole/freestanding signs and directional signs are not permitted in the district. 

(3)  Wall signs, awning signs, canopy signs, blade or projecting signs and sandwich board signs, (or A-frame signs) are permitted in the district per the standards of sections 94-406 and 94-410. Blade and projecting signs may project four feet over the public sidewalk with a minimum ten-foot vertical clearance above the sidewalk. Sandwich board signs (or A-frame signs) may be placed on the sidewalk but shall not block pedestrian passage. 
(4)  Ground/monument signs for a public/civic use, business center or residential complex may be permitted after planning commission review and approval. Ground/monument signs shall consist of masonry construction materials with street address numbers displayed. 
(5)  Signs shall not blink, flash, spin or move in any manner. 
(6)  Digital / electronic reader boards of any type are not allowed. 
(7)  New signs or physical changes to existing signs will require a sign permit from the city community development department. 

(o)  Mixed use required for large lots. Consistent with the regulating plan, any project site that is larger than ten acres shall provide a mixture of uses, such that no less than 30 percent of the total land area is residential. For the purpose of this district, a site shall constitute a single parcel or multiple adjacent parcels under single ownership and shall include sites that are developed in phases or subdivided for separate development. 
(p)  Civic uses. Sites developed with civic uses (e.g., schools, post office, libraries, government offices, parks) shall exhibit architectural treatments and design qualities that are unique and exceptional in order to serve as cornerstones of the district. As such, the planning commission may permit modifications to the dimensional and building height requirements of this district as part of the site plan review. In considering the modifications, the planning commission shall consider the design of civic buildings, the location of parking areas and the relationship of the site to the streetscape and adjacent buildings and uses. 
(q)  Greenbelts and buffer zones. 
1.  The buffer zone requirements contained in section 94-334 shall not apply in the district, except at the district's outer perimeter. Where a use within the district adjoins a use that is outside of the district, then the buffer zone requirements of Section 94-334 shall be met. 
2.  Low-level brick walls and wrought iron fences with intermittent brick piers and low-level landscaping shall be used adjacent to sidewalks and parking areas where appropriate to provide internal buffers and to define pedestrian movement areas. 
(r)  Outdoor display and storage. Permanent and long-term outdoor display or storage of inventory or product is not permitted in this district. Outdoor display or storage of inventory or product is only permitted as part of a special sale or event, following receipt of a temporary use permit from the city community development department in accordance with the standards of article XVIII. 
(s)  Modifications. The planning commission may approve deviations to the architectural requirements and dimensional requirements of this section to achieve the objectives of this district through the use of creativity and flexibility in development and design. Each modification shall require a finding that the design standard deviation sought will enhance the public interest and will not detract from the overall legislative intent and regulatory tone of this district. 
An applicant seeking a design standard deviation shall submit elevation drawings of the proposed building that is superimposed on a color drawing or photograph of the entire block showing the relation of the proposed building design to other buildings along the block. This submittal may be utilized by the planning commission to evaluate the proposed building design deviation. Approvals of deviations shall be based upon the following standards and findings: 
1.  The building design standard deviation is consistent with the desired character of the Standale Downtown District, as articulated in the city master plan. 
2.  The proposed building fits within the context of adjacent or proposed buildings along the block. 
3.  The building remains oriented towards the front sidewalk and maintains or enhances the continuity of the pedestrian environment. 
4.  The roof design remains in character with other buildings along the block and is within the minimum and maximum height requirements of the district. 
5.  The exterior finish materials remain of equal or better quality and durability as those otherwise required in this district. 
6.  Ground floor windows remain along the front sidewalk to maintain the pedestrian orientation of the streetscape. 
7.  Upper story windows are compatible with the rhythm and proportions of windows on other buildings along the block. 
(t)  Other regulations. All proposed developments shall be in accordance with other applicable regulations of the City Code. Where a conflict exists between the requirements of the district and the requirements of another article of the zoning ordinance, then the requirements of the district shall govern. 

(Ord. No. 10-588, § 5, 10-11-10; Ord. No. 11-602, §§ 6, 7, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 13-611, § 5, 1-28-13 ) 
Sec. 94-178. - "C-3" district, highway commercial. 
(a)  Intent. The "C-3" district, highway commercial, is to encourage the construction or continued use of land for commercial and service uses and to provide for orderly development and concentration of such uses to satisfy the needs of modern commercial development where access is entirely dependent upon the automobile and to provide suitable locations for such activities which function relatively independently of intensive pedestrian traffic and proximity to other firms. Typical activities in this district require direct automobile traffic access and visibility from the road and sufficient depth to provide for vehicle parking, but this district is not intended to accommodate, and permitted uses exclude, outdoor sales establishments. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as expressly otherwise permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the "C-3" district, highway commercial, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  The principal uses permitted in the "C-1" district, local commercial. 
(2)  Indoor retail sales and service. 
(3)  Offices and telephone exchange buildings. 
(4)  Motels and hotels. 
(5)  Self-service laundry and dry cleaning facilities. 
(6)  Automobile repair, minor. 
(7)  Indoor places of public assembly. 
(8)  Milk distribution stations. 
(9)  Retail building supplies. 
(10)  Other uses determined by the board of zoning appeals to be similar to the permitted principal uses in this zoning district and compatible with the intent of this zoning district. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses in the "C-3" district shall be a permitted accessory use. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses may be permitted as special exception uses within the C-3 district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  Child care centers, day care centers, child caring institutions and child placing agencies. 
(2)  Car washes, so long as the car wash complies with section 94-176(d). 
(3)  Regulated uses, per article XIII of this chapter. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "C-3" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the "C-3" district, the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  All activities shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street. 
(Ord. No. 77-232, § 4, 4-12-77; Ord. No. 86-343, § 1, 10-28-86; Ord. No. 88-367, § 15, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 96-491, § 16, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-499, § 5, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 99-542, § 4, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 10-588, § 6, 10-11-10) 
Sec. 94-179. - "C-4" district, outdoor commercial. 
(a)  Intent. This district is to provide for commercial establishments of the type that conduct all or a substantial portion of their operations, including display of merchandise, out-of-doors or commercial uses not permitted in other commercial districts. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as expressly otherwise permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the "C-4" district, outdoor commercial, shall be used, erected, altered or converted, or land used in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  The principal uses permitted in the "C-1" district, local commercial. 
(2)  Drive-in restaurants. 
(3)  Gasoline service stations. 
(4)  Produce markets. 
(5)  Automobile repair, minor. 
(6)  Outdoor theater or drive-in theater. 
(7)  Nursery, shrubbery and garden supply centers. 
(8)  Telephone exchange buildings. 
(9)  Other uses determined by the board of zoning appeals to be similar in character to the permitted principal uses in this zoning district and compatible with the intent of this zoning district. 
(10)  Car washes, provided that the car wash complies with the provisions of subsections 94-176(d)(1)a. through g. and that the automobile exit from the building of a mechanized car wash and the automobile exit from any bay in a manual (self-serve) car wash shall be at least 75 feet from the nearest edge of the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal uses. Any use customarily incidental to the permitted uses shall be a permitted accessory use. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses may be permitted as special exception uses within the C-4 district if approved by the planning commission as provided in article IX: 
(1)  Child care centers, day care centers, child caring institutions and child placing agencies. 
(2)  Liquor store/party store/convenience store to be operated with an SDD and/or SDM license, or similar off-premises liquor license, from the state. 
(3)  Regulated uses, per article XIII of this chapter. 
(e)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses of land and structures may be permitted as special exception uses within the "C-4" district if approved by the planning commission as provided by this section and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  Sales and service of mobile homes, manufactured homes (as defined by 42 USC section 5402, as amended from time to time), trailer homes, or "campers"; 
(2)  Automobile, truck, boat, and related vehicle sales including, without limitation: 
a.  Indoor automobile, truck, boat, and related vehicle sales and repair in connection with such outdoor operations; 
b.  Sales of repossessed automobiles, trucks, boats, and related vehicles; and 
c.  Display of automobiles, trucks, boats, and related vehicles incidental to their sale; 
(3)  Farm machinery and implement sales. 
These uses may be approved as special exception uses subject to the following requirements. 
a.  In addition to the general authority of the planning commission to impose conditions pursuant to section 94-251, the planning commission may, when necessary to satisfy the standards prescribed by section 94-250, impose conditions on the parking and location of vehicles on the premises including, without limitation, conditions relating to: 
1.  The minimum number of parking spaces, including, without limitation, the minimum number of spaces for display of vehicles; 
2.  Unobstructed ingress and egress to parking spaces by defined drives and traffic lanes identified on the approved site plan; 
3.  A prohibition on the parking or location of vehicles on the premises other than in the parking spaces identified on the approved site plan; 
4.  The maximum number of vehicles which may be displayed on the premises at any time; and 
5.  Any other conditions related to parking or location of vehicles on the premises. 
In exercising the power to impose these conditions, the planning commission may impose more stringent requirements than otherwise required by this chapter. 
b.  Vehicles displayed or intended to be displayed for sale or which are otherwise delivered to the premises, vehicles of employees, and any other vehicles related to the use of the premises for the purposes identified in subsection (d) above (except customer vehicles) shall not be parked or located at any time within the public right-of-way. 
For purposes of this section, the term "sale" or "sales" shall include, without limitation, sales, leases, and any other transactions in which consideration is transferred. 
(f)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the "C-4" district are contained in the tabular summary of the schedule of district regulations, except that gasoline service station pumps and unenclosed gasoline service station canopies approved for a structure by the building inspector may be so placed that there is a minimum distance of 15 feet between the front property line and the closest part of the first island containing pumps and between the front property line and the closest part of the canopy. 
(g)  Additional requirements. In the "C-4" district, sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street. 
(Ord. No. 72-178, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 85-327, § 1, 12-23-85; Ord. No. 86-343, § 2, 10-28-86; Ord. No. 88-367, § 16, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 93-420, § 1, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 96-491, § 17, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-499, § 6, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 99-542, § 5, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 09-571, § 2, 4-13-09; Ord. No. 10-588, § 7, 10-11-10) 
Sec. 94-180. - "ML" district, light industry. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the ML district, light industrial, are intended to provide for various types of light industrial and manufacturing uses, wholesale businesses, warehouses, and other uses compatible with one another and with surrounding land uses, and with an absence of objectionable external effects. Permitted uses are characterized by low maximum usable floor area percentages, substantial setbacks, environmental sensitivity, and creative site design. The regulations are defined to exclude uses which would have a detrimental effect upon the orderly development and functioning of the district, as well as surrounding land uses. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the ML district shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Industrial plants manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treating, or assembling the following: 
a.  Agricultural products, including but not limited to, the production in greenhouses of flowers, plants, shrubs, trees, or other similar living products. 
b.  Food and kindred products including meat, dairy, fruit, vegetable, seafood, bakery, confectionery, beverage, and similar products (but not including slaughtering of animals, or rendering or refining of fats and oils). 
c.  Furniture and fixtures. 
d.  Printing, publishing, and allied industries. 
e.  Electrical machinery, equipment and supplies, electronic components and accessories. 
f.  Engineering, measuring, optical, medical, scientific, photographic, and similar instruments and goods. 
g.  Cut stone and stone products related to monuments. 
(2)  Industrial plants manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treating or assembling of materials or products from previously prepared materials the following: 
a.  Textile mill products, including woven fabric, knit goods, dyeing and finishing, floor coverings, yarn and thread, and other similar products. 
b.  Apparel and other finished products including clothing, leather goods, furnishing and canvas products. 
c.  Lumber and wood products including mill work, prefabricated structural work products and containers. 
d.  Paper and paperboard containers and products. 
e.  Biological products, drugs, medicinal chemicals and pharmaceutical preparations. 
f.  Glass products. 
g.  Jewelry, silverware and plated ware; musical instruments and parts; toys, amusement, sporting, and athletic goods; pens, pencils, and other office and artist supplies and materials; notions; and signs and advertising displays. 
h.  Pottery and figurines and other ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay. 
i.  Fabricated metal products, except heavy machinery and transportation equipment. 
(3)  Animal hospitals, kennels, and small animal clinics, provided that kennels allowed by this subsection shall comply with the provisions of section 94-171(d)(1) of this chapter. 
(4)  Wholesale businesses, including automotive equipment, drugs, chemicals, dry goods, apparel, food, farm products, electrical goods, hardware, machinery, equipment, metals, paper products and lumber. 
(5)  Warehousing, refrigerated and general storage. 
(6)  Laundries, laundry services, and dry cleaning and dyeing plants, excluding retail/service outlets serving the general public. 
(7)  Office buildings for executive, administrative, professional, accounting, drafting, and other similar professional activities. 
(8)  Research and development facilities, including production activities, which shall be limited to 50 percent of the floor area of the principal building. 
(9)  Trade or industrial schools. 
(10)  Emergency medical services. 
(11)  Mineral mining, consisting of the excavation and removal of peat, gravel, sand, clay, or other soils, including overburden; the transporting of those materials on a mining site; or the reclamation of the mining site after removal or excavation of the materials. 
(12)  New building materials sales and storage, including building trade contractors, and related storage yards. 
(13)  Automobile repair, major. 
(14)  Other uses determined by the board of zoning appeals to be similar to the permitted principal uses in this zoning district and compatible with the intent of this zoning district. 
(15)  Artisanal manufacturing (single- or multi-tenant). 
(16)  Catering office and production center (single- or multi-tenant). 
(17)  Contractor's shop (single- or multi-tenant). 
(18)  Self-storage: Interior access. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal uses. The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses in the "ML" district: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses in the "ML" district. 
(2)  A lunchroom or cafeteria located on the site of a permitted "ML" principal use, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Use of the lunchroom or cafeteria shall be limited to owners or employees of the principal use and persons on the premises for a business purpose related to the principal use; and 
b.  The lunchroom or cafeteria shall not be open or advertised in any way to the public, and shall not be identified to the public by any sign, on or off the premises. 
(d)  Special exception uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. The following uses may be permitted as special exception uses within the ML district if approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-167(d) and as provided by article IX: 
(1)  Mineral processing and material storage, in accordance with the requirements of article IX of this chapter, including those of section 94-254. 
(2)  Automated dispensing fuel depot system for automotive fuels. 
(3)  Child care centers and day care centers. 
(4)  Churches. 
(5)  Community center. 
(6)  Movie studio. 
(7)  Online auction operations. 
(8)  Recycling/composting operations. 
(9)  Fitness centers and health clubs. 
(10)  Minor recreation, commercial indoor. 
(11)  Major recreation, commercial indoor. 
(12)  Outdoor recreation, commercial. 
(13)  Self-storage: Exterior access. 
(14)  Government research, testing and development laboratories. 
(15)  Government offices, public works facilities, fire stations, and police stations. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the ML district are contained in section 94-188 of this chapter. 
(f)  Additional requirements. In the ML district the following additional requirements must be met: 
(1)  All uses located within this district shall be so designed, constructed and operated that the requirements of the performance standards of article XV are met. 
(2)  All permitted principal and special exception uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for loading and unloading operations, and the on-site parking of vehicles, or as otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(3)  Outside storage of materials, equipment, or vehicles is permitted, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Materials may be stored only in the side or rear yards, except that materials may not be stored on the street side of the corner lot. In no case shall materials be stored in any required yard, as regulated in section 94-188. 
b.  All storage of materials shall be visually screened to a height of at least six feet above the elevation of the nearest adjacent road or property. Such screening shall consist of either a decorative fence, wall, or greenbelt (in accordance with section 94-344), or a combination of these materials. 
c.  In no case shall the outside storage of material be stacked higher than the height of the visual screen. 
d.  One nongated opening, no greater than 12 feet in width, shall be permitted in the screen for each 200 feet of property frontage on a public street. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street. 
(5)  No parking of employee vehicles or trucks is permitted in any front yard, except as screened in strict accordance with the requirements of the buffer zone, landscaping, parking and lighting ordinance (section 94-344(d)), as demonstrated in Figure 2, except that parking accessory to a building which has a front wall width of greater than 150 feet shall be screened in accordance with the "Type C" buffer described therein: 
Such screen shall not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage ways, or obstruct vision for safety of ingress and egress to the parking area. 

(6)  Parking of employee vehicles and trucks is prohibited within the first 25 feet of any property line shared with properties in any residential zoning district. 
(7)  In the event of a conflict between the requirements of section 94-180(f)(5) and/or 94-180(f)(6) and 94-468(3), the requirements of section 94-180(f)(5) and 94-180(f)(6) shall prevail. 
(8)  Internal parking areas in excess of 25 spaces shall be landscaped in accordance with the following: 
a.  A minimum of 100 square feet of landscaped area shall be provided within the parking area for every 15 parking spaces, or part thereof. 
b.  The minimum size of a landscaped area shall be 60 square feet, and at least six feet in width. 
c.  Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass or other living ground cover, wood mulch, or native stone. 
d.  Landscaped areas shall be constructed so as to prevent damage by any surrounding vehicle. All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised curb. 
e.  Minimum plant sizes at the time of installation shall conform to the following: 
Deciduous canopy tree 21/2-inch caliper Deciduous ornamental tree 2-inch caliper Evergreen tree 6 feet in height Deciduous shrub 2 feet in height Upright evergreen shrub 2 feet in height Spreading evergreen shrub 24 inches spread  
(9)  Waste dumpsters shall be screened on all sides by a continuous, opaque screen at least six feet in height. The screen may be comprised of berms, plant material, screen walls or fences, or any combination of these elements. Gates shall be kept closed except when the waste dumpster is being utilized or serviced. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 79-267, § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. No. 86-343, § 3, 10-28-86; Ord. No. 88-359, § 3, 3-8-88; Ord. No. 88-367, §§ 17, 18, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 90-384, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 91-390, § 1, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 91-395, §§ 5, 6, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 94-456, § 2, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 95-466, §§ 1-3, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 96-491, § 18, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 97-500, § 5, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 97-503, § 2, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 98-526, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 99-533, § 1, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 01-476, § 1, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 10-588, § 2, 10-11-10; Ord. No. 11-602, § 4, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 16-631 , § 1, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 18-641 , § 2, 4-23-18) 
Sec. 94-181. - "MH" district, heavy industry. 
(a)  Intent. The regulations of the MH district, heavy industrial, are intended to provide for various types of industrial and manufacturing uses, and other uses compatible with one another and surrounding land uses, with the absence of objectionable external effects. While the uses permitted in the MH district are intended for more intensive industrial uses than those permitted in the ML district, the regulations are intended to limit uses which would have a detrimental effect upon the orderly development and functioning of the district, as well as surrounding land uses. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the MH district shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for: 
(1)  Any principal use allowed in the ML light industrial district. 
(2)  Mineral processing and material storage, provided that the use complies with the requirements of section 94-254. 
(3)  Automated dispensing fuel depot system for automotive fuels. 
(4)  Truck terminals. 
(5)  Electroplating. 
(6)  Plastic manufacture. 
(7)  Industrial plants manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treating or assembling from previously prepared materials the following: 
a.  Fabricated metal products, including heavy machinery, and transportation equipment. 
b.  Rubber products, including tires, footwear, and other fabricated rubber products. 
(8)  Other uses determined by the board of zoning appeals to be similar to the permitted principal uses in this zoning district and compatible with the intent of this zoning district. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal uses. The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses in the "MH" district: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses in the "MH" district. 
(2)  A lunchroom or cafeteria located on the site of a permitted "MH" principal use, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Use of the lunchroom or cafeteria shall be limited to owners or employees of the principal use and persons on the premises for a business purpose related to the principal use; and 
b.  The lunchroom or cafeteria shall not be open or advertised in any way to the public, and shall not be identified to the public by any sign, on or off the premises. 
(d)  Special exception uses. The following uses of land and structures may be permitted as special exception uses within the MH district as provided by this section and article IX: 
(1)  Junkyards. 
(2)  Movie studio. 
(3)  Online auction operations. 
(4)  Recycling/composting operations. 
(e)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements of the MH district are contained in section 94-188 of this chapter. 
(f)  Additional requirements. The uses in the MH district will be subject to the same additional requirements as noted in the ML district, subsection 94-180(f). 
(Ord. No. 79-267, § 2, 8-28-79; Ord. No. 88-367, §§ 19, 20, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 91-395, §§ 7, 8, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 94-456, § 3, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 95-466, §§ 4, 5, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 98-513, § 3, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 99-534, § 1, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 01-476, § 2, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 10-588, § 3, 10-11-10; Ord. No. 11-602, § 5, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 94-182. - "MP" district, industrial park. 
(a)  Intent. The "MP" district, industrial park, is intended to permit and control the development of preplanned, exclusively industrial areas and research and development centers with reasonable protection from encroachment by retail commercial, residential and other incompatible land uses. It is intended for land which is not substantially developed or land which is developed but where it is proposed to raze buildings and redevelop. It is intended that reasonable protection will be afforded to adjacent uses. 
(b)  Principal uses. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no building or part of a building in the "MP" district, industrial park, shall be used, erected, altered or converted or land used, in whole or in part, except for the principal uses permitted in the "ML" district under section 94-180(b) and the special exception uses permitted in the "ML" district under section 94-180(d). 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses to principal use. Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal use in the "MP" district shall be a permitted accessory use. 
(d)  Minimum area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for an "MP," industrial park district shall be as provided by this section. 
(1)  The minimum area of an "MP" district, industrial park, shall be 20 acres. 
(2)  The minimum size of any individual lot within an industrial park shall be 40,000 square feet, and the minimum dimension in width at the building line shall be 200 feet. 
(3)  To preserve the park-like character of an industrial park district, the normal yard and location restrictions shall be expanded as follows: 
a.  Front yard. Where it is intended to utilize the front yard area for parking passenger vehicles, buildings with a front wall width of 150 feet or less shall be set back at least 70 feet, of which the front 25 feet shall be landscaped; and buildings with a front wall width of over 150 feet shall be set back at least 100 feet, of which the front 35 feet shall be landscaped. Where the front yard is not to be used for parking, the total front yard area shall be landscaped and buildings with a front wall width of 150 feet or less shall have a front yard of at least 35 feet; and buildings with a front wall width in excess of 150 feet shall have a front yard of at least 45 feet. 
b.  Side yard. Where a side yard fronts on a street, the requirements for side yards shall be the same as the requirements for front yards as set forth in subsection (d)(3)a. Interior side yards shall have a width equal to the height of the outside wall of the building, but in no case less than 20 feet, except where a common wall is shared between adjacent owners. Where adjacent owners elect to construct a common wall, the side yard on the common wall side shall be waived, but the front yard setbacks shall be based on the sum of the width of the front walls of the two structures. 
c.  Rear yard. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 35 feet, except where the property abuts residentially zoned land, in which case a rear yard setback of 50 feet is required. 
(4)  The maximum building height for principal and accessory uses within an "MP" industrial park shall be the same as provided by the schedule of district regulations in section 94-188 for maximum building height within the "ML" light industry zone district. 
(e)  Additional requirements. The design, construction, and operation of all uses located within the "MP" district shall meet the performance standards of article XV. In addition, all uses shall conform to section 94-180(f)(2). 
(f)  Development plans and restrictive covenants. 
(1)  Before any development in the "MP" district, a development plan for the entire proposed industrial park shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval. The development plan submitted to the planning commission shall include: 
a.  A topographic map showing contour lines at five-foot intervals. 
b.  A plot plan of the proposed industrial park showing the lot layout, the location of all present and proposed streets, alleys, utilities and easements. 
c.  A description of the proposed industrial operations in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, water pollution and air pollution, fire hazards, and any other safety hazards. 
d.  A description of all billboards to be located in the industrial park; the general arrangement of railroad spur tracks, access points and buffer strips; and the relation of the tract of land to surrounding property. 
e.  Engineering plans for the treatment and disposal of any industrial wastes or sewage. 
f.  Any additional information that is deemed by the planning commission to be reasonably necessary to adequately evaluate the proposed industrial park development and its effects on the city. 
(2)  Before any development is commenced in the "MP" industrial park district, there shall also be submitted to the planning commission the restrictive covenants to be placed upon the land to ensure its development in accordance with the development plan. 
(g)  Planning commission review and approval of industrial park developments; procedures, standards and requirements. 
(1)  The application, the proposed development plan and the restrictive covenants to ensure development in accordance with the plan shall be filed with the planning director, who shall transmit those materials to the planning commission. The application, plan and restrictive covenants must be filed at least 30 days prior to the planning commission hearing at which they are first to be considered. 
(2)  The planning director shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission on the application and the proposed development plan. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as required by Section 103 of Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2006, as amended, as amended. Unless otherwise required under this chapter, public hearing as described herein shall not be required for individual site plan requests for future development in industrial parks. Review of such requests should be processed under the procedures of article X and, if necessary, article IX, of this chapter. 
(3)  At the public hearing before the planning commission, the applicant shall present evidence regarding the following characteristics of the proposed industrial park development: 
a.  The general character and substance of the proposed development. 
b.  The objectives and purposes to be served by the development. 
c.  Compliance with applicable regulations and standards. 
d.  The scale and scope of the development. 
e.  Development schedules. 
f.  Compliance with the city's general development plan, and the effect of the proposed development on the city's general development plan. 
g.  The impact of the development on public utilities, facilities or services, on surrounding properties, and on the natural environment. 
h.  The economic impact of the development on surrounding property values or the city as a whole. 
i.  Status of ownership or control of the development such that there is a single person or entity having responsibility for completing the development in conformity with the approved plan. 
(4)  At the public hearing, or within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the planning commission shall take the following actions: 
a.  The planning commission shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions, the industrial park development request. 
b.  The planning commission shall prepare a report stating its conclusions on the industrial park development request, the basis for its decision, and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision. 
(5)  The planning commission's report as required by subsection (g)(4)b. shall include its determination as to whether the proposed industrial park development as described by the development plan meets the following standards: 
a.  The proposed development shall conform to the city's general development plan. 
b.  The proposed development shall conform to the intent and to all applicable regulations and standards of this chapter. 
c.  The proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage courses, water and sanitary sewer facilities, refuse disposal, or the persons or agencies responsible for the proposed development shall be able to provide the facilities and services, in a manner acceptable to the planning commission. 
d.  The common open space, any other common properties, individual properties, and all other elements of the proposed development are planned so that they will achieve a unified open space system with open space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to each other, the site, and the surrounding land. 
e.  The location of the proposed uses, layout of the site, and its relation to streets giving access to it, shall be such that traffic to, from, and within the site and assembly of persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the project or the surrounding area. In applying this standard, the planning commission shall consider, among other things, convenient routes for pedestrian traffic, the relationship of the proposed project to main thoroughfares and street intersections, and the general character and intensity of the existing and potential development of the surrounding area. 
f.  The mix of industrial uses shall be compatible. 
g.  The planning commission shall determine that noise, odor, light or other external effect from any source whatsoever, which is connected with the proposed use, will not adversely affect adjacent and neighboring lands or uses. 
h.  Streets shall follow topography, be properly spaced, and be located and aligned in accordance with the intended function of each street. The property shall have adequate access to public streets. The plans shall provide for logical extensions of public streets and shall provide suitable street connections to adjacent parcels, where applicable. 
i.  Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety and welfare of the users of the industrial park development and the users or occupants of the surrounding area. 
(6)  Reasonable conditions may be required by the planning commission in conjunction with the approval of an industrial park development for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased services and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety and welfare of individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole, and shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this article, and be related to the objective of ensuring compliance with the standards of this article. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the record of the approved industrial park development plan. 
(7)  No construction, grading, tree removal, soil stripping, or other site improvements or changes shall commence, and no construction permits shall be issued for all or any phase of an industrial park development until the application, development plan and restrictive covenants have been approved by the planning commission as provided by this section. Further, no construction of buildings or structures or any other site improvement or changes shall be made except in strict compliance with the development plan approved by the planning commission. 
(h)  Commencement and completion of construction. Construction shall be commenced within two years following approval by the planning commission of a plan for all or any phase of an industrial park development project. Each phase of a multi-phase project shall be commenced within two years of the schedule established for the phase by an approved application. If construction is not commenced within that time, any approval of the plan shall expire and be void. However, the planning commission may grant an extension for a specified period upon a showing of good cause, if the request for an extension is made prior to the expiration of the initial period. If the approval has expired and no extension has been granted, a new application for approval shall be required where determined necessary by the planning commission. The new application shall be reviewed in light of then existing and applicable provisions of law and ordinance. 
(i)  Amendment of approved development plan. An approved industrial park development plan shall not be varied or modified in any respect without an amendment approved by the planning commission. An application for proposed amendment to a development plan shall be reviewed, and denied, approved, or approved with conditions by the planning commission under the procedure prescribed for the original submittal and review of the development plan. 
(j)  Performance guarantees. Performance guarantees to ensure compliance with an approved industrial park development plan and conditions of approval may be required by the planning commission at the time of approval of the plan as authorized under section 4e of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. 
(k)  Fees. Fees shall be paid at the time of filing of the application for approval of an industrial park development project. The amount of the fees shall be established by the city commission by resolution. No part of any fee paid shall be refundable. 
(l)  Violations. An approved industrial park development plan shall have the full force and effect of this chapter. Any violation of an approved plan shall be grounds for the city to order that all construction be stopped, and to order that building permits and certificates of occupancy be withheld until the violation is removed or adequate guarantee of removal of the violation is provided to the city. Further, violations of any approved plan, or failure to comply with any requirements of this section, including agreements, conditions of approval, or restrictive covenants, shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 85-321, § 7, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 86-336, § 1, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 86-338, § 3, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 88-367, §§ 18, 21, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 95-458, § 1, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 16-634 , § 2, 1-9-17) 
Sec. 94-183. - "RPUD-1" district, low density residential planned unit development. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the "RPUD-1" district to encourage more imaginative and livable housing environments within that district, through a planned reduction, or averaging, of the individual lot area requirements for a planned unit development, provided that the overall density requirements for the planned unit development remain the same. Such averaging or reduction of lot area requirements shall only be permitted when a landowner, or group of owners acting jointly, can plan and develop a tract of land as an entity and thereby qualify for regulation of that tract of land as one complex land use unit in accordance with an approved final area site plan as provided by article VIII, rather than an aggregation of individual buildings located on separate, unrelated lots. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Subject to subsection (d) and the planning commission's authority to prohibit uses pursuant to subsection 94-213(3)j., the following uses of land and structures may be permitted within a low-density residential PUD as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, the planned unit development regulations contained in article VIII: 
(1)  Any permitted use in the "A" and "A-2" districts. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses as permitted in the "A" and "A-2" districts. 
(3)  Special exception uses as permitted in "A" and "A-2" districts, as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
(4)  Golf courses, tennis clubs and athletic clubs, when combined with any residential use. 
(c)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within an "RPUD-1" district shall be determined by the planning commission upon application for approval of a planned unit development as provided by, and subject to the requirements of, sections 94-214 and 94-215 of this chapter. 
(d)  Final area site plan approval required. No permits for any development or use of property included within an "RPUD-1" district shall be issued until a final area site plan has been approved by the planning commission, as required by article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 71-150, § 5.16, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 87-356, § 1, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 92-409, § 1, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 05-531, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 94-184. - "RPUD-2" district, high density residential planned unit development. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the "RPUD-2" district to encourage more imaginative and livable housing environments within that district, through a planned reduction, or averaging, of the individual lot area requirements for a planned unit development, provided that the overall density requirements for the planned unit development remain the same. Such averaging or reduction of lot area requirements shall only be permitted when a landowner, or group of owners acting jointly, can plan and develop a tract of land as an entity and thereby qualify for regulation of that tract of land as one complex land use unit in accordance with an approved final area site plan as provided by article VIII, rather than an aggregation of individual buildings located on separate, unrelated lots. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Subject to subsection (d) and the planning commission's authority to prohibit uses pursuant to subsection 94-213(3)j., the following uses of land and structures may be permitted within an "RPUD-2" high-density residential PUD as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, the planned unit development regulations contained in article VIII: 
(1)  Any permitted use in the "ARM" district. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses as permitted in the "ARM" district. 
(3)  Special exception uses as permitted in the "ARM" district, as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
(4)  Multiple housing with more than four dwelling units. 
(5)  Golf courses, tennis clubs and athletic clubs. 
(6)  Any permitted use within the "C-1" local commercial district, provided that any such commercial use must be primarily intended for the use and patronage of the development's residents, and provided further that the gross area designated for such commercial use including parking, accessways, and yards or open space shall not exceed five percent of the total usable floor area of the residential development. In addition, no use provided for in this subsection shall be constructed until not less than 30 percent of the dwelling units proposed in the development have been completed. 
(c)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within an "RPUD-2" district shall be determined by the planning commission upon application for approval of a PUD as provided by, and subject to the requirements of, section 94-214 and section 94-216. 
(d)  Final area site plan approval required. No permits for any development or use of property included within an "RPUD-2" district shall be issued until a final area site plan has been approved by the planning commission, as required by article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 71-150, § 5.17, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 87-356, § 1, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 92-409, § 2, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 05-531, § 2, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 94-185. - "CPUD" district, commercial planned unit development. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the "CPUD" district to allow design flexibility in accordance with an approved final area site plan as provided by article VIII of this chapter and to encourage development compatible with surrounding or abutting uses, with suitable open spaces, landscaping and parking areas. Further, it is the intent of the "CPUD" district to conserve the value of property which includes optimum utilization of areas devoted to commercial use together with protection of the immediate environment, both existing and intended, by the city's general development plan; to promote a more complete urban design which includes necessary community service and employment opportunities conveniently located and attractively designed; and to encourage creative and imaginative approaches in the development of commercial elements of the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Subject to subsection (d) and the planning commission's authority to prohibit uses pursuant to subsection 94-213(3)j., the following uses of land or structures may be permitted within a CPUD as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, the planned unit development regulations contained in article VIII: 
(1)  Any permitted use within the "ORP," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3" and "C-4" districts. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses as permitted in the "ORP," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3" and "C-4" districts. 
(3)  Special exception uses as permitted in the "ORP," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3" and "C-4" districts as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
(c)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within a "CPUD" district shall be determined by the planning commission upon application for approval of a planned unit development as provided by, and subject to the requirements of, section 94-217. 
(d)  Final area site plan approval required. No permits for any development or use of property included within a "CPUD" district shall be issued until a final area site plan has been approved by the planning commission, as required by article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 71-150, § 5.18, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 87-356, § 1, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 88-370, § 1, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 92-409, § 3, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 05-531, § 3, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 94-186. - "MPUD" district, mixed use planned unit development. 
(a)  Intent. The "MPUD" district is intended to permit the integrated development of significant residential-use components mixed with commercial uses otherwise permitted in the "ORP," "C-l," "C-2" or "C-3" district or to allow a use otherwise permitted in the "ORP," "C-l," "C-2" or "C-3" districts to be incorporated as an integral part of a residential development, in accordance with an approved final area site plan as provided by article VIII. 
This section is intended to provide greater flexibility for large or small projects that combine residential and commercial uses in an innovative way within a single integrated development. The vertical or horizontal mixing of commercial and residential uses is allowed. However, the mixing of uses shall be carefully designed in order to create the following: 
(1)  An interconnected and hierarchical system of streets and service drives. 
(2)  A pedestrian-friendly environment via the use of sidewalks, trails, paths and traffic calming devices. 
(3)  A sustainable pattern of building location and form that enables longterm site desirability, viability and the continued use of onsite structures. 
(4)  A system of passive, active and natural open space areas, subject to the physical attributes and regulatory limitations of the site. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Subject to subsection (d) and the planning commission's authority to prohibit uses pursuant to subsection 94-213(3)j., the following uses of land or structures may be permitted within an "MPUD" district as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements, of the planned unit development regulations contained in article VIII: 
(1)  Any use permitted by right or by special exception in the "ORP," "C-l," "C-2" or "C-3" districts in combination with residential uses permitted by right or by special exception in the "A", A-2", and "ARM" districts, in a single integrated development. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses as permitted in the "ORP," "C-l," "C-2," "C-3" or "ARM" districts. 
(c)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within an "MPUD" district shall be determined by the planning commission upon application for approval of a planned unit development as provided by, and subject to the requirements of, section 94-218. 
(d)  Final area site plan approval required. No permits for any development or use of property included within an "MPUD" district shall be issued until a final area site plan has been approved by the planning commission, as required by article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 71-150, § 5.19, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 87-356, § 1, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 92-409, § 4, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 05-531, § 4, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 06-548, § 1, 10-9-06) 
Sec. 94-187. - "IPUD" district, industrial planned unit development. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the "IPUD" district to permit and control the development of comprehensively planned industrial areas and research and development centers; to encourage development of comprehensively planned industrial areas that are compatible with surrounding or abutting uses, exhibit low to negligible levels of negative external impacts such as noise, dust, smoke, etc., and are enhanced with suitable buffering, landscaping and parking areas; and to allow design flexibility and creative approaches in the development of industrial elements of the city in accordance with the city's master plan and an approved final area site plan as provided by article VIII. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Subject to subsection (d) of this section and the planning commission's authority to prohibit uses pursuant to subsection 94-213(3)j., the following uses of land or structures may be permitted within an "IPUD" district as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, the planned unit development regulations contained in article VIII: 
(1)  Any use permitted by right or by special exception in the "ML" district. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses as permitted in the "ML" district. 
(3)  Industrial manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treating or assembling from previously prepared materials the following: 
a.  Fabricated metal products, including heavy machinery and transportation equipment. 
b.  Plastic products. 
(c)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within an "IPUD" district shall be determined by the planning commission upon application for approval of a planned unit development as provided by, and subject to the requirements of, section 94-219. 
(d)  Final area site plan approval required. No permits for any development or use of property included within an "IPUD" district shall be issued until a final area site plan has been approved by the planning commission, as required by article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 92-409, § 5, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 05-531, § 5, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 07-550, § 1, 3-26-07) 
Sec. 94-188. - Schedule of district regulations. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 94-166, the area, height, bulk and placement requirements for principal and accessory uses, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be as follows: 
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
Zoning district Maximum Usable Floor Area Front Yard Side Yard Feet Rear Yard Feet Stories Minimum Lot Size Minimum lot width 
R1 single-family residential 35 35(11) 10 20 25 35 21/2 11,880  90 
R2 duplex, two-family residential 35  35(11) 10 20 25 35 21/2 13,000 100 
RA suburban residential single-family 35  35(11) 10 25 35 35 21/2 11,880  90 
RS suburban residential, single-family 35  35(11) 10 25 50 35 21/2 25,000 125 
Ag agricultural 35  35 10 25 50 35 21/2 1 acre 180(2) 
RM residential, multiple-family 40  50 15 35 40 35 21/2 
RMH mobile home or trailer coach park (3)  50 25 50 50 35 21/2 
ORP office, research and parking 40  35 10 25 35 35 21/2 12,150  90 
C-1 local commercial  35 (4) (4) (5) 35 21/2 12,000  50 
C-2 community commercial 200 15 30 (5) 35 21/2 5 acres 400 
C-3 highway commercial 100 15 30 (5) 35 21/2 20,000 150  
C-4 outdoor commercial  75 35 70 (5) 35 21/2 40,000 200 
ML light industry 60  40 (6) (7) (8) 45 3 40,000 100 
MH heavy industry 60  50 (6) (7) (9) 45 3 80,000 200 
P-SP district, public- semi-public 35 30 60 30 35 
MP industrial park See section 94-182 for requirements 
CPUD commercial planned unit development See Sec. 94-217(d) for requirements 
IPUD industrial planned unit development See Sec. 94-219(d) for requirements 
MPUD mixed use planned unit development See Sec. 218(d) for requirements 
RPUD-1 low density residential planned unit development See Sec. 94-215(b) for requirements 
RPUD-2 high density residential planned unit development See Sec. 94-216(b) for requirements  

(b)  Notes to schedule of district regulations: 
(1)  Measured from the edge of the street right-of-way to the principal building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches. 
(2)  To permit subdivision into two lots when water and sewer services are available, provided side yard and other requirements can be met. 
(3)  The distances in the schedule of district regulations govern the location of buildings other than trailer coaches and mobile homes. For trailer coaches and mobile homes, the following shall be met: 
a.  No mobile home or trailer coach shall be placed closer than ten feet from the right-of-way of a public street or alley or closer than 15 feet from the inside edge of the sidewalk adjacent to a private street. 
b.  A side yard of ten feet shall be maintained, except that a completely enclosed structure which is attached to a trailer coach or mobile home and not used for living purposes may be located not less than five feet from the side lot line. In addition, there shall be at least ten feet between each mobile home or tailer coach and its accessories including, but not limited to, full storage containers, storage sheds, cabanas and porches, and the closest neighboring mobile home or trailer coach or any of its accessories. 
c.  There shall be a rear yard of at least 15 feet on each mobile home or trailer coach lot. 
d.  Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet and a minimum width of 50 feet, measured at the foremost portion of the trailer coach or mobile home. The width shall be the length of the shortest line which can be drawn between the two side lot lines and across the foremost portion of the trailer coach or mobile home. Provided, however, that the 50-foot width shall not apply to lots which have their only access onto a cul-de-sac, are within 100 feet of the closed end of the cul-de-sac and are not corner lots. 
(4)  No side yard is required if access is available from the rear through an alley or other means for fire and service vehicles; otherwise, a side yard is required and any side yard shall provide a minimum area of 15 feet. 
(5)  A rear yard of at least 24 feet is required where property abuts any residential or agricultural district; provided, that when an alley separates the commercial district from the residential or agricultural district the full alley width shall be counted as part of the required rear yard. 
(6)  The side yard shall be equal to the height of the building or 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
(7)  The total side yards required pursuant to subsection (b)(6). 
(8)  Twenty feet or the building height, whichever is greater, except that a rear yard of 50 feet is required when abutting residentially zoned land. 
(9)  Twenty feet or the building height, whichever is greater, except that a rear yard of 100 feet is required when abutting land zoned other than "MH" heavy industry. 
(10)  Accessory buildings-See section 94-352. 
(11)  If more than one-half of the dwellings on 500 feet of either side of a proposed residential building have uniform front yard setbacks either greater or lesser than required in that district by this chapter, and the lots upon which those dwellings are located encompass more than 40 percent of the property located within 500 feet of either side of the lot on which the residential building is proposed, the setback line of the proposed residential building shall be the same as such uniform setback line. Provided, that no such setback line shall unreasonably restrict the use of such property; and provided further that no new residential building shall have a front yard less than 75 percent of the front yard required in that district, and none shall be required to have a front yard greater than 125 percent of the front yard required in that district. 
(12)  When more than one-half of the buildings on 500 feet of either side of a proposed commercial building have uniform front yard setbacks either greater or lesser than required in that district by this chapter, and the lots upon which those buildings are located encompass more than 40 percent of the land on 500 feet of either side of the lot on which the building is proposed, the setback line of the proposed commercial building shall be the same as such uniform setback line. Provided, that no such setback line shall unreasonably restrict the use of such property; and provided that no new commercial building shall have a front yard less than 75 percent of the front yard required in that district. 
(13)  Whenever a single-family residential dwelling is constructed within the "A-2" duplex district, two-family residential, the minimum lot size may be 11,880 square feet and the minimum lot width may be 90 feet. 
(14)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any building or structure constructed upon any property adjacent to an interstate or other limited access highway shall maintain a rear or side yard setback from such highway right-of-way equal to the height of the building or 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
(15)  Minimum lot size width in feet (as shown in the schedule of district regulations) shall be measured at the street right-of-way line, except that in the A, A-2, S and SA Districts it may be measured at the minimum front yard setback line if the lot width measured at the street right-of-way line is at least 60 feet and in the A, A-2, and SA Districts and is at least 85 feet in the S District and: 
a.  Any part of the front lot line abuts a curved street right-of-way line at the terminus of a cul-de-sac (only the lots marked "a" on Figure 1 meet this criteria); or 
b.  Any part of the front lot line abuts the exterior of a curved street right-of-way line and the interior angle of the abutting curved street is not more than 105 degrees. The interior angle of a curved street is the angle formed by extending the centerline of the street in a straight line from the points where the abutting curve begins as shown on Figure 4. (Only the lots marked "b" on Figure 4 meets this criteria.) 

(16)  An open front porch or an attached deck, as provided for in section 94-352a, is permitted on the front of a residential dwelling, provided that an open front porch or attached deck is set back at least 25 feet from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 72-178, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 77-240, § 2, 9-13-77; Ord. No. 78-251, §§ 3, 4, 9-12-78; Ord. No. 79-268, § 1, 11-13-79; Ord. No. 86-338, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 94-445, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 95-458, § 2, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 96-483, § 1, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 96-485, § 1, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 97-502, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 04-514, § 2, 7-12-04; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Secs. 94-189-94-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 94-211. - Purpose. 
    The provisions of this article provide requirements and standards for the submission, review and approval of applications for planned unit developments (PUD). The PUD regulations are designed to accomplish the objectives of this chapter through a land development project review process based on the application of site planning criteria to achieve integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the project area. These PUD regulations are intended to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development; encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout and type of structures constructed; achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy and the provision of public services and utilities; encourage provision of useful open space; and provide adequate housing, employment and shopping opportunities particularly suited to the needs of the residents of the city. Further, it is the purpose of the planned unit development regulations to promote the intent and purpose of this chapter, and to ensure that the land use or activity authorized shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use. The provisions of this article are not intended as a device for ignoring this chapter or the planning upon which it has been based. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88) 
Sec. 94-212. - Objectives. 
    The objectives, principles, and standards of this article are intended to guide the applicant in the preparation of preliminary and final area site plans, consistent with the purposes stated in section 94-211. They shall be used as the basis for the evaluation of the plans by the planning commission and shall be considered in reviewing any application for a PUD to ensure a quality of construction commensurate with other developments within the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88) 
Sec. 94-213. - Planned unit development application, review and approval procedures. 
    The procedures contained in this section shall be followed when applying for the approval of any planned unit development as provided for by this article. 
(1)  Preapplication conference. 
a.  Prior to the submission of an application for planned unit development approval, the applicant shall meet with the planning director and the city engineer, together with such consultants as either the city or the applicant deem appropriate. The planning director shall invite officials from other departments of the city who might have an interest in the proposed development, or who might assist the city in the review process. The purpose of the meeting is to inform city officials of the concept of the proposed development and to provide the potential applicant with information regarding land development policies, procedures, standards and requirements of the city in terms of the proposed development. Statements made in the course of a preapplication conference shall not be legally binding commitments. 
b.  At the preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit a general sketch plan of the proposed planned unit development, accompanied by other maps and by written statements sufficient to convey the following information: 
1.  A legal description of the property in question; 
2.  A recent map of the site, reflecting area size and boundary line dimensions; 
3.  The total number of acres in the project; 
4.  Existing and proposed land uses and their approximate locations; 
5.  A statement of the approximate number of residential units, the approximate number and type of nonresidential units, and the approximate number of acres to be occupied by each type of use; 
6.  The approximate net residential density and expected final population of the proposed PUD; 
7.  The number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space, and the general location of any such proposed open space or public use areas; 
8.  Existing floodplains, bodies of water and other unbuildable areas, and all known natural resources and natural features to be preserved; 
9.  Circulation patterns, including pedestrian walkways and arterial, collector or local streets; 
10.  An explanation of the character of the PUD, the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the PUD regulations, the manner in which it reflects the "purpose" and "objectives" of planned unit developments as stated in sections 94-211 and 94-212, and its conformance to the city's general development plan; 
11.  A statement of ownership or option to purchase of all lands within the proposed PUD; 
12.  A general indication of the expected schedule of development, including phases of development, if any; and 
13.  Any other maps, plans, site data, or information that the applicant wishes to submit to explain the proposed development. 
(2)  Preliminary area site plan requirements. After completion of the preapplication review, ten copies of a preliminary area site plan shall be submitted to the planning director who shall transmit the same to the planning commission. A preliminary area site plan shall consist of (i) a map or maps and (ii) accompanying written materials, as required by this section. 
A preliminary area site plan shall include a map or maps on a scale of one inch equaling not more than 100 feet. The map or maps must provide the following information: 
a.  Dimensions of the land, including width, length, acreage and frontage. 
b.  Existing zoning and zoning of all adjacent properties within 500 feet. 
c.  A topographical map or maps showing present and proposed elevations at contour levels of not more than five feet. 
d.  Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes, streams and wetlands. 
e.  A description of the development including: 
1.  The type and location of all uses. 
2.  The acreage allocated to each use. 
3.  The general location of proposed building areas. 
4.  Density calculations and the number and types of residential units. 
5.  A general description of all proposed nonresidential uses, including the types of stores and offices, hotels, motels, etc. 
6.  The approximate square footage that will be devoted to office or retail purposes, and the approximate number of rooms in any proposed hotels or motels. The information related to square footage and number of rooms should be provided in sufficient detail to determine the demand for water, sewer, and transportation facilities that will result. 
7.  The general location and size of all proposed open spaces, including preserves, recreational areas, and the like, and each purpose proposed for such areas. For purposes of this article, "open space" means an area designed and intended for use or enjoyment of residents of the PUD or of the general public. Open space may contain accessory structures and improvements necessary or desirable for recreational, cultural, or other noncommercial uses. Open space shall not include streets, rights-of-way, parking areas or commercial areas. 
8.  The approximate location and description of proposed water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage systems. 
9.  All known natural resources and natural features to be preserved. 
10.  A general landscape plan showing woodlands and vegetation to be preserved or added, topography, and similar features. 
11.  The location and right-of-way width of existing streets and the proposed general location of public and/or private streets or drives. 
12.  The general location of all proposed parking areas and number of spaces. 
13.  The general location and area of each development phase of a multi-phased development. 
14.  The general location of any buffer zones, berms and fences. 
15.  The general location of any outdoor commercial activities, including, but not limited to, outdoor display and sales. 
In addition to the required map(s), a preliminary area site plan shall include written materials which contain the following information: 
f.  The owner's name and address; and the applicant's name and address, if other than the owner. 
g.  The name of the proposed development. 
h.  The name, address, city and phone number of the firm and of the individual who prepared the plan. 
i.  The common description and complete legal description of the property. 
j.  A statement of ownership or option to purchase of all lands within the proposed PUD. 
k.  A development and construction schedule indicating: 
1.  The approximate date for commencement of construction. 
2.  Stages or phases in which the project will be built and the expected starting and completion dates of each stage. 
l.  A general description of the organization(s) or individual(s) who will own and maintain all land areas within the PUD, including common open space. 
m.  A general description of the types of buildings to be constructed, including the number of units per building, proposed building heights, and the type of ownership proposed (i.e., individually owned or rental). 
n.  The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD. 
o.  A statement of intent to subdivide under the subdivision regulation ordinance of the city (chapter 74). 
p.  An explanation of the manner in which the PUD has been planned to take advantage of the PUD regulations, the manner in which it reflects the purpose and objectives of planned unit development as stated in sections 94-211 and 94-212, and its conformance to the city's general development plan. 
q.  Freestanding/pylon, ground-mounted and wall signage plans, showing all setbacks and dimensions and describing all exterior construction materials. 
(3)  Planning commission review and approval of PUD preliminary area site plans; planning commission review and recommendation of petition to rezone to PUD district. 
a.  An application for PUD approval shall require submission of a preliminary area site plan consisting of the map(s) and accompanying written materials as required by subsection (2). In addition, if the site of a proposed PUD has not previously been rezoned as a PUD district, as provided by section 94-183, 94-184, 94-185 or 94-186 of this chapter, the applicant must apply for the necessary rezoning as a part of the application for PUD approval. A petition to rezone to a PUD district shall not be required as a part of an application for PUD approval if the site of a proposed PUD has previously been rezoned and is appropriately classified as a PUD district as required by this article at the time the application for preliminary area site plan approval is submitted. 
b.  An application for PUD approval for a parcel of land may be made by the owners of record or by any persons acting on behalf of the owners of record of the subject parcel. The applicant shall have a substantial interest in the subject property prior to filing for a PUD district classification, and such filing shall be in the name of and signed by all owners. 
c.  The application shall be filed with the planning director who shall transmit the preliminary area site plan and the petition for rezoning to the planning commission. The application must be filed at least 30 days prior to the planning commission hearing at which it is first to be considered. Fees shall be paid to the city treasurer; no transmittals shall be made unless the required fees have been paid in full. 
d.  The planning director shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission on the plan and petition. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as required by section 4a(3) of Act No. 207, Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. 
e.  At the public hearing before the planning commission, the applicant shall present evidence regarding the following characteristics of the proposed development: 
1.  The general character and substance of the proposed planned unit development. 
2.  The objectives and purposes to be served by the planned unit development. 
3.  Compliance with applicable regulations and standards. 
4.  The scale and scope of the development proposed. 
5.  Development schedules. 
6.  Compliance with the city's general development plan, and the effect of the PUD on the city's general development plan. 
7.  The impact of the planned unit development on public utilities, facilities or services, on surrounding properties, and on the natural environment. 
8.  The economic impact of the planned unit development on surrounding property values or the city as a whole. 
9.  The impact of the planned unit development on existing woodlands and wetlands. 
10.  Status of ownership or control of the PUD such that there is a single person or entity having responsibility for completing the PUD in conformity with the approved plan. 
f.  At the public hearing or within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the planning commission shall take the following actions: 
1.  The planning commission shall make its final consideration of the request to approve the preliminary area site plan, and shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions the request, provided that any approval shall not be official until an agreement as required by section 94-213(5) has been received by the city clerk. The planning commission shall prepare a report stating its conclusions on the request to approve the preliminary area site plan, the basis for its decision, and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision. 
2.  The planning commission shall also make a recommendation to the city commission on the proposed rezoning to a PUD district necessary to permit the proposed PUD. 
g.  The planning commission's report as required by subsection (3)f. shall include its determination as to whether the PUD as described by the preliminary area site plan meets the following standards: 
1.  The proposed development shall conform to the city's general development plan or any part thereof. 
2.  The proposed development shall conform to the intent and to all regulations and standards of this article and of this chapter, as applicable. 
3.  The proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage courses, water and sanitary sewer facilities, refuse disposal, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the proposed development shall be able to provide in a manner acceptable to the planning commission any such facilities and services. 
4.  The common open space, any other common properties, individual properties, and all other elements of the PUD are so planned that they will achieve a unified open and recreation area system with open space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to each other, the site, and the surrounding land. 
5.  The location of the proposed uses, layout of the site, and its relation to streets giving access to it shall be such that traffic to, from, and within the site and assembly of persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the project or the surrounding area. In applying this standard, the planning commission shall consider, among other things, convenient routes for pedestrian traffic, particularly of children; relationship of the proposed project to main thoroughfares and street intersections; and the general character and intensity of the existing and potential development of the surrounding area. 
6.  The mix of housing unit types and densities and the mix of residential and nonresidential uses shall be acceptable in terms of convenience, privacy, compatibility, and similar measures. 
7.  The planning commission shall determine that noise, odor, light or other external effect from any source whatsoever which is connected with the proposed use will not adversely affect adjacent and neighboring lands or uses. 
8.  Streets shall follow topography, be properly spaced, and be located and aligned in accordance with the intended function of each street. The property shall have adequate access to public streets. The plans shall provide for logical extensions of public streets and shall provide suitable street connections to adjacent parcels, where applicable. 
9.  Major pedestrian circulation shall be provided for within the site, and shall interconnect all residential areas, community areas, and commercial and other services where applicable. The pedestrian system shall provide a logical extension of the pedestrian ways from outside the site and shall provide pedestrian connections to the edges of the site where appropriate. 
10.  Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety and welfare of the users of the planned unit development and the residents of the surrounding area. 
h.  Reasonable conditions may be required by the planning commission in conjunction with the approval of a preliminary area site plan for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased services and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety and welfare of individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole, and shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this article, and be related to the objective of ensuring compliance with the standards of this article. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the record of the approved preliminary area site plan. 
i.  In considering a requirement for sidewalks or pedestrian lanes as a condition imposed pursuant to subsection 94-213(3)h. above, the planning commission shall consider the criteria in section 94-318 of this chapter. 
j.  In addition to its authority pursuant to subsection h. above, the planning commission may prohibit one or more specific uses otherwise permitted within a PUD district if it makes one or more of the following findings: 
1.  The use would be detrimental to or endanger the public. 
2.  The use would not be compatible with nearby uses of land. 
3.  The use would be injurious to the use or enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity. 
4.  The use would result in the significant adverse impact on the natural environment. 
5.  The use would impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in that district. 
6,  The affected public services and facilities would not be capable of accommodating increased services and facility loads caused by the use. 
(4)  City commission review and approval of the petition to rezone. 
a.  The city commission shall be provided, for its information, with a copy of the planning commission's report and decision of denial, approval, or approval with conditions of the preliminary area site plan, along with a summary of comments received at the public hearing, minutes of all proceedings, and all documents related to the PUD request. 
b.  The city commission shall also be provided with the planning commission's recommendation on the proposed rezoning of the PUD site. After receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission on the proposed rezoning, the city commission may hold a public hearing to consider the rezoning request. Notice for the public hearing, if held, shall be provided as required by section 4a(3) of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. In making its determination on the proposed rezoning, the city commission may consider the planning commission's report and decision regarding the planning commission's approval or denial of a preliminary area site plan (as provided by subsection (4)a.), but the city commission shall not engage in a substantive review of the details of a preliminary area site plan that has been approved by the planning commission. The city commission shall approve or deny the petition to rezone, or refer the petition again to the planning commission for further review. 
c.  The city commission may approve a petition to rezone property to a PUD designation even though a preliminary area site plan has not yet been approved (or approved with conditions) for the property by the planning commission. However, no construction, grading, tree removal, soil striping, or other site improvements or changes shall commence, and no construction permits shall be issued therefor, for all or any phase of a PUD until a preliminary and final area site plan have been officially approved for the property by the planning commission as provided by this article. 
(5)  Effect of approval of the preliminary area site plan by the planning commission and approval of the petition to rezone by the city commission. If the preliminary area site plan is approved by the planning commission and the petition to rezone is approved by the city commission, the approved petition and preliminary area site plan, including all approved maps and accompanying written materials, and the conditions of approval, shall be binding upon the applicant and owners of record and upon their heirs, successors and assigns with respect to all future development of the property, subject to the approval of a final area site plan by the planning commission. 
(6)  Final area site plan requirements. Upon approval of a preliminary area site plan, an applicant may submit, within the time limitations as provided by subsection (7), an application for approval of a final area site plan for all or any phase of a proposed PUD shown on the approved preliminary area site plan. An application for approval of a final area site plan may be submitted prior to approval of a petition to rezone by the city commission; provided, however, that the planning director shall not schedule the public hearing on the final area site plan pursuant to subsection (7)c. unless and until the rezoning petition is approved; and provided, further, that an application for approval of a final area site plan shall not be considered or approved by the planning commission if the rezoning petition is denied by the city commission. Ten copies of a final area site plan shall be submitted to the planning director. A final area site plan shall consist of (i) a map or maps and (ii) accompanying written materials, as required by this section. 
A final area site plan shall include a map or maps on a scale of one inch equaling not more than 100 feet. The map or maps must provide the following information in sufficient detail to describe, where appropriate, adequate dimensions to show the size and location of all proposed structures, and adequate contour elevations to determine the existing and proposed configuration of the site for engineering purposes: 
a.  Dimensions of the land, including width, length, acreage and frontage. 
b.  Existing zoning and zoning of all adjacent properties within 500 feet. 
c.  A topographical map or maps showing present and proposed elevations at contour levels of not more than two feet. 
d.  Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes, streams and wetlands. 
e.  A description of the development including: 
1.  The type and location of all uses. 
2.  The square footage or acreage allocated to each use. 
3.  The locations of all structures, including proposed setbacks, typical layout and elevation for each type of use. 
4.  Density calculations, number and types of residential units, and floor area per habitable space. 
5.  A description of all proposed nonresidential uses, including the types of stores and offices, hotels, motels, etc. 
6.  The square footage that will be devoted to office or retail purposes, and the number of rooms in any proposed hotels or motels. The information related to square footage and number of rooms should be provided in sufficient detail to determine the demand for water, sewer and transportation facilities that will result. 
7.  The location and size of all proposed open spaces, including preserves, recreational areas, and the like, and each purpose proposed for such areas. 
8.  The location and description of proposed water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage systems. 
9.  All known natural resources and natural features to be preserved. 
10.  A landscape plan showing woodlands and vegetation to be preserved or added, topography, and similar features. 
11.  The location and right-of-way width of existing streets and the proposed location and surface width of public and/or private streets or drives. 
12.  A circulation plan for internal streets, roadways and pedestrian walkways. 
13.  The location of all proposed parking areas and number of spaces by size. 
14.  A description of easements on private roads to allow necessary city access to the roads, water lines, sanitary sewer and storm sewer, as well as provisions for access of emergency vehicles. 
15.  Freestanding/pylon, ground-mounted and wall signage plans, showing all setbacks and dimensions and describing all exterior construction materials. 
16.  A description of the type and location of all outdoor lighting facilities. 
17.  The location and area of each development phase of a multiphased development. 
18.  The location of any buffer zones, berms and fences. 
19.  The location of any outdoor commercial activities, including, but not limited to, outdoor display and sales. 
In addition to the required map(s), a final area site plan shall include written materials which contain the following information: 
f.  The owner's name and address; and the applicant's name and address, if other than the owner. 
g.  The name of the proposed development. 
h.  The name, address, city and phone number of the firm and of the individual who prepared the plan. 
i.  The common description and complete legal description of the property. 
j.  A statement of ownership or option to purchase of all lands within the proposed PUD. 
k.  A development and construction schedule indicating: 
1.  The date for commencement of construction. 
2.  Stages or phases in which the project will be built and the expected starting and completion dates of each stage. 
l.  A description of the organization(s) or individual(s) who will own and maintain all land areas within the PUD, including common open space. 
m.  A description of the types of buildings to be constructed, including the number of units per building, proposed building heights, and the type of ownership proposed (i.e., individually owned or rental). 
n.  The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD, including materials, dimensions and techniques used such as screens, fences, berms, walls or landscaping. 
o.  A statement of intent to subdivide under chapter 74, Subdivisions. 
p.  An explanation of the manner in which the PUD has been planned to take advantage of the PUD regulations, the manner in which it reflects the purpose and objectives of planned unit development as stated in sections 94-211 and 94-212, and its conformance to the city's general development plan. 
(7)  Planning commission review and approval of PUD final area site plans. 
a.  Within two years following official approval of the preliminary area site plan and petition to rezone, the applicant shall submit to the planning director ten copies of a final area site plan in accordance with subsection (6). If the final area site plan has not been submitted within such period, the preliminary area site plan approval shall lapse and the applicant must recommence the review process, provided that the planning commission may extend the time for submission of the final area site plan if the applicant requests an extension prior to the expiration of the initial period and no material change of circumstance has occurred. Where a PUD is proposed for construction in phases, a final area site plan for at least the first phase of such construction shall be submitted within the time limitations contained in this section. Final area site plans for subsequent phases shall be submitted within similar successive periods thereafter from the date of approval of the final area site plan of the immediately preceding phase, unless a shorter period was required in connection with approval of the preliminary area site plan. Where a preliminary area site plan has lapsed due to failure of the applicant to submit a final area site plan within the time limitations contained in this section, the planning commission may require that a new preliminary area site plan be submitted and reviewed in accordance with then existing and applicable law and ordinance provisions. 
b.  The planning director shall transmit the final area site plan to the planning commission for planning commission review and approval. The final area site plan must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the planning commission hearing at which it is first to be considered. 
c.  The planning director shall schedule a public hearing on the request to approve the plan. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as required by section 4a(3) of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. 
d.  At the public hearing or within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the planning commission shall make its final consideration of the request to approve the final area site plan, and shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions, the request, provided that any approval shall not be official until an agreement as required by subsection (8) of this section has been received by the city clerk. The planning commission shall prepare a report stating its conclusions on the request to approve the final area site plan, the basis for its decision, its recommendation, and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision. 
e.  The planning commission shall not approve the final area site plan unless each of the following is satisfied: 
1.  The PUD as described by the final area site plan continues to meet the standards contained in subsection (3)g. of this section and shall meet any other applicable standards for review. 
2.  The final area site plan is in substantial compliance with the previously approved preliminary area site plan consisting of the maps and accompanying written materials required under subsection (2) of this section. 
3.  The applicant shall have made provision, satisfactory to the planning commission, to ensure that those open space areas shown on the plan for use by the public or by residents of the development will be or have been irrevocably committed for that purpose. Provision satisfactory to the planning commission shall also have been made to provide for the financing of any improvement shown on the plan for open space areas, and common use areas which are to be included within the development, and that maintenance of such improvements is ensured by a means satisfactory to the planning commission. 
4.  The PUD complies with the uses permitted by the PUD district and any prohibitions of specific uses by the planning commission pursuant to section 94-213(3)j. 
f.  Reasonable conditions may be required by the planning commission in conjunction with the approval of a final area site plan as in accordance with subsections (3)h. and (3)i. of this section. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the record of the approved final area site plan. 
(8)  Effect of approval of the final area site plan by the planning commission. 
a.  If the final area site plan is approved by the planning commission, the approved final area site plan, including all approved maps and accompanying written materials, and the conditions of approval, shall supersede the previously approved preliminary area site plan and shall be binding upon the applicant and owners of record and upon their heirs, successors and assigns with respect to all future development of the property, absent revision or amendment in accordance with this article. 
b.  The city shall enforce any or all provisions of the approved final area site plan and conditions of approval, against the petitioners, owners, successors, assigns or agents. 
c.  No construction, grading, tree removal, soil stripping, or other site improvements or changes shall commence, and no construction permits shall be issued therefor, for all or any phase of a PUD until a final area site plan has been officially approved by the planning commission as provided in this article. 
d.  No construction of buildings or structures, or any other site improvements or changes, shall be made except in strict compliance with the final area site plan officially approved by the planning commission pursuant to this article. 
(9)  Commencement and completion of construction. Construction shall be commenced within two years following official approval of a final area site plan for all or any phase of a PUD. Each phase of a multiphased project shall be commenced within two years of the schedule established for such project in the application submitted for the planned unit development. If construction is not commenced within such time, any approval of the final area site plan shall expire and be null and void; provided, an extension for a specified period may be granted by the planning commission upon good cause shown if such request is made prior to the expiration of the initial period. Moreover, if approval has expired, a new application for approval of preliminary and final area site plans shall be required where determined appropriate by the planning commission, and shall be reviewed in light of then existing and applicable law and ordinance provisions. 
(10)  Amendment of approve preliminary and final area site plan. 
a.  Except as authorized by section 94-213(10)b. for minor modifications, an approved preliminary or final area site plan shall not be varied or modified in any respect without an amendment approved by the planning commission. An application for a proposed amendment to a preliminary area site plan shall be reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied, by the planning commission pursuant to the procedure prescribed for original submittal and review of the preliminary area site plan. An application for a proposed amendment to a final area site plan shall be reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied, by the planning commission pursuant to the procedure prescribed for original submittal and review of the final area site plan. 
b.  Minor modifications may be made to an approved preliminary or final area site plan as provided by this subsection (without the need to comply with the requirements of section 94-213(10)a.). 
1.  An application for a proposed minor modification to an area site plan may be reviewed, and approved, approved with conditions, or denied, by the planning director, without the need for review and approval by the planning commission. The planning director's decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a minor modification shall be made in writing. The planning director shall provide a copy of the written decision to the planning commission for its information at the planning commission's next regularly scheduled meeting. 
2.  The planning director may, in his or her discretion, refer any application for a minor modification to the planning commission for review and approval by the planning commission. The planning commission's decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a minor modification shall be made in writing at a regularly schedule or special meeting of the planning commission. A public hearing shall not be required. 
3.  In deciding whether or not to approve a minor modification, the planning director or the planning commission may consult with other city staff, officials, and departments, as appropriate. Neither the planning director or the planning commission, as applicable, shall approve a modification to an approved plan unless the modification conforms to the standards and requirements of this article. If a minor modification is approved by the planning director or the planning commission, the applicant shall prepare any required changes to the PUD documents (including, without limitation, maps, written materials, and any written agreements required by this article to be recorded with the county register of deeds) as necessary to show the approved modification. No approval of a minor modification shall become final and effective until the planning director has reviewed and approved the changes made to the PUD documents to reflect the modification, and the necessary documents as revised have been recorded with the county register of deeds. After a modification is final and effective, no activity or use on the property shall be conducted except in strict compliance with the plan as modified. 
4.  Only the following changes to an area site plan as originally approved shall be eligible for consideration as minor modifications as provided by this section: 
i.  A change of not more than 20 feet in the location of any building or structure provided that the building or structure is not closer to any public right-of-way and is not within a buffer or open space area designated on the approved area site plan. 
ii.  A reduction of not more than ten percent in the size of any nonresidential building. 
iii.  A decrease in the total number of residential buildings or a reduction in the number of dwelling units provided that a reduction in the gross floor area of any residential unit shall not be considered a minor change. 
iv.  A change in the height of a building by not more than ten percent provided that the building height does not exceed 35 feet. 
v.  The internal rearrangement of parking spaces in a parking lot provided that the total number of parking spaces is not reduced, circulation hazards or congestion are not created by the redesign, no part of the parking lot will be within a buffer or open space area designated on the approved area site plan, and the rearrangement will not result in any additional external impact on adjoining property. 
vi.  The substitution of landscaping or plant materials provided they are substituted with similar types of materials on a one-to-one or greater basis, as determined by the planning director and provided that there is no reduction in any buffer or open space area designated on the approved area site plan. 
vii.  A reduction in the number of signs, a decrease in the height or size of any signs, or an increase in the setback of any signs. 
viii.  A reduction in the number of curb cuts or a change in the location of any curb cut if the change is ten feet or less in either direction. 
ix.  A decrease in the width of any curb cut or an increase of not more than 50 percent in the width of any curb cut, provided that such increase or decrease complies with the city's street and highway regulations and other applicable ordinances. 
x.  Improvements to access and circulation systems, such as the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes, boulevard, curbing, and pedestrian paths provided that they are not located in any buffer area designated on the approved area site plan. 
xi.  The addition of not more than one accessory building or structure provided that: 1) the accessory building or structure is not more than 120 square feet in area, 2) is designed and used for maintenance, storage or similar purposes and not for human occupancy, and 3) the planning director determines that the accessory building is otherwise compatible with the development. 
xii.  An increase in the area designated on a site plan as reserved for open space or a designated buffer area, or otherwise not being subject to development. 
xiii.  A change in the location of any storm catch basins and utility connections as originally approved. 
xiv.  A change in the name of the PUD or in the names of any private streets or drives within the PUD. 
xv.  Other similar changes of a minor nature proposed to be made to the configuration, design, layout, or topography of the PUD which the planning director determines would not have any significant adverse effect on adjacent or nearby lands or the public health, safety and welfare. 
(11)  Performance guarantees. Performance guarantees to ensure compliance with an approved final area site plan and conditions of approval may be required by the planning commission at the time of approval of the final area site plan as authorized under section 4e of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. 
(12)  Fees. Fees shall be paid at the time of filing of the application for PUD rezoning and preliminary area site plan approval. An additional fee shall be paid at the time of filing of the application for final area site plan approval. The amount of such fees shall be established by the city commission by resolution and may include escrow accounts to cover the city's costs of professional consultants and other expenses related to the application. 
(13)  Violations. 
a.  A preliminary or final area site plan approved under the provisions of this article shall have the full force of this chapter. Any violation of such approved plan shall be grounds for the city to order that all construction be stopped, and to order that building permits and certificates of occupancy be withheld until the violation is removed or adequate guarantee of such removal is provided to the city. 
b.  Violations of any final or preliminary area site plan approved under this article, or failure to comply with any requirements of this article, including any agreements and conditions attached to any approved plan, shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-486, §§ 1, 2, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 99-541, §§ 1, 2, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 00-462, §§ 1, 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 05-524, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 05-531, § 6, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 07-551, § 3, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 94-214. - Residential planned unit developments-Generally. 
(a)  Intent. Under the requirements set forth in sections 94-183 and 94-184, approval may be granted for the construction and occupancy of an RPUD-1 or RPUD-2 development, provided that the standards, procedures and requirements set forth in this section are satisfied. 
(b)  Additional standards for review. In addition to the standards for review contained in section 94-213(3)g., the planning commission shall determine that the following standards are met as a prerequisite to approval of any RPUD-1 or RPUD-2 development: 
(1)  An RPUD-1 site shall be located within an RPUD-1 district as provided in section 94-183; an RPUD-2 site shall be located within an RPUD-2 district as provided in section 94-184. 
(2)  Public water and sewer facilities shall be provided as part of the site development of an RPUD-1 or RPUD-2 development. 
(c)  Clustering. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of permitting residential clustering is to provide savings in sewer, water, facilities, land resources and energy use through the concentration of dwellings, construction and physical impact to specific areas of a tract. Cluster development permits variation in lot size, shape and orientation without an increase in overall site density. 
(2)  Determination by planning commission. Clustering may be permitted by the planning commission in the RPUD-1 or RPUD-2 districts. The decision of the planning commission shall be guided by the following standards: 
a.  Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas shall be designed and situated to minimize alteration of the natural features and topography. 
b.  Individual lots and buildings shall be arranged and situated to relate to surrounding properties to provide improved views from the buildings. 
c.  Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas shall be situated to avoid the adverse effects of shadows, noise and traffic on the residents of the site and to lessen the area devoted to motor vehicles. 
d.  Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building design shall be encouraged to achieve a more compatible relationship between development and the land. 
e.  Cluster open space intended for recreation or public use shall be easily accessible to pedestrians. Open space intended for scenic value shall be visible from a significant number of units or buildings. 
(3)  Lot dimensions. Front, side and rear yard requirements and lot areas which are otherwise required by this article shall not apply in a cluster development except for perimeter lots. Variations from these dimensions shall be shown on the preliminary and final area site plans and must be approved by the planning commission. 
(4)  Density. The number of dwelling units permitted in a cluster development shall not exceed the density that would be permitted by the application of the area, height, bulk and placement requirements of this article without variation in lot size, shape or orientation. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88) 
Sec. 94-215. - RPUD-1, low density residential PUD. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The uses of land and structures as provided by section 94-183 of this chapter may be permitted within an RPUD-1 development as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, this article. 
(b)  Minimum area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements, as determined by the planning commission pursuant to section 94-183(c), shall not be less than the minimum standards of this section, except as provided in section 94-214(c), or unless the applicant demonstrates and the planning commission determines that a better or more appropriate design can be achieved by not applying the minimum standards of this section and that adherence to the standards is not required to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and users of the development and of adjoining property: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings shall meet, as a minimum, the regulations applicable in the A district as provided by section 94-167(e). 
(2)  Two-family dwellings shall meet, as a minimum, the regulations applicable in the A-2 district as provided by section 94-167(e). 
(3)  All other permitted uses shall meet, as a minimum, the regulations applicable in the A-2 district as provided by section 94-167(e). 
(c)  Density. The maximum allowable density for the PUD district shall be determined by the planning commission after consideration of each of the following standards: 
(1)  The PUD shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and shall not change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed. 
(2)  The PUD shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, pedestrian ways, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer facilities. 
(3)  The PUD shall not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services. 
(4)  The PUD shall be developed in accordance with the purposes and objectives of the planned unit development district. 
In no case shall the maximum allowable density exceed the density that would be permitted by the application of the area, height, bulk and placement requirements of this article without variation or reduction by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88) 
Sec. 94-216. - RPUD-2, high density residential PUD. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The uses of land and structures as provided by section 94-184(b) may be permitted within an RPUD-2 development as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, this article. 
(b)  Minimum area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements, as determined by the planning commission pursuant to section 94-184(c), shall not be less than the minimum standards contained in this section, except as provided in section 94-214(c), or unless the applicant demonstrates and the planning commission determines that a better or more appropriate design can be achieved by not applying the minimum standards contained in this section and that adherence to those standards is not required to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and users of the development and of adjoining property: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouses or other similar permitted single-family attached dwelling types, and multiple-family dwelling structures shall meet, as a minimum, the regulations applicable in the ARM district as provided by sections 94-172(e) and (f). 
(2)  Commercial uses permitted pursuant to section 94-184(b)(6) shall meet, as a minimum, the regulations applicable in the C-1 district as provided by sections 94-175(e) and (f). 
(3)  All other permitted uses shall meet, as a minimum, the regulations applicable in the ARM district as provided by section 94-172(e). 
(c)  Density. The maximum allowable density for this PUD district shall be determined by the planning commission after consideration of the standards contained in section 94-215(c), provided that the maximum allowable density shall not exceed the density that would be permitted by the application of the area, height, bulk and placement requirements of this article without variation or reduction by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 88-370, § 3, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-217. - CPUD, commercial planned unit development. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the CPUD district is stated in section 94-185(a). 
(b)  Additional standards for review. In addition to the standards for review contained in section 94-213(3)g., the planning commission shall determine that the following standards are met as a prerequisite to approval of any CPUD development: 
(1)  A CPUD site shall be located within a CPUD district as provided in section 94-185. 
(2)  The proposed PUD shall be designed and developed with a unified architectural treatment. 
(3)  Utilities, roads, and other essential services must be available for immediate use of occupants purchasing or leasing sites in the PUD. 
(4)  Compatibility of site use with nearby residential areas must be evidenced and can be determined in relationship to the following criteria: 
a.  Uses have no harmful or unpleasant effects (noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke, vapors and gases, electrical emissions, and industrial wastes). 
b.  The PUD site has direct access to a collector or arterial street. 
c.  Appearance is harmonious with adjacent uses. This determination shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign control, building profiles and architectural controls. 
d.  The distances separating all proposed uses and buildings from the surroundings are great enough to in fact constitute a buffer. 
e.  Loading docks and truck maneuvering areas and terminals should be designed and located so as not to adversely affect adjacent and neighboring lands or uses due to noise, odor, light or other external effect. 
(c)  Permitted uses. The uses of land and structures as provided by section 94-185(b) may be permitted within a CPUD development as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, this article. 
(d)  Minimum area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within a CPUD district, as determined by the planning commission pursuant to section 94-185(c), shall not be less than the minimum standards of this section, unless the applicant demonstrates and the planning commission determines that a better or more appropriate design can be achieved by not applying the minimum standards of this section and that adherence to the minimum standards is not required to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and users of the development and of adjoining property: 
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and special exception uses as permitted in the ORP, C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 districts shall meet, as a minimum, the corresponding area, height, bulk and placement regulations applicable to such uses if located in the ORP, C-1, C-2, C-3, or C-4 districts. If a use is permitted in more than one such district, the planning commission shall establish which district regulations shall constitute the minimum standards. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88) 
Sec. 94-218. - MPUD, mixed use PUD. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the MPUD district is stated in section 94-186(a). 
(b)  Additional standards for review. In addition to the standards for review contained in subsection 94-213(3)g., the planning commission shall determine that the following standards are met as a prerequisite to approval of any MPUD development: 
(1)  An MPUD site shall be located within an MPUD district as provided in section 94-186. 
(2)  Grant of the PUD shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the community, where such benefit would otherwise be infeasible or unlikely to be achieved within the constraints of the otherwise applicable zoning districts. 
(3)  The residential component(s) of an MPUD shall be completed concurrent with any nonresidential construction, or in such a manner so as to minimize disruption to any development component within an MPUD. 
(c)  Permitted uses. The uses of land and structures as provided by section 94-186(b) may be permitted within an MPUD development as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, this article and the MPUD district intent as provided by section 94-186 (a). 
(d)  Minimum area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within an MPUD district, as determined by the planning commission pursuant to subsection 94-186(c), shall not be less than the minimum standards of this section except as provided by this section, or unless the applicant demonstrates and the planning commission determines, that a better or more appropriate design can be achieved by not applying the minimum standards of this section and that adherence to the minimum standards is not required to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and users of the development and of adjoining property: 
(1)  The minimum residential floor area required in MPUDs for multiple-family dwellings shall be the same as required by the ARM district as provided by section 94-172 and the minimum residential floor area required in MPUDs for single-family or two-family dwellings shall be the same as required in subsection 94-350(1), unless the planning commission specifically allows reductions in these minimum residential floor areas to occur; but, in no case, shall more than a 20-percent reduction in minimum floor area be allowed. 
(2)  All other area, height, bulk and placement requirements shall, at a minimum, be the same as for buildings of a similar use built in the ORP, C-1, C-2, C-3 or ARM districts unless the developer can show that these would be a hardship or hindrance to the design of a quality project. If a use is permitted in more than one such district, the planning commission shall establish which district regulations shall constitute the minimum standards. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 06-548, § 2, 10-9-06) 
Sec. 94-219. - IPUD, industrial planned unit development. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the IPUD district is stated in section 94-187(a). 
(b)  Additional standards for review. In addition to the standards for review contained in section 94-213(3)g., the planning commission shall determine that the following standards are met as a prerequisite to approval of any IPUD development: 
(1)  An IPUD site shall be located within an IPUD district as provided in section 94-185. 
(2)  Utilities, roads, and other essential services must be available for immediate use of occupants purchasing or leasing sites in the IPUD. 
(3)  The IPUD site shall have direct access to a collector or arterial street. 
(4)  All uses in the IPUD shall be designed, constructed and operated to comply with the performance standards as provided by article XV of this chapter. 
(5)  Loading docks and truck maneuvering areas and terminals should be designed and located so as not to adversely affect adjacent and neighboring lands or uses due to noise, odor, light or other external effect. 
(6)  Except as otherwise expressly approved by the planning commission, all permitted principal uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except for loading and unloading operations, onsite parking of vehicles, and reasonable storage of materials and products which are related to the principal uses. Materials and products may be stored on the property as provided by, and subject to the screening requirements of, section 94-180. 
(c)  Permitted uses. The uses of land and structures as provided by section 94-187 may be permitted within an IPUD development as approved by the planning commission pursuant to, and subject to the requirements of, this article. 
(d)  Minimum area, height, bulk and placement requirements. The area, height, bulk and placement requirements within an IPUD district, as determined by the planning commission pursuant to section 94-187, shall not be less than the minimum standards of this section, unless the applicant demonstrates and the planning commission determines that a better or more appropriate design can be achieved by not applying the minimum standards of this section and that adherence to the minimum standards is not required to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and users of the development and of adjoining property: 
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and special exception uses permitted in the IPUD district shall meet, at a minimum, the corresponding area, height, bulk and placement regulations applicable to such uses if located in the ML district as provided by section 94-180 and contained in the summary of the schedule of district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 92-409, § 6, 7-14-92) 
Sec. 94-220. - Signs. 
    The minimum and maximum requirements applicable within any PUD with regard to the area, height, type, construction, design and number of signs shall be determined by the planning commission upon application for approval of a PUD as provided by, and subject to the requirements of, this section. The requirements applicable to signs as provided by article XIV of this chapter shall apply to any PUD unless the applicant demonstrates and the planning commission determines that a better or more appropriate overall project can be achieved by not applying the otherwise applicable requirements and that adherence to the otherwise applicable requirements is not required to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and users of the development and of adjoining property, or to comply with the intent and purpose of this article. In making its decision whether to vary from the otherwise applicable signage requirements, the planning commission shall also consider the nature, size, density, location or design of the proposed project, including the design of the project's signage plan; the expected or projected long-and short-term signage needs for the project and in the immediate area; and characteristics of the project which will affect the project's signage needs, including factors such as the appropriateness of joint signs to be shared by different uses, anchor store signage requirements, signage for outlots, and any other factors reasonably related to the need for signage for the proposed project. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any billboards permitted within any PUD shall comply with section 94-412 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 92-409, § 7, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 96-486, § 3, 8-27-96) 
Sec. 94-221. - Offstreet parking, loading and circulation requirements. 
    Offstreet parking and loading requirements set forth in article XVI of this chapter shall apply to any PUD, except as provided by this section. 
(1)  Streets, building location, parking areas, pedestrian ways, and utility easements shall be designed to promote the public safety, compatibility of uses and to minimize friction between uses. 
(2)  Private streets may serve circulation and parking purposes if providing adequately for police and fire protection, rubbish collection, and lighting. 
(3)  Adequate access for fire and other emergency vehicles shall be provided on the site. 
(4)  Parking and loading requirements shall be equal to the sum of the parking and loading requirements for all uses proposed. However, where it can be demonstrated by the applicant that, due to nonconflicting hours of operation, design of the circulation and parking plan, or any other factor reasonably related to the need for parking and/or loading, the total parking and loading requirements can be reduced, the planning commission may do so. In making its determination, the planning commission may consider nationally recognized parking standards and studies. 
(5)  Driveways and circulation roadways shall be designed to minimize traffic and congestion within the PUD and to minimize the amount of paving. 
(6)  Where open parking areas or roadways are to be located immediately adjacent to any peripheral boundary, a separation or buffer of a type sufficient to ensure the privacy of the adjacent property shall be provided in the manner approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 92-409, § 7, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 96-486, § 4, 8-27-96) 
Sec. 94-222. - Prior planned unit developments. 
    The development plan of a planned unit development previously approved pursuant to section 94-172 is hereby deemed to constitute an approved final area site plan for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-356, § 2, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 92-409, § 7, 7-14-92) 
Sec. 94-223. - Building facades. 
    All building facades within an MPUD, CPUD, and IPUD district shall comply with the requirements and standards of section 94-357. 
(Ord. No. 06-547, § 3, 8-28-06) 
Secs. 94-224-94-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND UNIQUE USES 

Sec. 94-246. - Purpose. 
    Because of their unique characteristics, special exception uses and unique uses are permitted only after the review and approval of the planning commission to ensure that they are compatible with the character of the surrounding area, the adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacities of public services and facilities, and the public health, safety and welfare. This article provides standards and requirements for the submission, review and approval of applications for special exception uses and unique uses. The standards and requirements of this article are designed to accomplish the objectives of this chapter through a land development review process based on the application of site planning criteria to achieve proper integration of a proposed special exception use or unique use with the characteristics of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-247. - Scope. 
    Special exception uses and unique uses shall be permitted only upon review and approval by the planning commission of the use and of the site plan submitted for the use, as provided by this article. The standards and requirements provided by this article shall be in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter which are applicable to the special exception use or unique use under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-248. - Additional special exceptions authorized. 
    In addition to the special exceptions authorized elsewhere in this chapter, the planning commission may approve the following, subject to the standards and requirements of this article: 
(1)  The vertical extension of a building existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter derives to the height indicated by the original drawings of the building, if the building was actually designed and constructed to carry the additional height. 
(2)  The enclosure of an existing open front porch where the enclosure is in character with the adjoining neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-249. - Application for a special exception use or unique use. 
    The following procedures shall be followed to apply for a special exception use or a unique use: 
(1)  Any person owning or having a legal interest in the subject property may file an application to use the property for a special exception use or a unique use provided for by this chapter. 
(2)  The application shall be filed with the planning director. The planning director will review the application and, if complete, transmit it to the planning commission. The application must be filed at least 30 days prior to the planning commission hearing at which it is first to be considered. 
(3)  Fees shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of filing of the application for a special exception use or a unique use. Transmittals shall not be made unless the required fees have been paid in full. The amount of such fees shall be established by the city commission by resolution and may include escrow accounts to cover the city's costs of professional consultants and other expenses related to the application. 
(4)  The application filed with the planning director shall be accompanied by the following documents and information: 
a.  A site plan which meets the standards and requirements of article X. If the site plan is readily reproducible by a copy machine and does not exceed 12 by 18 inches in size, one copy of the plan shall be submitted with the application. If the site plan is not readily reproducible or exceeds 12 by 18 inches in size, 15 copies of the plan shall be submitted with the application. 
b.  A statement regarding compliance with the standards for approval provided by section 94-250, and with other requirements imposed by this chapter applicable to the use under consideration. 
(5)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the planning director shall take the following actions: 
a.  The planning director shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission for consideration of the special exception use or unique use request. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as required by section 4a(2) of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended. 
b.  The planning director shall also schedule consideration of the site plan submitted with the application as an item on the agenda at the next regular planning commission meeting. The site plan shall be reviewed at that meeting under the standards and requirements provided by article X of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 05-524, § 2, 2-14-05) 
Sec. 94-249.1. - Review of expansion of existing use as integrated site. 
    If an applicant seeks approval of a special exception or unique use as an expansion of an existing use onto an adjacent site, the applicant shall file an application and site plan for review of the proposed and existing site as a single integrated site. The planning commission shall review the application and site plan for the integrated site pursuant to the terms of this chapter and may impose conditions as to all or any portion of the integrated site pursuant to section 94-251 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-420, § 2, 7-13-93) 
Sec. 94-250. - Standards for approval of special exception uses or unique uses. 
    At the public hearing before the planning commission, the commission shall review the particular circumstances of the special exception use or unique use under consideration and shall approve the use only if all of the following findings are made: 
(1)  The establishment, maintenance, location or operation of the use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public; 
(2)  The use is compatible with the intent of the zoning district and will not change the essential character of the surrounding area; 
(3)  The use will not be injurious to the use or enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes permitted, will not substantially diminish or impair property values within the area, and will not result in any significant adverse impact on the natural environment; 
(4)  The establishment, maintenance, location or operation of the use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in that district; 
(5)  Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary services or facilities have been or will be provided such that the use will not place demands on public services or facilities in excess of capacity; and 
(6)  The use will, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, conditions imposed on approval, and all other applicable provisions of law, ordinance or statute. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-251. - Conditions of approval. 
    In addition to the specific conditions or requirements of approval set forth in this chapter, reasonable conditions may be imposed by the planning commission in conjunction with the approval of a special exception use or a unique use for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased services and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety and welfare of those who will use the special exception use or unique use under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed use, and the community as a whole; be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity; and be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter, be related to the standards established in this chapter for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-252. - Approvals of special exception uses and unique uses. 
(a)  At the public hearing, or within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the special exception use or unique use request. The decision shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the special exception use or unique use under consideration. The statement shall specify the basis for the decision and any condition imposed relating to an affirmative decision. 
(b)  The planning commission shall also review the site plan submitted with the application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan in accordance with the procedures, standards and requirements for site plan review as provided by article X. If approved, or approved with conditions, the site plan as approved shall become a part of the record of approval of the special exception use or unique use. 
(c)  No construction, grading, tree removal, soil stripping, or other site improvements or changes shall commence, and no construction permits shall be issued for a special exception use or unique use until both the application and site plan have been approved by the planning commission. Further, no construction of buildings or structures or any other site improvements or changes shall be made except in strict compliance with the site plan as approved by the planning commission, or as changed by mutual agreement of the planning commission under section 94-283. 
(d)  Approval of a special exception use or a unique use shall expire one year from the date of approval unless the authorized use or activity has commenced prior to that time. However, the planning commission may in its discretion approve an extension of the expiration period for up to one additional year, if the extension is requested prior to the expiration of the initial period. 
(e)  An application which has been denied or approved subject to conditions by the planning commission may not be resubmitted for review by the planning commission for a period of 120 days from the date of denial, except on the basis of new evidence found valid by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-253. - Performance guarantees. 
    Performance guarantees to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions imposed under this chapter may be required by the planning commission at the time of approval of a special exception use or unique use as authorized under section 4e of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 38, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-254. - Specific standards for certain special exception uses. 
    In addition to meeting the standards of approval applicable to all special exception uses as provided by this chapter, the following uses shall also be subject to the following specific standards: 
(a)  Mineral processing and material storage. 
(1)  Lot and setback requirements. 
a.  The minimum lot size for such uses shall be 20 acres. 
b.  All principal and accessory buildings and structures, and all stored mineral materials shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
Requirement Adjoining any residential use or residential district 
(including AA district) Adjoining 
any other 
district Front yard 500 feet 50 feet Side yard 500 feet 20 feet Rear yard 500 feet 20 feet Lot coverage 60% 60% Height  Buildings or structures 45 feet 45 feet  Stored material piles 35 feet 35 feet  
c.  All required yard areas shall be planted with ground cover suitable to prevent dust and erosion. 
(2)  Screening. 
a.  The property or properties on which the use is established shall be planted with screening materials meeting one of the following requirements, or a combination thereof, as approved by the planning commission: 
1.  Planting of staggered rows of coniferous trees along the boundaries of the property at least six feet in height at the time of planting. The planting of the rows of coniferous trees shall ensure a continuous screen along the property lines. 
2.  Construction of a solid fence or wall of decorative wood or masonry materials, which shall be continuously maintained. 
3.  Other methods approved by the planning commission that achieve the required screening, including the use of existing vegetation, earthen berms, etc. 
(3)  Access and on-site circulation. 
a.  All such uses shall have direct access to a public street. Driveway approaches to the site must be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer. 
b.  To minimize the deposit from trucks of mineral materials onto a public street, a paved or bituminous surface shall be provided for all on-site entrance and exit drives for a distance into the site of not less than 300 feet from the property line marking the entrance to the site. If such materials are deposited on the public street, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to immediately remove the spilled or deposited material. 
(4)  Erosion control measures shall be maintained to comply with the state Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (Part 91 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL 324.9101 et seq., as amended), and with any other applicable federal, state, or city requirements. 
(5)  Any on-site lighting shall be shielded or otherwise directed away from adjacent properties. Poles or lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(6)  All machinery, equipment, facilities, and operations shall be maintained and conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, to the maximum extent practical, noises, vibrations, dust or other adverse conditions which interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property in the vicinity. To this end, the planning commission may impose such conditions as are necessary to achieve this objective. Such conditions shall comply with the requirements of section 94-251. 
(7)  Separation, crushing, dissolving, breaking up, pulverizing, grinding, shredding, mixing, combining, or other similar operations shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and shall end not later than 7:00 p.m., or as may be determined by the planning commission. 
(b)  Junkyards. 
(1)  Requests for a special exception use for establishment of a junk yard shall also require submission of a detailed proposal identifying the predominant type of salvage or junk to be received, the methods of separation and/or recycling, and ultimate destination of waste materials. The applicant shall be required to submit written materials outlining measures taken to comply with all necessary state, county, and local laws. 
(2)  The site shall be provided with suitable access to a collector or arterial road to ensure safe, direct transport of salvage to and from the site. 
(3)  No portion of the storage area shall be located within 500 feet of any residential use or district. 
(4)  Any outdoor storage area shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall at least six feet in height constructed of a sturdy, durable material and sufficiently opaque to ensure that salvage is not visible from outside the storage area. The fence or wall shall have a minimum of two nontransparent gates each of which shall not exceed 48 feet in width providing access to the storage area for vehicles but shall not allow direct view of the storage area from adjacent properties or streets. Said fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition and shall contain only approved signs. 
(5)  Stored materials shall not be stacked higher than the height of the fence used to enclose the storage area and shall be stored in a manner so as not to be visible from adjoining properties or rights-of-way. In no case shall salvage or junk be stored at a height exceeding the height of the storage area fence or wall. 
(6)  A management office shall be provided on site. 
(7)  Conditions within the storage area shall be controlled to minimize the hazards of fire and other threats to health and safety. 
(8)  All portions of the storage area shall be accessible to emergency vehicles. 
(9)  Vehicles or vehicle bodies shall be stored in rows with a minimum of 20-foot continuous loop drives separating each row of vehicles. 
(10)  All batteries shall be removed from any vehicle, and all radiator and fuel tanks shall be drained prior to the vehicle being placed in the storage yard. Salvaged batteries, oil and other such substances shall be removed by a licensed disposal company or be stored in a manner which prevents leakage of battery fluid. No fluids removed from vehicles shall be applied as a dust control method. 
(11)  Vehicle parts shall not be stored, loaded, unloaded, or dismantled outside the fence enclosing the salvage yard. 
(12)  The property shall include at least six acres. 
(13)  All fences shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet from any residential use or district. 
(14)  In order to protect surrounding areas, the crushing of vehicles or any part thereof shall be limited to daylight hours. 
(15)  The planning commission may impose other conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with this section. Such conditions shall comply with the requirements of section 94-251. 
(Ord. No. 94-456, § 4, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 95-469, § 1, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 95-473, § 4, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 97-501, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 98-513, § 4, 4-13-98) 
Secs. 94-255-94-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IXA. - OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 94-260. - Purpose. 
    Act No. 179 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2001 ("Act 179") requires that cities having a population of 1,800 or more and having undeveloped land zoned for residential development at a certain density must adopt provisions in their zoning ordinances known as "open space preservation" provisions, which permit lands satisfying specified criteria to be developed, at the option of the landowner, with the same number of dwellings on a portion of the land specified in the zoning ordinance, but not more than 80 percent, that, as determined by the city, could otherwise be developed under existing ordinances, laws and rules, on the entire land area. The purpose of this article is to adopt open space preservation provisions consistent with the requirements of Act 179. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-261. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases used in this article, if defined in Act 179, shall have the same meaning as provided in Act 179. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-262. - Eligibility 
(a)  Land may be developed under the provisions of this article only if each of the following conditions is satisfied: 
(1)  The land shall be zoned in the AA district or S district; 
(2)  The development of land under this article shall not depend upon the extension of a public sanitary sewer or a public water supply system to the land, unless the development of the land without the exercise of the clustering option provided by this article would also depend on such an extension; and 
(3)  The clustering option provided pursuant to this article shall not have previously been exercised with respect to the same land. 
(b)  If all of the preceding conditions are satisfied, the land is eligible for development, at the option of the landowner, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-263. - Permitted uses. 
    Only those residential land uses permitted by the zoning district in which the land is located shall be permitted on land developed or used pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-264. - Application and review procedure. 
(a)  The application requirements and review procedures for land proposed to be developed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be those stated in article X (site plan review) of this chapter and this article. In the event of a direct conflict between article X (site plan review) and this article, this article shall govern. 
(b)  In addition to the application materials required by article X of this chapter, an application for the development of land under the provisions of this article shall include the following: 
(1)  A parallel plan prepared for the purpose of demonstrating the number of dwelling units that could be developed on the land under its existing zoning if the clustering option provided by this article were not exercised. 
The parallel plan shall be prepared by the developer showing a feasible development under the requirements of the specific zoning district in which it is located and the requirements of any and all state, county, and city regulations. All lots, roads, and other improvements shall be designed so that they do not adversely impact wetlands, floodplains, or drainage ways, as regulated by federal, state, county, or local agencies. 
It must be determined by the planning commission that this parallel plan is able to be physically constructed and meet all current requirements, should the open space plan be denied or not constructed. If there is a question regarding water, septic, wetlands, or floodplains, the planning commission may request validation from the proper regulatory authority. If it is determined, through these responses, that the number of lots proposed is not feasible, the parallel plan shall be revised and resubmitted, minus that number of lots. Detailed engineering is not required at this stage. 
The planning commission may also waive the submission of a parallel plan if it is determined that the number of housing units proposed for open space development is clearly below the number that would be permitted on the site. Such waiver must be recorded as part of the minutes of the planning commission. 
(2)  The parallel plan may be conceptual in nature but shall include at least the following information: 
(i)  Date, north arrow and scale, which shall not be more than one inch equals 100 feet, and, in all cases, the scale shall be the same as that utilized for the site development plan illustrating the proposed development using the clustering option permitted by this article. 
(ii)  Location of streets and driveways. 
(iii)  Location of all lots, illustrating lot area and width of each lot to demonstrate compliance with the minimum requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(iv)  Location of all utilities that would be necessary to serve a development under the parallel plan and which would not be located within any public road right-of-way or private street easement, or on buildable lots. Such utilities include, but are not limited to, storm water retention or detention basins, community sewage treatment systems, and community water supply facilities. 
(v)  If development under the parallel plan would require the use of septic tanks and drain fields, the parallel plan shall illustrate the location of all septic tanks and drain fields. The applicant shall submit proof that the proposed septic tank and drain field location for each lot would be approved, or has been approved, by the Kent County Health Department. 
(vi)  The location of all portions of the land that are unbuildable for residential purposes due to the presence of wetlands, severe slopes, flood plains, or other features prohibiting development for residential purposes. 
(3)  A copy of the conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or other legal instrument that would run with the land, and that would have the legal effect of preserving in perpetuity the open space required by this article in an undeveloped state. Such legal instrument shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney prior to recording, consistent with the terms of this article. The legal instrument shall: 
(i)  Indicate the proposed permitted use(s) of the undeveloped open space. 
(ii)  Require that the open space be maintained in perpetuity in an undeveloped condition, without buildings, structures, or other improvements, except such drainage improvements, except such drainage improvements, utility lines, riding trails, hiking trails, picnic areas, park or playground equipment, or similar improvements that are approved by the planning commission. 
(iii)  Require that the undeveloped open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the undeveloped open space. 
(iv)  Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the undeveloped open space, including necessary pruning and harvesting of new trees and new plantings. 
(4)  The site development plan for the clustering option permitted by this article shall include the following minimum information, in addition to that required by section 94-280 of this chapter: 
(i)  Date, north arrow, and scale which shall not be more than 1" = 100 feet, and, in all cases, the scale shall be the same as that utilized for the parallel plan. 
(ii)  The site development plan shall clearly illustrate the portions of the land that are proposed to remain in a perpetually undeveloped state and the portions of the land that will be used for clustered development. 
(iii)  The site development plan shall indicate the total number of acres of land that are proposed to remain in a perpetually undeveloped state, the total number of acres of land that are proposed to be used for clustered development, and the percentage of each, as compared to the total site acreage. 
(iv)  The site development plan shall illustrate the location of all lots and proposed building envelopes and shall indicate the lot area and width of each lot, and the proposed front, side, and rear yard building setbacks. The number of lots on the site development plan shall not exceed the number of lots on the parallel plan, as approved by the planning commission, and reduced to accommodate non-dwelling structures, if necessary, as described in subsection 94-265(k). 
(v)  The site development plan shall illustrate the location and type of all proposed structures or improvements that are not dwellings. 
(vi)  If clustered development will include septic tanks and drain fields, the site development plan shall illustrate the location of all septic tanks and drain fields. The applicant shall submit proof that the proposed septic tank and the drain field location for each lot has been approved by the Kent County Health Department. 
(5)  If the development is to be served by public streets, verification that the public rights-of-way and streets comply with the city's right-of-way and street standards. If the development is a site condominium with private streets, verification that the private streets comply with section 94-317, subject to subsection 94-265(p). 
(c)  When reviewing an application submitted under the terms of this article, the planning commission shall determine whether the parallel plan accurately reflects the number of dwelling units that could be developed on the land under its existing zoning if the clustering option provided by this article were not exercised. If the planning commission determines that the number of dwellings illustrated on the parallel plan exceeds the number of dwellings that could be permitted on the land if it were developed under its existing zoning, if the clustering option provided by this article were not exercised, the applicant shall submit a revised site development plan for the clustering option reflecting the permitted number of dwellings, as determined by the planning commission. 
(d)  The planning commission shall review the site development plan and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site development plan in accordance with this article and applicable provisions of this chapter. The basis for the decision and any conditions imposed relating to an affirmative decision shall be specified in the resolution of the planning commission approving or denying the site development plan. If approved, or approved with conditions, the site development plan as approved shall become part of the record of approval. 
(e)  The planning commission may impose reasonable conditions in conjunction with the approval of a site development plan when necessary to effectuate the intent and purpose of this article and as provided in section 94-285. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-265. - Development requirements. 
(a)  Required open space. At least 20 percent of the land proposed for development under the provisions of this article shall remain in a perpetually undeveloped state by means of a conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or other legal instrument that runs with the land, as approved by the city attorney. The following areas shall not constitute open space: 
(1)  The area within all public street rights-of-way. 
(2)  The area within all private street easements. 
(3)  Any easement for overhead utility lines, unless adjacent to open space. 
(4)  The area within a platted lot or site condominium unit. 
(5)  Off-street parking areas. 
(6)  Detention and retention ponds. 
(7)  Community drain fields. 
(8)  Golf course. 
(b)  Standards for open space. The following standards shall apply to the open space required pursuant to this article: 
(1)  The open space may include a recreational trail, picnic area, children's play area, greenway, linear park, or other use which, as determined by the planning commission, is substantially similar to these uses. 
(2)  The open space shall be available for all residents of the development, subject to reasonable rules and regulations. The open space may be, but is not required to be, dedicated to the use of the public. 
(3)  If the land contains a lake, stream, or other body of water, the planning commission may require that a portion of the open space abut the body of water. 
(4)  A portion of the open space shall be located along the public street frontage abutting the land. The depth of this area shall be at least 50 feet, not including public right-of-way, and this area shall be left in its natural condition or be landscaped to help preserve or enhance the existing views. 
(5)  A portion of the open space shall be reasonably usable by the residents of the land for passive recreational uses such as hiking or picnicking. 
(6)  Open space shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible to the residents of the clustered development. Safe and convenient pedestrian access points to the open space from the interior of the clustered development shall be provided. 
(7)  Open space shall be located so as to preserve significant natural resources, natural features, scenic or wooded conditions, bodies of water, wetlands, or agricultural land. 
(c)  Use of open space. All dwelling units and other structures and improvements shall be located outside that portion of the land designated as open space. However, the planning commission, in its discretion, may permit structures or improvements to be located in the open space if the structures and/or improvements would be consistent with the designated purpose of the open space. By way of example only, park or playground equipment could be permitted on open space designated for recreational use. 
(d)  Houses abutting the open space. A minimum of 50 percent of all dwelling units within the development shall abut or overlook the dedicated open space. 
(e)  Underlying zoning district. The development of land under this article shall comply with all requirements of this chapter applicable to the zoning district in which the land is located, except those setback and yard size requirements that must be adjusted to allow the clustering option permitted under this article. 
(f)  Uniform lot size. Lots for dwellings in the clustered portion of the development shall be as uniform in area as is reasonably practicable, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. Flag lots or panhandle lots shall not be permitted. 
(g)  Building envelopes. The location and area of building envelopes, as proposed by the applicant, shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. The location and area of building envelopes shall be established to achieve the intent and purpose of the zoning district in which the land is located. 
(h)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a minimum width equal to no less than 75 percent of the minimum lot width specified for the zoning district in which the land is located, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
(i)  Maximum number of lots. The clustered portion of the development shall contain not more than the maximum number of lots, as determined from the parallel plan approved by the planning commission, and as reduced to reflect the inclusion of non-dwelling unit structures, if any, as described in subsection (j). 
(j)  Nondwelling unit structures. Lots containing nondwelling structures such as a clubhouse and its related amenities shall be subject to all requirements of this article applicable to lots containing dwellings and shall further be subject to all other requirements of this chapter and other provisions of the city code applicable to the type of structure proposed. However, the planning commission may, in its discretion, permit the enlargement of a lot containing a nondwelling structure so as to reasonably accommodate it. 
(k)  Reduction in lots for non-dwelling structures. If structures other than dwellings, such as a clubhouse, are constructed on a lot in the clustered portion of the land, the number of dwelling lots permitted in the clustered portion of the land shall be reduced by the number of dwelling lots equivalent to the area of the lot containing the nondwelling structure, rounded up to the nearest whole number. For the purposes of this subsection, the number of equivalent dwelling lots shall be based on the average area of lots containing dwellings in the clustered development. 
(l)  Perimeter lots. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the planning commission may require that the clustered development be designed and constructed with lot sizes and setbacks on the perimeter that will be reasonably consistent with the lot sizes and setbacks of adjacent uses (planned or existing). 
(m)  Pedestrian circulation. Adequate pedestrian circulation shall be provided by the applicant for on-site circulation. Adequate access shall be provided to all open space/recreational spaces from the residential areas. Natural paths or bike paths are encouraged within the development. Paths provided within the development shall be constructed of asphalt, gravel, woodchip, or other similar material as approved by the planning commission. 
(n)  Sidewalks. The planning commission may require that sidewalks or non-motorized trails be constructed. 
(o)  Grading. Grading within the clustered development shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  To preserve the natural appearance of the land, all graded areas, cuts, and fills shall be kept to a minimum. Specific requirements may be placed on the area of land to be graded or to be used for building, and on the size, height, and angles of cut-and-fill slopes and the shape thereof. Retaining walls may be required. 
(2)  All areas indicated as open space on the approved development plan shall be undisturbed by grading, excavating, structures, or otherwise, except as permitted by the planning commission. Drainage improvements, utility lines, riding trails, hiking trails, picnic areas, and similar recreational improvements and amenities may be placed in open space areas if approved by the planning commission. 
(3)  Grading within the clustered development shall be planned and carried out so as to avoid erosion, pollution, flooding, or other adverse effects upon the land, and so as to have only such minimal effect upon the environmental characteristics of the land as may be reasonably feasible. 
(p)  Private streets. If the clustered development is a site condominium, private streets may be permitted in accordance with section 94-317. The planning commission may, however, modify the requirements for private streets in a clustered development and in doing so, shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Number and type of dwelling units served by the private street; 
(2)  Traffic generation; 
(3)  Existing topography and vegetation; 
(4)  Security provisions; 
(5)  Interrelationship with the public street network; 
(6)  Future installation of public utilities; 
(7)  Likelihood of public dedication of the roadway. 
(q)  Other laws. The development of land under this article is subject to all other applicable city ordinances, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, rules relating to suitability of groundwater for on-site water supply for land not served by a public water system, and rules relating to the suitability of soils for on-site sewage disposal for land not served by public sanitary sewers. 
(r)  Subdivision, site condominium regulations. After or in conjunction with approval of a clustered site development plan pursuant to this article, the developer shall comply with the requirements and procedures for subdivisions or site condominiums as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-266. - Amendments to an approved site development plan. 
(a)  An approved clustered site development plan and any conditions imposed upon its approval shall not be changed except upon the mutual consent of the planning commission and the applicant, except as otherwise stated below with respect to a minor change. 
(b)  A minor change may be approved by the planning director. The planning director shall notify the planning commission of the minor change and state his conclusion that the change does not substantially alter the basic design or conditions required for the plan by the planning commission. 
The following shall be considered minor changes: 
(1)  Reduction of the size of any building, building envelope, or sign. 
(2)  Movement of buildings or signs by no more than ten feet. 
(3)  Plantings approved in the landscaping plan may be replaced by similar types of plantings. 
(4)  Changes requested by the city for safety reasons. 
(5)  Changes which will preserve natural features of the land without changing the basic site layout. 
(6)  Other similar changes of a minor nature proposed to be made to the configuration, design, layout, or topography of the site development plan which are deemed by the planning director to be not material or significant in relation to the entire site and which the planning director determines would not have any significant adverse effect on the development or on adjacent or nearby lands or the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(c)  The planning director may refer any decision regarding any proposed change in an approved site development plan to the planning commission for review and approval (regardless of whether the change may qualify as a minor change). In making a determination whether a change is a minor change, or whether to refer a change to the planning commission for approval, the planning director may consult with the chairperson of the planning commission. 
(d)  Should the planning director determine that a requested change in the approved site development plan is not minor, resubmission to the planning commission for an amendment shall be required, and the planning commission shall consider the change in accordance with the same procedures as for an original application. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-267. - Performance guarantees. 
    The planning commission, in its discretion, may require reasonable performance guarantees or assurance deemed satisfactory in the circumstances and authorized by law. Such arrangements shall be conditioned upon faithful compliance with all of the provisions and requirements of the approved clustered site development plan, including any conditions thereto, and construction and placement of all the improvements required thereby. 
    In its discretion, the planning commission may rebate or refund a proportionate share of the amount specified in a performance bond, letter of credit, or other written assurance, based upon the percent or other portion of improvements completed, as verified by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 94-268. - Time limitations 
    Each development permitted pursuant to this article shall be under construction within one year after the date of approval of the site development plan by the planning commission. If this requirement is not met, the planning commission may, in its discretion, grant an extension not exceeding one year, provided that the applicant submits reasonable evidence to the effect that unforeseen difficulties or special circumstances have been encountered, causing delay in the commencement of the clustered development. 
    If the clustered development has not been commenced within the above-stated time period, or within any authorized extension thereof, any building permits issued for the development or any part thereof shall be of no further effect. The applicant shall then be required to seek renewed approval from the planning commission under the terms of this article in order to exercise the clustering option. 
(Ord. No. 02-493, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Secs. 94-269-94-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 94-276. - Purpose. 
    This article establishes standards and requirements for the review and approval by the planning commission of site plans. As used in this article, "site plan" includes the documents and drawings as specified by this article which are necessary as a part of the land development review process to ensure that a proposed land use or activity is in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state statutes, and is compatible with the character of the surrounding area, the adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacities of public services and facilities, and the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 39, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-277. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the creation of a use or the erection of a building or structure requiring site plan review as specified in this article, except in connection with planned unit developments under article VIII. The standards and requirements provided by this article shall be in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter which are applicable to the use or activity under consideration. The planning commission may adopt procedures to encourage preliminary, informal review of proposed site plans. The preliminary review shall not, however, affect the applicability of the standards and requirements for formal approval of site plans as required by this article. The building official shall not issue a building permit for any use, building or structure requiring site plan review until a final site plan has been reviewed and approved as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 39, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 98-525, § 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-278. - Site plan review and approval by planning commission required. 
    Site plan review and approval by the planning commission as provided by this article shall be required prior to the creation of any of the following uses or the construction or erection of any buildings or structures in connection therewith: 
(1)  All permitted principal and associated permitted accessory uses (including any permitted regulated issues) in the following zone districts (except as provided by section 94-279): 
a.  ARM district, multiple-family residential (except those accessory uses excluded from site plan review by section 94-279). 
b.  ARM district one, multiple-family residential (except those accessory uses excluded from site plan review by section 94-279). 
c.  RMT district, mobile home or trailer coach park (to the extent allowed by state law). 
d.  ORP district, office, research and parking. 
e.  C-1 district, local commercial. 
f.  C-2 district, community commercial. 
g.  C-3 district, highway commercial. 
h.  C-4 district, outdoor commercial. 
i.  ML district, light industry. 
j.  MH district, heavy industry. 
k.  MP district, industrial park. 
l.  Principal uses permitted in the AA district under subsections 94-171(b)(4), (5), (6), (7), and (16) and accessory uses to such principal uses. 
The standards and requirements of this chapter shall also apply to special exception and unique uses as provided in section 94-248. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 01-474, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 94-279. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding subsection 94-278(1), the following shall be exempt from the requirement of site plan review and approval by the planning commission as provided by this article, but shall instead be subject to review by the building official to verify compliance with applicable zoning standards and requirements: 
(1)  A single one- or two-family dwelling on a lot. 
(2)  Multiple housing with more than two dwelling units but not more than four dwelling units. 
(3)  Accessory uses permitted under subsection 94-172(c)(1) in the ARM district and accessory uses permitted under subsection 94-173(c) in the ARM district one. 
(4)  The principal uses permitted under subsection 94-171(b)(1), (2), (3), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), and (15), and accessory uses to such principal uses in the AA district. 
(5)  A "state licensed residential facility (six or less persons)" on a lot on which there is no other principal building or use. 
(6)  The construction of any building addition which does not increase existing usable floor area by more than 25 percent or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. This subsection shall not be construed to exempt any new construction otherwise subject to site plan review under section 94-278. 
(7)  Construction solely on the interior of an existing building that does not increase usable floor area or increase the number of parking spaces by five or more spaces. 
(8)  The creation of any permitted principal use or permitted accessory use, or the erection of any buildings or structures in connection therewith, in any of the following zone districts (unless site plan review and approval by the planning commission is specifically required for the use, building or structure by the applicable district regulations in Article VII): 
a.  "A" district, single-family residential. 
b.  "A-2" district, duplex, two-family residential. 
c.  "SA" district, suburban residential, single-family. 
d.  "S" district, suburban residential. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection 94-278(1), the following shall also be exempt from the requirement of site plan review and approval by the planning commission under this article, but shall instead be subject to review under the provisions specified by this section below: 
(1)  Mineral mining, subject to the requirements of Article VII of Chapter 34. 
(2)  Planned Unit Developments (PUDs), subject to the requirements of Article VIII of this Chapter. 
(3)  Site condominium projects, subject to the requirements of Article XI of this Chapter. 
(4)  Temporary uses, subject to the requirements of Article XVIII of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-280. - Information required for site plans. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided by this article, site plans shall contain the information required by this section, as deemed necessary by the planning commission to adequately review a proposed use or activity and to meet the purposes and intent of this article. The types of information and the level of detail required by the planning commission for its review may vary depending upon the scale, scope or nature of the use under consideration. The information shall be presented in sufficient detail to describe, where appropriate, adequate dimensions to show the size and placement of all proposed structures, and adequate contour elevations to determine the existing and proposed configuration of the site for engineering purposes. Further, the required information shall be provided in sufficient detail to determine the demand on the capacities of public services and facilities. 
(1)  An accurate site plan, drawn to a scale not larger than one inch equals 100 feet (one inch = 100 feet) a minimum of one inch to 200 feet scale or larger and showing: 
a.  Property boundaries, property dimensions (including width, length, acreage and frontage) and north arrow. 
b.  A project description. 
c.  Existing zoning of the property and zoning of all adjacent properties within 300 feet. 
d.  The location, size, height, and use of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, or man-made features, including proposed setbacks, lot lines, typical layout, and distances between structures and between structures and lot lines. 
e.  The dimensions and number of proposed lots. 
f.  The location, surface width, and right-of-way width, as applicable, public rights-of-way, streets, drives, alleys, easements, acceleration and deceleration lanes, pedestrian walkways, and loading areas, including relationship to existing rights-of-way. The site plan shall also include any private streets if they are existing or otherwise permitted under this chapter. 
g.  The location of parking areas and number of parking spaces by size, as specified in Article XVI of this chapter. Parking spaces shall be designated by lines showing individual spaces. 
h.  The location and specifications of exterior lighting. 
i.  The location of all existing and proposed landscaping and vegetation, including number of trees and shrubs by species and caliper. 
j.  All known natural resources or natural features to be preserved. 
k.  The location, height and type of existing and proposed fences, walls, retaining walls, screening, berms and buffer zones. 
l.  The location of dumpsters, waste disposal areas, and loading facilities. 
m.  The location and size of existing and proposed hydrants and utilities, including proposed connections to public sewer and water supply systems. 
n.  The location and size of all surface and subsurface water drainage facilities, and county and/or local drainage ways, existing and proposed, with flow and runoff calculations, and floodplain areas, bodies of water, wetlands, or other unbuildable areas, if present on the site. 
o.  The location and size of all signs in accordance with Article XIV of this chapter. 
p.  The approximate locations of all buildings, structures and driveways on properties within 100 feet of any lot line of the subject properties. 
q.  The location and size of proposed open spaces, including recreational areas, and the purpose proposed for the open space areas. 
r.  Driveway/access specifications. 
s.  Locations of existing or proposed above or below ground storage facilities, and any containment structures, for chemicals, flammable materials, or hazardous materials. 
t.  For residential developments, density calculations, number and types of residential units, and floor area per habitable space. 
u.  The square footage that will be devoted to nonresidential purposes, and the number of rooms in hotels or motels. 
(2)  A topographic map showing present and proposed elevations at contour levels of not more than five feet, and showing the relationship of the topography of the land to adjoining land. Where excavation, fill or recontouring of the site is involved, proposed grading and final contours shall be shown. 
(3)  In addition to the required maps and drawings, a narrative (shown on the site plan or submitted separately) which contains the following information: 
a.  The owner's name and address; and the applicant's name and address, if not the same as the owner. 
b.  The name, address and phone number of the individual who prepared the plan, and the date of preparation. 
c.  The common description and complete legal description of the property. 
d.  The approximate number of acres allocated to each proposed use and gross area in building, structures, parking, public and/or private streets and drives, and open space. 
e.  Dwelling unit densities by type, if applicable. 
f.  A development and construction schedule indicating the intended date(s) for commencement of construction of all or portions or phases of the project. 
g.  Deed restrictions or other covenants affecting the land. 
h.  Proposed method of providing sewer and water service, as well as other public and private utilities. 
i.  Proposed method of providing storm drainage. 
j.  Permits and/or approvals required by state, federal, county, or other local agencies. 
(4)  Any additional information that is deemed by the planning commission to be reasonably necessary to adequately evaluate the proposed use or activity and its effects on the city, including, without limitation, additional studies (e.g., traffic impact analysis, impacts on natural features and drainage, soil tests), graphics (e.g., aerial photography), or written materials. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-281. - Application for site plan review. 
(a)  An application for site plan review must be submitted by the applicant to the planning director. If the site plan is readily reproducible by a copy machine and does not exceed 12 by 18 inches in size, one copy of the plan shall be submitted. If the site plan is not readily reproducible or exceeds 12 by 18 inches in size, 15 copies of the plan shall be submitted. The site plan must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which it is first to be considered. An application shall not be considered complete unless all of the following has been provided: 
(1)  Fifteen copies of the site plan meeting the requirements of section 94-280. 
(2)  A site plan review fee. Transmittals shall not be made unless the required fees have been paid in full. The amount of the fees shall be established by the city commission by resolution and may include escrow accounts to cover the city's costs of professional consultants and other expenses related to the application. 
(b)  The planning director shall review the site plan and, if complete, shall schedule consideration of the site plan as an item on the agenda at the next regular planning commission meeting. The planning director may also distribute copies of the site plan to other city departments for review and comment prior to review by the planning commission as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 05-524, § 4, 2-14-05) 
Sec. 94-282. - Preliminary review by city staff. 
(a)  The planning director, building official, city engineer, fire chief, and such other city officials or employees (city staff) that are interested in a proposed site plan or who might assist the city in the review process, shall be provided the opportunity to review the site plan prior to review by the planning commission. 
(b)  At the planning director's request, the applicant (or the applicant's authorized representatives) shall meet with the planning director and other city staff members to discuss the city's preliminary comments regarding the site plan. City staff and the applicant shall attempt to resolve any technical issues raised by the staff's comments prior to review of the site plan by the planning commission. If determined necessary by the planning director following the staff review meeting, the planning director may request the applicant to prepare and submit a revised site plan prior to review by the planning commission. Issues regarding the site plan that cannot be resolved by city staff and the applicant as a result of the meeting shall be referred to the planning commission for decision. 
(c)  The planning director shall prepare a written report to the planning commission summarizing the city staff's review of the site plan, including a description of any changes made by the applicant to the plan as a result of the review, a summary of staff comments, and any issues regarding the site plan that could not be resolved by staff and the applicant. Staff members that have reviewed the site plan may also submit their written comments, if any, to the planning director for transmittal to the planning commission. 
(d)  Statements made by city staff to the applicant in the course of its preliminary review of a site plan as provided by this section shall not constitute legally binding commitments, and shall not affect the applicability of the standards and requirements for formal approval of site plans by the planning commission as required by this article. 
(e)  The planning commission may adopt additional procedures to encourage preliminary, informal review of proposed site plans consistent with the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-283. - Standards for site plan review by planning commission. 
    The planning commission shall review the site plan following the preliminary review of city staff pursuant to section 94-282 (except as provided in section 94-289). The planning commission's review shall be based on the purposes, objectives and requirements of this article and on the standards provided by this section. The standards provided by this section are intended to provide a frame of reference for the planning commission in making its decision and to provide some guidelines for applicants preparing site plans. The standards are not intended as inflexible requirements, nor are they intended to discourage creativity, invention or innovation in the land development process. 
(1)  Dimensional requirements . The dimensional arrangement of buildings and structures conforms to the required yards, setback, height, and other applicable bulk and placement regulations of this chapter. 
(2)  Building arrangement . The proposed buildings and structures have a compatible relationship to the site terrain, landscaping, open space, and the other buildings and structures, existing and proposed. The bulk, location and height of proposed buildings and structures, as well as the general character of the development, should minimize any adverse effect to other development in the surrounding area and should not place demands on public services or facilities in excess of capacity. 
(3)  Drainage of surface water . Proper site drainage should be provided so that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. If practical, stormwater shall be removed from all roof areas, canopies and paved areas and carried away in an underground drainage system. Temporary onsite storage to reduce peak runoff from the site is encouraged. Surface water in all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and will not create ponding. 
(4)  Utility services . Utility distribution lines shall be underground. Other or associated utility installations above ground shall be located so as to have a harmonious relationship to neighboring properties and to the site. 
(5)  Vehicular access and parking . The provisions for vehicular loading and unloading and parking, and for vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and onto adjacent public streets and ways shall not create hazards to safety, and shall not place demands on public services or facilities in excess of capacity. Drives, streets and other elements shall be designed to promote safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and shall provide safe and efficient vehicular access to and from the site in light of adjacent streets and curb cuts. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as required by this chapter in a manner that will minimize noise, glare, odor and other effects on uses on the site or on adjacent properties. 
(6)  Pedestrian access . Pedestrian access should be provided between major activity areas, employment centers, service centers and residential areas. Sidewalks should be provided along the street unless determined by the planning commission to be undesirable or unnecessary or because pedestrian circulation is provided in other ways. At a minimum, if sidewalks are not provided, pedestrian movement along the street right-of-way should not be hindered by rocks, boulders, fences or other obstructions. 
(7)  Exterior lighting . Exterior lighting shall not create undue hazards to motorists traveling on adjacent public streets, nor damage the value or diminish the usability of adjacent properties. Lighting should be adequate for the safety of occupants or users of the site. 
(8)  Landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. Plant material should be used to enhance appearance of the site, to screen unsightly or harsh elements, and to provide visual relief from large monotonous features such as parking lots. Landscaping, buffers, and/or greenbelts should be preserved or provided to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. Landscaping, buffer zones, and other aspects of the site plan shall comply with the requirements of section 94-344. 
(9)  Signs . The size and location of signs should be considered in relation to signs on adjacent sites, and shall be located to avoid impairment of traffic safety and the visibility of motorists. Every sign shall be proportionate in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings as an accessory use to onsite structures. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building(s) and site(s) to which it principally relates. 
(10)  Special features . Storage areas, mechanical areas, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar features should be located and/or screened so as to be unobtrusive and not interfere with access to or circulation within the site or detract from the visual impression of the site. 
(11)  Emergency access . All buildings and structures shall be arranged so as to permit sufficient access to emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98; Ord. No. 01-482, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 07-551, § 4, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 94-284. - Conflicts with laws or private restrictions. 
(a)  A site plan that violates, or that is inconsistent with, local, state or federal law or regulations shall not be approved. 
(b)  The approval of a site plan shall not be considered a waiver of deed restrictions or covenants that apply to the property. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-285. - Conditions of approval. 
    The planning commission may impose reasonable conditions in conjunction with the approval of a site plan for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased services and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety and welfare of those who will use the proposed use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed use, and the community as a whole; be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity; be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter; be related to the standards established in this chapter for the land use or activity under consideration; and be necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-286. - Site plan approvals. 
(a)  The planning commission shall review the site plan and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan in accordance with this article and applicable provisions of this chapter. The basis for the decision and any conditions imposed relating to an affirmative decision shall be specified in the resolution of the planning commission approving or denying the site plan. If approved, or approved with conditions, the site plan as approved shall become a part of the record of approval. 
(b)  Upon approval of a site plan, the planning director and the applicant shall sign and date three copies of the site plan as approved. One signed copy of the approved site plan shall be kept on file by the planning department; one copy shall be forwarded to the building inspector; and one copy shall be returned to the applicant. 
(c)  Approval of a site plan shall expire (and shall be null and void) one year from the date of approval unless a building permit is issued prior to that time and the construction proceeds to completion in accordance with the building permit and site plan. However, the planning commission may approve an extension of the expiration period for up to one additional year, if the extension is requested prior to the expiration of the initial period and the applicant presents reasonable evidence that the delay in commencing construction was due to unforeseen difficulties beyond the control of the applicant. If the extension is not granted due to the applicant's failure to meet the conditions for an extension as provided by this section, or if construction is not commenced prior to the expiration of a granted extension, the site plan approval shall be null and void and a new application shall be required. 
(d)  A site plan which has been denied or approved subject to conditions by the planning commission may not be resubmitted for review by the planning commission for a period of 120 days from the date of denial or approval with conditions, except on the basis of new evidence found valid by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-287. - Changes to an approved site plan. 
(a)  Subsequent to its approval, a site plan may be changed only by the mutual agreement of the planning commission and the applicant, except minor changes as provided by subsection 94-287(b). The planning commission shall not agree to a change in an approved plan unless the change conforms to all applicable standards and requirements of this chapter. The decision to approve a change to an approved site plan shall be made by the planning commission at a regularly scheduled or special planning commission meeting. 
(b)  Minor changes to an approved site plan may be approved by the planning director upon certification in writing to the planning commission that the proposed revision does not alter the basic design or any specified conditions of the plan as approved by the planning commission. For purposes of this section, a minor change is any of the following, provided that the applicable minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance continue to be met: 
(1)  A reduction of the size of any building. 
(2)  Change in the location of a building, sign or trash dumpster by no more than ten feet. 
(3)  Replacement of plantings approved in the site plan landscape plan with similar types of plantings on a one-to-one basis or greater basis. 
(4)  Any change in signs including the number, height, size, or setback. 
(5)  Changes required or requested by the city or another governmental agency for safety reasons. 
(c)  An applicant requesting a change to an approved site plan by the planning commission or the planning director shall provide the planning director with three copies of the site plan indicating the proposed change. If the change is approved as authorized by this section, the three copies of the modified site plan shall be signed, dated and distributed as provided by Section 94-286. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-288. - Performance guarantees. 
    Performance guarantees to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions imposed under this article may be required by the planning commission at the time of approval of a site plan as authorized under section 4e of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-289. - Variances. 
    If a site plan requires one or more variances, an application for the variance(s) shall be filed and considered by the board of zoning appeals after preliminary city staff review pursuant to section 94-282. The application for the variance(s) shall be considered by the board of zoning appeals pursuant to article III of this chapter before the planning commission considers the site plan pursuant to section 94-283 and this article X. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-290. - Enforcement. 
    A site plan approval by the planning commission in connection with a proposed use or activity shall have the full force and effect of this chapter. Subsequent actions relating to that use or activity authorized shall be consistent with the site plan as originally approved or as subsequently changed as provided by this article. Any violation of an approved plan shall be grounds for the city to order that all construction be stopped, and to order that building permits and certificates of occupancy be withheld until the violation is removed or adequate guarantee of removal of the violation is provided to the city. Further, violations of any approved plan, or failure to comply with any requirements of this article, including conditions of approval, shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-525, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 94-291 - Building facades. 
    All building facades subject to site plan review in the ORP, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ML, MH and MP districts shall comply with section 94-357. 
(Ord. No. 06-547, § 4, 8-28-06) 
Secs. 94-292-94-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS 

Sec. 94-306. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Site condominium projects are condominium developments in which each condominium unit consists of an area of vacant land and a volume of vacant air space within which a building or other improvements may be constructed by the condominium unit owner. Each site condominium unit may also have an appurtenant limited common element reserved for the exclusive use of the owner of the condominium unit. Either the condominium unit by itself, or the condominium unit taken together with any contiguous, appurtenant limited common element, shall be considered to constitute a building site which is the functional equivalent of a lot for purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. Site condominium projects may also include general common elements consisting of common open space, recreational areas, streets (public or, if approved, private), and other areas available for use by all owners of condominium units within the project. This article is intended to ensure that site condominium units and developments are regulated in a similar manner and are entitled to the same privileges as any other lot or development regulated by the city. 
(b)  This article requires preliminary review by the planning commission followed by final review and approval by the city commission of site condominium project plans to ensure that site condominium projects comply with this chapter. Site condominium projects may be approved as provided by this article in any zoning district for the uses permitted by this chapter in the zoning district in which the project is located. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.1), 5-12-92; Ord. No. 95-479, § 3, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 94-307. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building envelope means the area of a condominium unit within which the principal building or structure may be constructed, together with any accessory structures, as described in the master deed for the site condominium project. (In a single-family residential site condominium project, for example, the building envelope refers to the area of each condominium unit within which the dwelling and any accessory structures may be built.) 
    Building site means either: 
(1)  The area within the site condominium unit by itself (i.e., exclusive of any appurtenant limited common element), including the area under the building envelope and the area around and contiguous to the building envelope; or 
(2)  The area within the condominium unit (as described in subsection (1) of this definition), taken together with any contiguous and appurtenant limited common element. 
For purposes of determining compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter, including, without limitation, height, area, yard and density requirements, or with other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations, a "building site" shall be considered to be the equivalent of a "lot." 
    Condominium act means Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq., MSA 26.50(101) et seq.), as amended. 
    Exempt change means a change to a site condominium project (other than a major or minor change) that is exempt from review and approval as required for major or minor changes under this article. Exempt changes shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  A change in the name of the project, in the name of a public or private street within the project, or in the name of the developer of the project; 
(2)  A change in the voting rights of co-owners or mortgagees; or 
(3)  Any other change in the site condominium project which, as determined by the planning commission, does not constitute a major or minor change or will not otherwise change the site configuration, design, layout, topography, or any other aspect of a project which is subject to regulation under this chapter. 
    Limited common element means an area which is appurtenant to a site condominium unit and which is reserved in the master deed for the site condominium project for the exclusive use of the owner of the site condominium unit. 
    Major change means a change in the site configuration, design, layout or topography of a site condominium project (or any portion thereof), including any change that could result in: 
(1)  An increase of 20 percent or more in the number of site condominium units; 
(2)  A reduction of five percent or more in the area of the building site for any site condominium unit; 
(3)  A reduction of five percent or more in the total combined area of the general common elements of the site condominium project; 
(4)  A reduction of five percent or more in the total combined area of all limited common elements of the site condominium project; or 
(5)  Any other change in the site configuration, design, layout, topography, or other aspect of the project which is subject to regulation under this chapter, including, without limitation, a change in the location of public or private streets and utilities, or in the size, location, area, horizontal boundaries or vertical boundaries of a site condominium unit, and which is determined by the planning commission to constitute a major change to the site condominium project. 
    Minor change means a change in the site configuration, design, layout or topography of a site condominium project (or any portion thereof), including any change that will result in: 
(1)  An increase of less than 20 percent in the number of site condominium units or a decrease in the number of site condominium units; 
(2)  A reduction of less than five percent in the area of the building site for any site condominium unit; 
(3)  A reduction of less than five percent in the total combined area of the general common elements of the site condominium project; 
(4)  A reduction of less than five percent in the total combined area of all limited common elements of the site condominium project; or 
(5)  Any other minor variation in the site configuration, design, layout, topography or other aspect of the project which is subject to regulation under this chapter, and which, as determined by the planning commission, does not constitute a major change. 
    Site condominium project means a plan or project consisting of two or more site condominium units established in compliance with the condominium act. 
    Site condominium project plan means the plans, drawings and information prepared for a site condominium project as required by section 66 of the condominium act and as required by this article for review of the project by the planning commission and the city commission. 
    Site condominium unit means a condominium unit established in compliance with the condominium act which consists of an area of vacant land and a volume of vacant air space, designed and intended for separate ownership and use as described in the site condominium project master deed, and within which a building or other improvements may be constructed by the condominium unit owner. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this article, the following words and phrases, as well as any other words or phrases used in this article which are specifically defined in the condominium act, shall conform to the meanings given to them in the condominium act: "common elements," "condominium documents," "condominium unit," "contractible condominium," "convertible area," "expandable condominium," "general common elements" and "master deed." 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D), 5-12-92; Ord. No. 96-479, §§ 4, 5, 2-13-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-308. - Review of preliminary plans by the planning commission. 
(a)  Prior to final review and approval of a site condominium project plan by the city commission, a preliminary site condominium project plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures, standards and requirements provided by this article. 
(b)  Application for review and approval of a site condominium project plan shall be initiated by submitting to the planning director: 
(1)  A minimum of 15 copies of a preliminary site condominium project plan project plan which complies with the requirements of section 94-311; and 
(2)  A filing fee in accordance with the fees established by resolution of the city commission which may include escrow accounts to cover the city's costs of professional consultants and other expenses related to the application. 
(c)  The planning commission shall review the preliminary site condominium project plan in accordance with the standards and requirements contained in section 94-310, and in accordance with the following additional standards and requirements: 
(1)  In its review of a site condominium project plan, the planning commission may consult with the zoning administrator, city attorney, city engineer, city fire chief, city planning director or other appropriate persons regarding the adequacy of the proposed common elements and maintenance provisions, use and occupancy restrictions, utility systems, public and private streets, project layout and design, or other aspects of the proposed project. 
(2)  The building site for each site condominium unit shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, including, without limitation, minimum lot area, minimum lot width, required front, side and rear yards, maximum building height, and public and private street frontage requirements. For example, the area and width of the building site shall be used to determine compliance with the minimum lot area and lot width requirements. Compliance with required front, side and rear yards shall be determined by measuring the distance from the equivalent front, side or rear yard boundaries of the building site to the closest respective front, side or rear boundary of the building envelope. On private streets, the front yard boundary of the building site shall be at least 30 feet from the centerline of the adjoining private street (and this 30-foot setback shall be required even if a modification is approved under section 94-317(d) regarding the width of the private street easement or paved surface of the private street). 
(3)  Except with respect to private streets approved for a site condominium project under section 94-317, site condominium projects shall comply with all requirements regarding design standards and provision of required improvements (including, but not limited to, street trees in section 74-90.1), as provided for subdivisions by article IV of chapter 74 of the City Code, provided that references therein to "subdivision" and "lot" shall mean "site condominium project" and "building site," respectively. 
(d)  Portions of the preliminary plan as relevant to the reviewing authority in question shall be submitted by the applicant to the county health department, county road commission, county drain commission, state department of natural resources, state department of public health and other appropriate state and county review and enforcement agencies having direct approval or permitting authority over any aspect of the proposed site condominium project. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.3), 5-12-92; Ord. No. 96-479, § 6, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 05-524, § 3, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 05-535, § 1, 9-26-05) 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 58-26 et seq. 
Sec. 94-309. - Planning commission recommendation. 
    After reviewing the preliminary site condominium project plan, the planning commission shall prepare a written statement of recommendations regarding the proposed site condominium project, including any suggested or required changes in the plan, and, if the recommendation is to deny approval, the reasons for denial. The planning commission shall provide a copy of its written recommendations to the applicant and to the city commission. A recommendation by the planning commission to approve (or approve with conditions) a preliminary project plan shall not constitute a final approval of the plan and shall not confer any rights upon any person. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.4), 5-12-92) 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 58-26 et seq. 
Sec. 94-310. - Review and approval of final plans by city commission. 
(a)  After receiving the planning commission's recommendations on the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit to the planning director a minimum of 15 copies of a final site condominium development plan which complies with the requirements of this section and of section 94-311. The planning director shall forward the copies of the final plan to the city commission. 
(b)  The final site condominium project plan submitted by the applicant shall incorporate all of the recommendations, if any, made by the planning commission based on its prior review of the preliminary plan. If any of the planning commission's recommendations are not incorporated in the final plan, the applicant shall clearly specify in writing which recommendations have not been incorporated and the reasons why those recommendations have not been incorporated. Except for changes made to the plan as necessary to incorporate the recommendations of the planning commission, the final plan shall otherwise be identical to the preliminary plan which was reviewed by the planning commission. Changes made to the plan other than those necessary to incorporate the recommendations of the planning commission shall be reviewed by the planning commission as provided by this article prior to approval of the plan by the city commission. 
(c)  After receiving the planning commission's recommendations on the preliminary plan and a final site condominium development plan from the applicant, the city commission shall proceed to review and may approve, deny or approve with conditions the plan in accordance with the standards provided by section 94-308 and other applicable procedures, standards and requirements provided by this article. 
(d)  As a condition of approval of a final site condominium project plan: 
(1)  The city commission may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city commission covering the estimated cost of required improvements associated with the site condominium project for which approval is sought be deposited with the city as provided by section 4e of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended. 
(2)  The city commission may impose additional conditions of approval as provided by section 94-312. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D), 5-12-92) 
Sec. 94-311. - Contents of site condominium project plans. 
    A complete condominium project plan shall include the following documents and information, as applicable to the project under consideration: 
(1)  All of the documents and information required by section 66 of the condominium act, including, without limitation: 
a.  A survey plan. 
b.  A floodplain plan, if the project lies within or abuts a floodplain area. 
c.  A utility plan, showing all sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer lines and related easements for installation, repair and maintenance of all utilities. 
d.  The size, location, area and horizontal boundaries of each condominium unit, and the vertical boundaries and volume for each unit comprised of enclosed air space. 
e.  A number assigned to each condominium unit. 
f.  Building sections showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements, including their location on the land. Any proposed structure or improvement shown should be labeled either "must be built" or "need not be built." To the extent that the developer is contractually obligated to deliver utility conduits, buildings, sidewalk, driveways, landscaping and access roads, the same shall be shown and designated as "must be built," but the obligation to deliver such items exists whether or not they are so shown and designated. 
(2)  A site plan which complies with section 94-278. 
(3)  To the extent not provided under subsection (1) or (2) of this section, the condominium project plan shall also include the following documents and information: 
a.  The location of all proposed drains, drainage ditches, ravines, culverts, changes in grade and other natural or artificial drainage facilities or improvement,s including, without limitation, a drainage plan showing the general flow of surface water from each building site within the site condominium project to any adjacent building site or lot or to an approved drainage course. 
b.  The nature, location and size of the general and limited common elements (including any information required to be submitted for private streets as provided by section 94-317), building envelopes and building sites. 
c.  The use and occupancy restrictions and maintenance provisions for all general and limited common elements that will be included in the master deed (including, without limitation, the maintenance provisions which will apply to any proposed private streets). 
d.  A narrative describing the overall objectives of the proposed site condominium project, and a copy of the proposed bylaws for the project. 
The condominium project plan and associated documents and information shall be provided at the level of detail as determined necessary by the planning commission for review of a preliminary plan or by the city commission for review of a final plan. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.6), 5-12-92; Ord. No. 96-479, § 7, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 94-312. - Construction in compliance with approved final site condominium project plan. 
    No buildings or structures shall be constructed nor shall any other site improvements or changes be made on the property in connection with a proposed site condominium project except in compliance with a final site condominium project plan as approved by the city commission, including any conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.7), 5-12-92) 
Sec. 94-313. - Commencement of construction; issuance of permits. 
    No construction, grading, tree removal, soil stripping, or other site improvements or changes shall be commenced by any person and no building, construction or grading permit shall be issued by the building inspector for a site condominium project until: 
(1)  A final site condominium project plan has been approved by the city commission; 
(2)  All conditions to commencement of construction imposed by the city commission have been met; and 
(3)  All applicable approvals or permits from appropriate county and state review and enforcement agencies have been obtained for the project. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.8), 5-12-92; Ord. No. 96-479, § 8, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 94-313.1. - Consistency with approved drainage plan required. 
(a)  A building permit required by the City Code for the excavation, construction, erection, conversion or repair of any land, building or structure proposed for a building site within a site condominium project for which a site condominium project plan has been approved shall not be issued until a building permit application has been submitted showing that the effect of the proposed work is substantially consistent with the drainage plan approved for the project regarding flow of surface water from the building site to any adjacent building site or lot or to an approved drainage course. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy required by the City Code for the use or occupancy of any building or structure on a building site shall not be issued unless the building official determines that the work completed on the building site pursuant to a building permit issued by the city is substantially consistent with the drainage plan approved for the project regarding flow of surface water from the building site to any adjacent building site or lot or to an approved drainage course. 
(c)  The requirements of subsections (a) and (b) shall be clearly and legibly reproduced verbatim in the master deed for the site condominium project. 
(d)  No work shall be conducted on a building site, except in compliance with the drainage plan approved for the project, and conditions on the building site after completion of the work shall be maintained at all times in compliance with the approved plan. 
(e)  This section applies only to building sites within site condominium projects for which a drainage plan has been approved for the site condominium project as provided by this article. Any building site for which a drainage plan has not previously been approved under this article is subject to the drainage requirements in chapters 18 and 67 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-479, § 9, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 13-612, § 4, 2-11-13 ) 
Sec. 94-314. - Expandable or convertible condominium projects. 
    Approval of a final site condominium project plan shall not constitute approval of expandable or convertible portions of a site condominium project unless the expandable or convertible areas were specifically reviewed and approved by the city commission in compliance with the procedures, standards and requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.9), 5-12-92) 
Sec. 94-315. - Review and approval of changes to approved site condominium projects. 
    Any change proposed in connection with a project for which a final site condominium project plan has previously been approved by the city commission shall be subject to review as provided by this section: 
(1)  Major changes. Any change which constitutes a major change shall be reviewed by the planning commission and reviewed and approved, denied, or approved with conditions by the city commission as provided by this article for the original review and approval of preliminary and final plans in accordance with the standards provided by section 94-308 and other applicable procedures, standards and requirements. 
(2)  Minor changes. Any change which constitutes a minor change shall be reviewed and approved, denied, or approved with conditions by the planning commission alone, in accordance with the standards provided by section 94-308 and other applicable procedures, standards and requirements, without the need for further review and approval by the city commission. 
(3)  Exempt changes. Any change which constitutes an exempt change shall not be subject to review by the city under this article, but a copy of the changes proposed, and of any changes subsequently made if at all different than proposed, shall be filed with the planning director as soon as the changes are proposed or made. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.10), 5-12-92) 
Sec. 94-316. - Incorporation of approved provisions in master deed. 
    All provisions of a final site condominium project plan which are approved by the city commission as provided by this article shall be incorporated by reference in the master deed for the site condominium project. Further, all major changes to a project shall be incorporated by reference in the master deed. A copy of the master deed as filed with the county register of deeds for recording shall be provided to the city within ten days after filing the plan with the county. 
(Ord. No. 92-408, § 1(5-D.11), 5-12-92) 
Sec. 94-317. - Private streets. 
(a)  In general. Private streets may be approved in place of public streets for site condominium projects as part of the site condominium project approval process as provided by this article, and subject to the standards and requirements provided by this section. 
(b)  Private street defined. For purposes of this section, "private street" means any undedicated street or road that provides, or is intended to provide, the primary means of ingress and egress to two or more building sites within a site condominium project. All extensions, additions or branches of or to a private street shall be considered part of the private street that abuts the public road. "Private street" also includes an access serving a single building site, if that building site does not have the requisite amount of frontage on a public street as required by this chapter. 
(c)  Design standards; highway permit fees. Except as otherwise specifically approved by the planning commission as provided by section 94-317(d), all private streets and driveway approaches on private streets shall meet the design standards and pay the applicable highway permit fees that would apply to an equivalent public street or driveway approach on a public street as provided by article IV of chapter 74 of the city code, the city's "Rules and Regulations for Highway Permits and Utility Line Permits," as revised, and the city's "Standard Specifications for Street Construction," as revised. As used in this section, "equivalent public street or driveway approach on a public street" means that if the private street or driveway approach on a private street is located in the AA agricultural zone district as provided by this chapter, the private street or driveway approach must meet the design standards that would apply to the street or driveway approach in the AA zone district if it was a public street or a driveway approach on a public street. Similarly, if the private street or driveway approach on a private street is located in a residential zone district (other than the AA zone district) or in a commercial or industrial zone district, the private street or driveway approach must meet the design standards that would apply to the street or driveway approach in the residential, commercial or industrial zone district (as applicable) if it was a public street or a driveway approach on a public street. 
(d)  Modification of maximum grade and/or width. Pursuant to its review and approval of the preliminary site condominium project plan, and subject to the minimum standards provided by this section, the planning commission may approve a modification of the design standards otherwise applicable under section 94-317(c) solely with regard to the following: The maximum permitted grade of a private street; the minimum required width of a private street easement; and/or the minimum required width of the paved surface of a private street. 
(1)  In determining whether to approve any such modification, the planning commission shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Whether the proposed modification is reasonably necessary or desirable to preserve existing natural features on the property such as topography, vegetation, water bodies, wetlands, etc. 
b.  Whether the private street will be of such width, surface and grade to assure safe passage and maneuverability of private vehicles, waste disposal vehicles and emergency vehicles if the proposed modification is approved. 
c.  The impacts, if any, of the proposed modification, on soil erosion or sedimentation of any lakes, streams, wetlands or other effects on the natural environment. 
d.  Whether adequate provisions have been made in the master deed for proper and continued maintenance of the private street (including, without limitation, snow removal). 
The planning commission shall also provide the building official, the fire chief, the chief of police, the city engineer (and any other city officials as determined appropriate by the planning commission) with an opportunity to review and comment on any proposed modification. The planning commission shall consider the comments received from such other city officials in determining whether to approve a proposed modification. 
(2)  In no case may the planning commission approve a modification of the maximum slope, minimum easement width or minimum pavement width standards otherwise applicable to a private street that are less restrictive than the following minimum standards: 
a.  A private street shall be located within a private street easement that is at least 50 feet wide at all points. The paved surface of a private street shall be at least 20 feet wide at all points. 
b.  A three-foot wide road shoulder shall be provided along each side of the paved surface of a private street and around the circumference of the paved surface of any required turn-around area. 
c.  A private street shall not exceed a grade of ten percent; provided that within 30 feet of the intersection of a private street with any other private street or with any public right-of-way, a private street shall not exceed a grade of four percent. 
(e)  Storm drainage. A private street shall be constructed in a manner determined adequate by the city engineer to provide effective stormwater drainage and to prevent run-off onto adjacent property. 
(f)  Bridges and culverts. If a private street crosses a natural drainage course, stream or other natural body of water, the method of crossing (by bridge, culvert or other structure, for example) must be approved by the city engineer and must comply with applicable state and local requirements. 
(g)  Street names. A private street shall be given a street name that is not the same or similar to any other street name in the city. A street sign bearing the name given the private street of substantially the same design, size and color of street signs provided by the city for public streets shall be erected and maintained at no expense to the city at the intersection of the private street with another private street or a public right-of-way. 
(h)  Street address numbers. Street address numbers for all properties located on a private street shall meet the street address requirements for public streets as provided by article IV, chapter 18, of this Code. 
(i)  Private street plan. The site condominium project plan shall include at least the following additional information with regard to any proposed private streets: 
(1)  The location, route, dimensions, design and grade of the private street; 
(2)  The relation of the private street to adjacent or intersecting public or private streets; 
(3)  Existing or proposed curb cuts; 
(4)  The building sites, buildings or dwelling units, existing and proposed, which will be provided access by the private street; 
(5)  The location of public utilities within the private street easement and within 20 feet of the easement; 
(6)  The location of any drainage courses, lakes, streams or other natural bodies of water within the private street easement and within 100 feet of the easement; and 
(7)  The street name and location of street signs. 
(j)  Maintenance provisions. A private street may not be approved without adequate provision being made in the master deed to insure the continued repair and maintenance of the private street (including, without limitation, street signs), and complete financing of the costs thereof by the private parties benefitting from the private street. 
(k)  One residential building permit for a house may be issued by the building official following the construction of the base asphalt coat of the private street system, as shown on the approved and final site condominium project plan and approved by the city engineer. 
    No other building permits may be issued until the private street system has been fully constructed in compliance with the approved and final site condominium project plan and approved by the city engineer. 
    For the purposes of this section, the term "fully constructed" means that the private street system has been constructed with the approved sub-grade, base coat and final top coat of asphalt, along with any required curbing, driveways, signage, storm sewer appurtenances, soil erosion control measures and other related devices, as shown on the final and approved site condominium project plan. 
(Ord. No. 96-479, § 10, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 13-611, § 6, 1-28-13 ) 
Sec. 94-318. - Sidewalks; pedestrian lanes. 
    If sidewalks are not otherwise required under this chapter, the planning commission may recommend and the city commission may require the final site condominium project plan to include the installation of sidewalks or pedestrian lanes along public or private streets. In considering the need for sidewalks or pedestrian lanes, the following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  The amount of current and future pedestrian traffic passing by or within the site. 
(2)  Whether a sidewalk or pedestrian lane would enhance the safety of pedestrians currently walking by the site, as well as the safety of future pedestrians. 
(3)  The existing and future volume of traffic on the public or private streets within the site and adjacent to the site. 
(4)  The existence or probability of sidewalks or pedestrian lanes being constructed on adjacent properties in order to create or complete a usable system of sidewalks or pedestrian lanes. 
(5)  The location of the proposed use. 
(6)  The location of nearby uses or facilities which attract pedestrians such as schools, churches, public buildings, parks and recreation areas, and shopping areas. If sidewalks or pedestrian lanes are required, adequate provision shall be made in the master deed to ensure their continued repair and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 99-540, § 1, 10-25-99) 
Secs. 94-319-94-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 94-336. - Visibility at intersections in residential and agricultural districts. 
    On a corner lot in any residential or agricultural district nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lot and a line joining points along the street lines of such lot 50 feet from the point of their intersection. 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 90. 
Sec. 94-337. - Fences and walls. 
(1)  The following requirements apply to all fences and walls: 
(a)  No fence shall be constructed of a material which is of such low strength as to be likely to collapse under the weight of a child or other person weighing up to 100 pounds. 
(b)  All contiguous fencing shall have uniform spacing between any slats, posts, or other repeating elements. 
(2)  The following requirements apply to fences and walls in residential zoning districts and the AA-Agricultural district: 
(a)  In residential districts, fences and walls located in a required front yard setback shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(b)  Fences used for nonagricultural purposes that are above three feet in height and are located in the required front yard setback shall not exceed 50 percent opacity, as measured as the distance between slats, boards, pickets, split rails, iron posts or similar structural material. 
(c)  Fences and walls located in a required side or rear yard setback shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(d)  Fence posts shall not extend above the top of the fence; however, decorative post caps can project a maximum of four inches above the top of the tallest adjacent fence section. 
(e)  Decorative fence tops, lattice and rails are allowed but shall be included in the overall fence height measurement. 
(f)  Fences used for nonagricultural purposes shall not be constructed of a woven wire, chain link or similar material which has spaces larger than two and a half inches between the wires or chain link. This requirement shall not apply to wrought iron, split rail or similar fences. 
(g)  Fences shall be installed with the "good" side facing outwards. The good side will be the finished side, which does not show the supports, posts or similar structural components. 
(h)  Residential fences in excess of 50 percent opacity shall be primarily composed of one or a mix of the following materials: 
1.  Stained, painted, or comparably finished lumber 
2.  Vinyl or composite plastic 
3.  Pressure treated lumber 
4.  Other materials as deemed compatible with the intent of this chapter after review by the Walker Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(i)  Residential fences not exceeding 50 percent opacity shall be primarily composed of one or a mix of the following: 
1.  Wrought iron or a similar metal alloy. 
2.  Stained, painted, or comparably finished lumber. 
3.  Vinyl or composite plastic. 
4.  Split rail. 
5.  Chain link, subject to the limitations of this section. 
6.  Pressure treated lumber. 
7.  Other materials as deemed compatible with the intent of this chapter after review by the Walker Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(j)  Residential walls shall be primarily faced with one or a mix of the following materials: 
1.  Brick. 
2.  Stone. 
3.  Stucco. 
4.  Other materials as deemed compatible with the intent of this chapter after review by the Walker Board of Zoning Appeals. 

(3)  The following requirements apply to fences and walls in nonresidential and nonagricultural zoning districts: 
(a)  Fences and walls located in a required front yard setback shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(b)  Fences and walls in a required side or rear yard setback shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(c)  Fences shall not be constructed of a woven wire, chain link or similar material which has spaces larger than two and a half inches between the wires or chain link. This requirement shall not apply to wrought iron, split rail or similar fences. 
(4)  No fence, wall or other structure in any zoning district shall be constructed or located within a drainage easement described in a final subdivision plat or a final site condominium project plan, or within a drainage easement of the city or other governmental entity which is recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds or otherwise established by law. 
(5)  No planting of trees or other vegetation shall be made or located in any zoning district to materially impede the flow of surface water within a drainage easement described in a final subdivision plat or a final site condominium project plan, or within a drainage easement of the city of other governmental entity which is recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds or otherwise established by law. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 94-456, § 5, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 98-512, § 1, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 08-558, § 3, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 11-602, § 2, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 17-635 , § 2, 7-10-17) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; vegetation, ch. 90. 
Sec. 94-338. - Accessory buildings and swimming pools. 
(a)  All accessory buildings shall be located within the rear yard and at least ten feet away from any other building. If any private garage is located less than ten feet from a dwelling house, the garage shall be made fire resistant in the manner required for attached garages. 
(b)  Swimming pools constructed, erected or placed in or on the ground as accessory to a residential dwelling unit shall be located within the rear yard. A wall of a swimming pool shall be located at least five feet from a side or rear property line and at least ten feet from a dwelling. The requirements of this subsection shall apply to any swimming pool for which a building permit is required under the building code of the city. 
(c)  No accessory building or swimming pool in any zoning district shall be constructed or located within a drainage easement described in a final subdivision plat or a final site condominium project plan, or within a drainage easement of the city or other governmental entity which is recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds or otherwise established by law. 


(Ord. No. 91-392, § 1, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 98-512, § 2, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 18. 
Sec. 94-339. - Erection of more than one principal building or structure on a lot. 
    Every building to be erected or moved shall be located on a lot, and in no case shall more than one principal building used for residential purposes be located on one lot, except as may be otherwise provided by this chapter. More than one principal building used for business, commercial or industrial uses may be located on a lot only if the additional building is an integral part of the same business, commercial or industrial operation and provided the building otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter. No principal building used for business, commercial or industrial uses shall be located on the same lot as a principal building used for residential purposes, except as may be otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 91-392, § 2, 3-12-91) 
Sec. 94-340. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
    The height limitations contained in the schedule of district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances (not to be construed to include signs) usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy provided, however, that the height of wireless communications towers and antennas shall comply with section 94-355 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-503, § 3, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 94-341. - Existing nonconforming lots. 
    When a parcel of land in a residential or agricultural district which was in existence at the time the ordinance from which this chapter derives took effect does not constitute a lot because it does not meet the area or width requirements of its district, but has at least 50 percent of the area and width requirements of its district, it may be used for single-family uses, and the side yards may be reduced by the proportion that the width fails to meet the minimum requirement of its district for width at the building line, subject to the limitation that no side yard shall be less than seven feet in width without approval of the board of zoning appeals. If any such lot has less than 50 percent of the area or width required by this district, a building permit shall not be refused by the building inspector merely on the basis of the size of the lot, provided that the board of zoning appeals finds that: 
(1)  Public water and sewer services are available for the lot; 
(2)  There is a front yard of at least 35 feet and a rear yard of at least 25 feet, and side yards shall be proportionately reduced subject to the limitation that no side yard shall be less than seven feet in width without approval of the board of zoning appeals; 
(3)  The lot has an area of at least 6,000 square feet; 
(4)  The proposed building will meet the requirements of the building code for the city and will conform generally with the architecture, structure and exterior design of buildings within 500 feet of such lot; and 
(5)  Except as to plats recorded prior to December 16, 1957, such lot did not at any time adjoin land of the same owner in single ownership available for use in connection with such lot. 
(Ord. No. 72-168, 4-20-72; Ord. No. 72-178, 10-19-72; Ord. No. 80-276, § 1, 6-24-80) 
Sec. 94-342. - Sanitation; outside toilets. 
(a)  All sewerage and toilets shall be connected to sewer mains or an adequate and effective septic tank and drain tile field as approved by the county department of health. 
(b)  Outside portable toilets or privies will be permitted in zoned recreational districts for a maximum period of ten consecutive days, not renewable within the following ten consecutive days, upon issuance of a permit therefor by the city building inspector. The building inspector shall authorize the issuance of a permit for the aforesaid use where the applicant presents evidence that such outside toilet will be equipped with an adequate and effective chemical to sanitarily treat the sewerage, as approved by the county department of health, so that it will not constitute a health hazard and source of filth. A fee of $1.00 per each unit, with a maximum of $5.00 per project, shall be charged for the issuance of such permit. 
(c)  Outside portable toilets or privies for construction personnel will be permitted at new construction projects until a time when sewerage and toilets are connected to sewer mains or an adequate and effective septic tank and drain tile field, as approved by the county department of health, or 120 days, whichever comes first, upon issuance of a permit by the building inspector. The building inspector shall not issue a permit for the aforesaid use unless the applicant presents evidence that such outside toilet will be equipped with an adequate and effective chemical to sanitarily treat the sewerage, as approved by the county department of health, so that it will not constitute a health hazard and source of filth. 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 86. 
Sec. 94-343. - Household pets and domestic animals. 
    The keeping of household pets for the enjoyment or recreation of the occupants of a dwelling unit, and not for sale, boarding or breeding, shall be permitted as an accessory use on parcels used for residential purposes, as provided by this section. No more than three dogs shall be kept or housed in or at any one dwelling unit; however, any litter of dogs which causes the limit of three dogs to be exceeded shall not constitute a violation of this provision for a period of four months after birth. Household pets must be confined in the dwelling, or in facilities located in the rear yard which must be maintained in a clean and healthful condition, inoffensive to the residents of adjacent property. The board of zoning appeals may, upon application, hear and determine complaints regarding household pets, may limit the number of household pets kept, and may prescribe the manner of keeping household pets in accordance with precautions necessary to prevent noise, odors or other conditions offensive to a reasonable person as a resident of adjacent property, or to prevent pollution of the water supply or the spread of infection and disease. Domestic animals are prohibited in any residential district; provided, that horses may be permitted in residential districts as a special exception as provided by section 94-167. Animals other than household pets and domestic animals are prohibited in any zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 75-217, § 3, 4-22-75; Ord. No. 87-353, § 1, 10-13-87; Ord. No. 13-611, § 2, 1-28-13 ) 
Sec. 94-344. - Buffer zone, landscaping, parking, and lighting. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, a "buffer zone" is defined as a strip of land abutting exterior boundaries of a lot (including any right-of-way line) and reserved solely for plant material, or fencing (if otherwise permitted in this chapter), to be used as a visual, sound, or privacy barrier. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to require the use of buffer zones and landscape screening to reduce the negative impacts between potentially incompatible land uses and to provide for specific landscape requirements within parking areas. It is further intended to preserve and enhance aesthetic qualities, privacy, and property values within the city. 
(c)  Scope. This section is applicable to all new site plans and development proposed after the effective date of this section. Furthermore, this section is applicable to all expansions, renovations, or alterations that increase the gross floor area of the structure by 25 percent or more above the floor area as it existed on the effective date of the ordinance amending this section. In addition, subsection (f) is applicable to all new or expanded parking areas having a total of more than 25 parking spaces. 
(d)  Buffer zones. Buffer zones are required on properties in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ORP, ML, MH and MP districts when they adjoin properties in certain zoning districts as set forth in Table 1. Table 2 specifies the requirements for each buffer zone type listed in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Zoning District of Proposed Use Adjacent Zoning District or Land Use: A, A-2, SA, S, AA, ARM Adjacent Zoning District or Land Use: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ORP, RMT Adjacent Zoning District or Land Use: ML, MH, MP C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ORP Type B Type A Type A ML, MH, MP Type C Type B Type A  
Table 2 
Buffer Zone Type Feature Buffer Zone A Buffer Zone B Buffer Zone C Width in Feet 5 15 20 Required Trees/100 Feet 2 5 8 Required Shrubs/100 Feet 4 5 8  

(1)  The number of trees and shrubs in Table 2 is required for every 100 linear feet of buffer zone length provided, however, that buffer zone length will be rounded to the nearest increment of 100 feet. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, an "adjacent zoning district or land use" as described in Table 1 includes all zoning districts or land uses on properties directly across a public right-of-way from the subject property. 
(3)  The existence of access ways or driveways within a buffer zone will not minimize the requirements for trees and shrubs. 
(4)  Evergreen trees are required for buffer zone types B and C, while either canopy or evergreen trees may be used in buffer zone type A. 
(5)  All areas of the buffer zones outside of trees, shrubs, and/or flowerbeds shall be covered with a living ground cover. 
(6)  The buffer zone requirements of this section apply whether or not the property in the adjacent zoning district as set forth in Table 1 is developed. 
(7)  Storm water detention and retention areas shall be permitted within buffer zones provided that they do not reduce the landscape/screening effect. 
(8)  For reasons of conflicting uses, unfavorable topography or other unique or extraordinary circumstances, the planning commission as part of site plan review (or the planning director if site plan review is not required) may increase or decrease landscape plantings in any required buffer zone if any increase or decrease is found to be necessary to reasonably achieve the intent of this section as stated in subsection (b) above. 
(e)  Front yard; commercial, industrial zones. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all properties in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ORP, ML, MH, and ORP Districts shall have a buffer zone in the front yard regardless of the adjacent zoning districts or land uses. Unless a type B or type C buffer zone is otherwise required under subsection (d), the buffer zone in the front yard shall, at a minimum, be a type A buffer zone as described in subsection (d) above. 
(f)  Parking, landscaping. Parking areas on properties in all zoning districts in excess of 25 spaces shall be landscaped according to the following: 
(1)  For parking areas with 26-99 parking spaces, 100 square feet of landscaped area per 12 parking spaces, or part thereof, shall be required. 
(2)  For parking areas with 100 or more parking spaces, 100 square feet of landscaped area per 15 parking spaces, or part thereof, shall be required. 
(3)  Landscaped islands shall be dispersed throughout the parking area in order to break up large expanses of pavement and shall be protected by raised curbs or other similar barriers. 
(4)  Planting islands shall be at least 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of nine feet. 
(5)  A minimum of one deciduous tree shall be provided for each planting island, with the balance of the island covered with grass, shredded bark, or other living cover. Lighting structures may be permitted in the planting islands. 

(g)  Plant requirements. For trees and shrubs required by subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section, minimum plant sizes at the time of installation shall conform to the following: 
Table 3 
Deciduous canopy tree 2 1/2 inch caliper Evergreen tree 8 ft. in height Deciduous shrub 2 ft. in height Upright evergreen shrub 2 ft. in height Spreading evergreen shrub 24 in. spread  
(1)  Trees shall be spaced at a minimum distance that is the average width of such trees one year after the date of planting. 
(2)  The planning department shall keep on file a suggested species list to accommodate various site situations. 
(3)  In effort to allow flexibility in design, various types of required landscaping may be substituted with the approval of the planning commission as part of site plan review provided that the desired screening effect is achieved. If site plan review is not required, the planning director may approve such substitution. 
(4)  If a property owner cannot plant trees or shrubs required by this section due to unfavorable planting conditions, the planning director may grant the property owner not more than six months after completion of the building or site improvements to install the required trees or shrubs. The planning director may require a performance guarantee as a condition of such approval. 
(h)  Existing plant material. Existing tree and plant material, which complies with the standards of this section, may be retained and shall count toward meeting the requirements of subsection (d), (e) and (f) of this section. 
(i)  Dumpsters. In the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ORP, ML, MH, and MP districts, all dumpsters and other detached storage facilities shall be screened on all sides by a continuous, opaque screen six feet in height. The screen may be comprised of berms, plant material, screen walls or fences, or any combination of these elements. Gates shall be kept closed except when the dumpster or other detached storage facility is being utilized or serviced. 
(j)  Lighting. Lighting requirements: 
(1)  Any lighting poles or other structures shall be concealed as much as possible within the landscaped areas. 
(2)  When adjacent to a property zoned for residential uses or used for residential purposes, all lighting poles or other lighting structures on the entire site shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(3)  All lighting shall be directed away from any adjacent properties zoned for residential uses or used for residential purposes. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, properties in the AA agricultural district shall be considered as zoned for residential uses. 
(k)  Performance guarantees. The planning commission (or the planning director if site plan review is not required) may require performance guarantees to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(l)  Conflict. In the event of any conflict between this section and other provisions of this chapter or between subsections of this section, the more stringent provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 01-482, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Sec. 94-345. - Moving buildings and structures. 
    Before the building official shall issue a permit for moving any dwelling, building or structure into or within the city, the building official shall inspect such dwelling, building or structure to determine whether the dwelling, building or structure complies with the provisions of the building code, and shall inspect the site to which it is proposed to move the dwelling, building or structure to determine that such dwelling, building or structure will comply with the requirements of the building code and of this chapter after such move. No permit shall be issued unless the building official is satisfied that such building, dwelling or structure complies with the requirements of the building code and will comply with the requirements of this chapter and building code in such new site; provided that if deficiencies exist which can be remedied, a permit may be issued upon the deposit of a satisfactory performance bond with the city treasurer or the satisfactory escrow of sufficient moneys to ensure that the structure after moving will comply fully with the requirements of the building code and this chapter and, in such event, the permit shall specify the deficiencies and there shall be filed with the building official plans and specifications for the remedying of such deficiencies. The moving of any such building or structure shall further be made under permits issued pursuant to and in compliance with the ordinances of the city specifically governing the moving of buildings and structures. 
Cross reference- Moving of buildings, § 18-166 et seq. 
Sec. 94-346. - Public sewer and water. 
    If public water and/or sewer service is located adjacent to any lot within a commercial or industrial zone, any building constructed on such lot shall be connected to all such public services. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 86. 
Sec. 94-347. - Private garages in the "A," "A-2," "SA," "S" and "AA" districts. 
    For each residential dwelling to be constructed, erected or moved upon any lot in the "A," "A-2," "SA," "S" or "AA" districts, there shall also be a private garage at least 12 feet in width by 22 feet in length; provided further, that there shall be a private garage, as described above, for each residential unit within a residential dwelling located in the "A-2" duplex district, two-family residential. 
(Ord. No. 77-239, § 2, 7-12-77; Ord. No. 77-240, § 3, 9-13-77) 
Sec. 94-348. - Driveways, service drives, and access drives. 
    No property within a residentially zoned area shall be used in conjunction with a commercial or industrial use for purposes of a driveway, service drive, access drive, or other such similar purpose unless such property shall be rezoned for commercial or industrial use. 
(Ord. No. 78-251, § 5, 9-12-78) 
Sec. 94-349. - Temporary quarters. 
    Where damage caused by fire, flood, wind or other such calamity occasions the need for temporary living or office quarters, the building official may approve by permit the conditions for use of a temporary structure for a period of 90 days. Such structure shall comply with the requirements of the building code and county health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 81-282, § 2, 3-10-81) 
Sec. 94-350. - Minimum requirements for dwellings outside of mobile home parks. 
    All dwellings located outside of mobile home parks shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Area. 
a.  Every dwelling unit shall have, exclusive of porches, garages, breezeways, terraces, attics and basements (except as provided in subsection (1)b.) a floor area of not less than: 
1.  Single-family dwelling: 960 square feet. 
2.  Two-family dwelling: 960 square feet per unit. 
3.  Multiple-family dwelling: square footage as required for unit size as listed in section 94-172(f). 
b.  Finished basement; floor area. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, a basement, or a part thereof fully enclosed by four walls, may be used for dwelling purposes and the floor area of the basement, or of the fully enclosed part thereof, as the case may be, shall be included in the floor area of a dwelling unit for the purposes of subsection (1)a., provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The basement, or the fully enclosed part thereof, shall comply with the building code of the city, as amended from time to time; and 
2.  All walls and the ceiling of the basement, or of the fully enclosed part thereof, shall be covered with an interior finish. For purposes of this section, "interior finish" means wainscoting, paneling, drywall, plaster or other similar finish, excluding paint, applied structurally or for acoustical treatment, insulation, decoration or similar purposes. 
(2)  Foundation. There shall be a foundation of concrete or block around the entire exterior perimeter of all dwellings. The foundation shall have a minimum depth of 42 inches below grade. The foundation shall provide maximum exposed foundation above grade of 16 inches and a minimum exposed foundation above grade of eight inches. A wood foundation is also acceptable provided it meets the standards established for wood foundations contained in the construction code adopted by the city. The requirement of a foundation around the exterior perimeter of a dwelling as set forth in this subsection shall not apply to a "four season" porch used as living space in the dwelling provided that such porch shall not exceed 250 square feet in area and that such porch is designed and constructed in accordance with applicable construction code requirements. 
(3)  Attachment to foundation. All dwellings shall be firmly attached to the foundation so as to be watertight as required by the construction code adopted by the city, or, if a mobile home, shall be anchored to the foundation by an anchor system designed and constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Regulations entitled "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards." 
(4)  Minimum height required. All habitable space within a dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum height between floor and ceiling of seven feet six inches. 
(5)  Storage areas required. All dwelling units shall provide storage areas (either within a basement or in an attic, or in a separate, fully enclosed structure) of not less than 15 percent of the living area of the dwelling unit, exclusive of storage space for automobiles. Such storage areas shall not be counted in determining whether the dwelling unit complies with the minimum floor area requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Minimum width required. The minimum width of any single-family dwelling unit shall be 22 feet for at least 67 percent of its length, measured between the exterior part of the walls having the greatest length. 
(7)  Minimum ingress and egress. All dwelling units shall provide a minimum of two separate points of ingress and egress. 
(8)  Steps or porch areas required. All single-family dwelling units shall provide steps or porch areas permanently attached to the foundation where there exists an elevation differential of more than one foot between a door and the surrounding grade. 
(9)  Interior access to basement or crawl space. All dwelling units shall provide from within the dwelling unit at least one means of access to any basement or crawl space. 
(10)  Crawl space. All dwellings without basements shall provide a crawl space below the entire floor of the dwelling not less than 18 inches in depth with a vapor barrier consisting of two inches of concrete on the floor of the crawl space. Multilevel dwellings separated by a minimum of three steps between levels shall be exempt from the crawl space requirement. The crawl space shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation approved by the building official. 
(11)  Minimum roof requirements. All dwelling units shall have a roof assembly designed to carry a 30-pound live load and a ten-pound dead load. A minimum of six inches overhang shall be provided on roof drip edges. 
(12)  Wheels, mechanism, tongue. The wheels, pulling mechanism and tongue of any mobile home shall be removed prior to placement on a foundation. 
(13)  Dwelling maintenance. All dwellings shall be maintained in accordance with the currently adopted property maintenance code to protect against deterioration and/or damage. 
(14)  Construction standards. All mobile homes shall meet the standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Mobile Home Construction Safety Standards in effect at the time the mobile home is located in the city. All mobile homes shall bear evidence of compliance with the mobile home construction safety standards in accordance with regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development in effect at the time the mobile home is located in the city. All other dwellings shall meet the requirements of the construction code adopted by the city. 
(15)  Building permits. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any dwelling unit, construction plans, including a plot plan, adequate to illustrate compliance with the requirements of this section and all other requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to the requirements of the district in which the unit is to be located, shall be submitted to the building inspector. If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, there shall also be submitted adequate evidence to ensure that the dwelling complies with the standards applicable to mobile homes set forth in this section before a permit will be issued. 
(16)  Additions. All additions to dwellings located outside mobile home parks shall meet the requirements of the construction code adopted by the city. 
(17)  Water and sewer connections. All dwellings shall be connected to a sewer system and water supply system approved by the city. 
(18)  Electrical connection. All dwellings shall be connected to overhead or underground electrical service. The service head, service mast or lateral, meter and service entrance conductor used to connect a dwelling to electrical service shall be attached to the exterior of the dwelling. The service panel used to connect a dwelling to electrical service shall be attached to the interior of the dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 83-307, § 1, 4-12-83; Ord. No. 83-314, §§ 1, 2, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 01-474, § 1, 5-14-01) 
Sec. 94-351. - Satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  No satellite dish antenna shall be constructed, installed, maintained or located in any district except in conformance with subsection (b) of this section and the following requirements: 
(1)  The satellite dish antenna shall be located only in the rear yard except that in a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, CPUD, MPUD, IPUD, ORP, ML, MH and MP district, the satellite dish antenna may also be located in the side yard. 
(2)  The satellite dish antenna shall be located at least ten feet from all lot lines. 
(3)  The height of the satellite dish antenna, including any platform or structure upon which the antenna is mounted, shall not exceed 15 feet, except that (i) in a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, CPUD, MPUD, IPUD, ORP, ML, MH and MP district, a satellite dish antenna may be mounted on the roof of the building provided that its height (including any platform or structure upon which the antenna is mounted) does not exceed 15 feet measured from the point where the satellite disch antenna is attached to the roof, and (ii) in an AA, A, A-2, SA, S, RPUD, ARM, ARM district one, or RMT district, a satellite dish antenna may be mounted on the roof of a building provided that its diameter does not exceed 24 inches and the height of the satellite dish antenna (including any structure upon which the antenna is mounted) does not exceed 36 inches measured from the point where the satellite dish antenna is attached to the roof. 
(4)  The rear yard shall be planted with a compact hedge, or other plants or trees approved by the building inspector, which shall have a height, density and location so as to screen the satellite dish antenna from adjoining properties. This subsection shall not apply to roof-mounted satellite dish antennas permitted under subsection (3) above. This subsection shall also not apply in a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, CPUD, MPUD, IPUD, ORP, ML, MH or MP district, unless the property on which the satellite dish antenna is located is contiguous with property in an AA, A, A-2, SA, S, RPUD, ARM, ARM district one or RMT district. 
(5)  The satellite dish antenna shall be permanently attached to a foundation, except that roof-mounted satellite dish antennas permitted under subsection (3) above shall be permanently attached to the roof. 
(6)  The satellite dish antenna and the construction, installation, maintenance and operation thereof shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Building permit required. 
(1)  No satellite dish antenna shall be constructed, installed, maintained or operated unless a building permit therefor has been issued in accordance with the procedures in subsection (b)(2). 
(2)  Prior to issuance of a building permit to construct, install, maintain or operate a satellite dish antenna, an application therefor and a site plan showing the proposed location of the satellite dish antenna, the foundation or roof to which the satellite dish antenna will be permanently attached, the height, density and location of required screening, and the dimensions of the satellite dish antenna, including any platform or structure upon which the antenna will be mounted, shall be submitted. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city commission to cover the costs of processing the application. No part of the fee shall be refundable. The building inspector shall review the application and the site plan and shall issue a building permit for the satellite dish antenna only upon finding that the satellite dish antenna conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 84-319, § 1, 11-13-84; Ord. No. 95-460, § 1, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 94-352. - Accessory buildings and private garages. 
    Accessory buildings, including private garages, may be erected in any zoning district for the purposes permitted in the zoning district in which the accessory building is located, subject to the requirements of the applicable district regulations and the requirements of this section. 
(1)  General. The following regulations are applicable to all accessory buildings and private garages in any zoning district. 
a.  Attached or detached. An accessory building may be erected either attached as an integral part of, or detached from, the main building to which it is accessory. If erected as an integral part of the main building to which it is accessory, the accessory building shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main building. Accessory buildings shall be considered to be an integral part of the main building when connected by a continuous breezeway, portico, covered colonnade or similar permanent architectural device. 
b.  Compatible construction. In the A, A-2, SA and S districts, all accessory buildings in excess of 200 square feet shall be constructed of materials which are similar to and compatible with the main building to which they are accessory, and shall be of a similar and compatible architectural character. 
c.  Vacant lots. An accessory building shall not be erected on a vacant lot, or prior to the time of construction of the main building to which it is accessory. Further, an accessory building shall not be occupied or used unless or until the main building to which it is accessory is also being occupied or used, or after such time as the occupation of use of the main building has ceased. 
d.  Floor area ratios. An accessory building shall not be permitted where its placement on the lot would exceed the maximum usable floor area and accessory building floor area requirements of section 94-166, set forth in the schedule of district regulations. 
e.  Floor area measurement. For purpose of determining the square footage of the floor area of an accessory building, the measurement shall be the length times the width of the exterior of the building, measured from the outside corners of the building frame. 
f.  Projections. No roof, cornice, or any other part of an accessory building may project more than 24 inches from the inside of the building frame, unless the entire structure's dimensions fall within the accessory building's allowable square footage. 
g.  Shape. The length of an accessory building shall not exceed two times its width. 
h.  Portable accessory buildings. Portable accessory buildings without a permanent foundation and capable of being moved intact shall meet all of the requirements applicable to accessory buildings which are not portable. In addition, portable accessory buildings shall be properly anchored in a method approved by the building official. 
i.  Commercial use. An accessory building which is accessory to a residential dwelling unit shall not be used for the conduct of any business, trade, occupation, profession or industry. 
j.  Foundation. The foundation shall provide maximum exposed foundation above grade of 16 inches and a minimum exposed foundation above grade of eight inches. A wood foundation is also acceptable provided it meets the standards established for wood foundations contained in the construction code adopted by the city. 
(2)  Private garages; single-family and two-family residential dwellings. Only one private garage, attached or detached, per dwelling unit is permitted by right on a lot occupied for single family or two-family residential purposes in the A, A-2, SA, S, AA and ARM districts, as provided by this section. 
a.  Maximum size, detached private garage. The maximum size permitted by right of a detached garage shall not exceed the following: 
1.  For a single-family residential dwelling: 832 square feet of floor area. 
2.  For a two-family dwelling: 528 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit. 
b.  Maximum size, attached private garage. The maximum size permitted by right of a private garage attached to a dwelling unit shall not exceed the following: 
1.  For a single-family residential dwelling. 832 square feet of floor area for the first 1,300 square feet of habitable floor area contained in the dwelling. In addition, for each whole increment of five square feet that the floor area of the dwelling unit exceeds 1,300 square feet, the floor area of the attached private garage may be increased by one square foot. 
2.  For a two-family dwelling. 528 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit. 

c.  Eaves height. The maximum eaves height of a detached private garage shall be as follows: 
Side/Rear Yard Setback of Accessory Building Maximum Eaves Height Both rear yard and side yard setback of not less than 5 feet 10 feet Both rear yard and side yard setback of not less than 10 feet 12 feet Both rear yard and side yard setback of not less than 15 feet 14 feet  
(3)  Additional accessory buildings; single-family and two-family residential dwellings. In addition to the attached or detached private garage permitted under subsection (2), and except as otherwise provided by subsection (3)d., only one additional accessory building shall be permitted by right on a lot occupied for single-family or two-family residential purposes in the A, A-2, SA, S, AA and ARM districts, as provided by this section. 
a.  Maximum size. In the A, A-2, SA, S, AA, and ARM districts, the maximum size of the accessory building shall be as follows: 
Lot Area Maximum Size Not more than 1/2 acre 900 square feet or 5% of lot area, whichever is less More than 1/2 acre but not more than 11/2 acres 1,200 square feet More than 11/2 acres but not more than 3 acres 1,500 square feet More than 3 acres 1,800 square feet  

b.  Setback. In the A, A-2, SA, S, AA, and ARM districts, all accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard, shall have a side yard setback and a rear yard setback of at least five feet, and if located less than ten feet from the dwelling, shall be made fire resistant in such manner as is required for attached garages. 

c.  Eaves Height. In the A, A-2, SA, S, AA, and ARM districts, the maximum height of eaves on accessory buildings shall be as follows: 
Side/Rear Yard Setback of Accessory Building Maximum Eaves Height Both rear yard and side yard setback of not less than 5 feet 10 feet Both rear yard and side yard setback of not less than 10 feet 12 feet Both rear yard and side yard setback of not less than 15 feet 14 feet  

d.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the limitations of this subsection (3), the following additional accessory buildings shall also be permitted per lot: A pool house, garden house, greenhouse, and/or a children's playhouse, or similar buildings for a use customarily incidental to the use of a lot occupied for purposes of a single-family or two-family residential dwelling, not to exceed 100 square feet in combined total area, and with an eaves height not to exceed ten feet. 
(4)  Subsections (1), (2) and (3) shall not apply to any building located within the AA zone district on a lot of at least five acres if: 
a.  The building is permitted as a principal use of the lot for general or specialized farming as provided by section 94-171(b)(1), or as accessory to the principal use of the lot for those farming purposes as provided by section 94-171(c); and 
b.  The building is used solely in connection with the commercial production of agricultural products in accordance with generally accepted agricultural and management practices (and is not used for any other principal or accessory use permitted in the AA zone district, including, without limitation, any purposes accessory to permitted dwellings or residential uses on the farm). 
Farm buildings which meet the requirements under subsections (4)a. and b., above, and are therefore exempt from the requirements of subsections (1), (2) and (3) shall remain subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter, including, without limitation, any applicable district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 88-369, § 1, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 91-392, § 3, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 91-394, § 1, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 94-432, § 1, 4-25-94; Ord. No. 00-467, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 04-514, § 1, 7-12-04; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Sec. 94-352a. - Decks. 
    A deck may be erected as an accessory structure either attached as a part of, or detached from, a residential dwelling. An attached or detached deck may be located in the rear or side yard provided that no part of the deck shall be less than five feet from the rear and side lot lines. An attached deck may be located in the front yard, as a porch for the front of a residential dwelling, provided that the attached deck or porch is set back at least 25 feet from the front lot line for the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 97-498, § 1, 9-8-97) 
Sec. 94-353. - Additional setbacks for structures adjacent the Grand River. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no principal or accessory building shall be hereafter constructed, erected, installed, or enlarged within a minimum of 100 feet of the shoreline of the Grand River. 
(b)  No clearance zone. 
(1)  A strip 50 feet bordering and parallel to the bank of the Grand River, as measured from the shoreline, shall be maintained in its natural vegetative state, except for the permitted clearing of dead or obnoxious plants. 
(2)  The zoning administrator may allow limited clearing of the no clearance zone, but only when required for construction of a permitted building or structure outside the no clearance zone, provided that the land cleared is returned to a vegetative state that is comparable to that which existed prior to the clearing. 
(Ord. No. 94-456, § 6, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 94-354. - Through lots. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following terms shall mean as follows: 
    Local street means: 
(1)  A street designed, intended or used to provide direct access (rather than through traffic) to 50 or fewer residential dwellings and which is traveled by less than 500 cars per day; or 
(2)  A street designated as a local residential street by the city's master plan. 
    Through lot (also referred to as a "double frontage lot") means a lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more than one street (as depicted in Figure 1 under the definition of "lot types" in section 94-5 of this chapter). 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, through lots are prohibited in the A, A-2, SA, S, AA, ARM, ARM district one, RPUD-1 and RPUD-2 zoning districts (and for lots used for residential purposes in the MPUD zoning district) unless determined by the city to be essential to provide separation of residential development from any street designed, intended or used for purposes other than a local street or to overcome disadvantages due to unique topography. If a through lot is proposed as a platted lot within a subdivision, the determination whether the through lot is essential as provided by this section shall be made by the planning commission and city commission pursuant to their review of the plat under chapter 74 of this Code. If a through lot is proposed as a building site within a site condominium development, that determination shall be made by the planning commission and city commission pursuant to their review of the site condominium project plan under article XI, chapter 94 of this Code. For lots other than platted lots or site condominium building sites, the determination shall be made by the planning commission. 
(c)  If a through lot is determined essential as provided by section 94-354(b), and therefore not prohibited, the planning commission and/or the city commission (as applicable, depending on whether a platted lot, site condominium building site, or other lot is involved as provided by section 94-354(b)) shall: 
(1)  Determine which street the dwellings on the lot shall face. 
(2)  Determine from which street all access to the lot (including driveway openings) shall be gained. 
(3)  Designate the "primary" front yard and "secondary" front yard for the lot. The use, setback, width and area of the primary front yard shall conform with all requirements and limitations applicable to front yards under chapter 94 of this Code. The use, setback, width and area of the secondary front yard shall conform with all requirements and limitations applicable to rear yards under chapter 94 of this Code, provided that no accessory buildings, swimming pool or fence within the secondary front yard shall be located closer to the nearest edge of the adjoining street right-of-way than allowed by the applicable primary front yard setback. 
The determinations made by the city under sections 94-354(c)(1), (2) and (3) above, shall be consistent with the direction faced, access gained and yards provided for a majority of dwellings and/or buildings on adjoining and adjacent lots, except as otherwise determined necessary by the city to mitigate any potential adverse traffic conditions or other public health, safety or welfare impacts caused, directly or indirectly, by the through lot. 
(Ord. No. 96-478, § 1, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 94-355. - Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas. 
(a)  Purpose and goals. This section establishes regulations for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. Further, this section is intended to: (1) protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; (2) encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; (3) minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; (4) strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; (5) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; (6) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; (7) enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; (8) protect the public health and safety in relation to communication towers; and (9) avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city's master plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
    Alternative tower structure means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals, excluding satellite dish antenna as defined in section 94-5 of this chapter. 
    Backhaul network means the lines than connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
    Heavy commercial zoning district means the C-2, C-3, and C-4 districts as provided in this chapter. 
    Industrial zoning district means the ML and MH districts as provided in this chapter. 
    Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas means any tower or antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such permit is current and not expired. 
    Residential zoning district means the A, A-2, SA, S, AA, ARM, ARM district one, and RMT districts as provided in this chapter. 
    Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the city shall be subject to the regulations of this section (section 94-355), except as provided in sections 94-355(c)(2) through (4), inclusive. 
(2)  Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
(3)  Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements of sections 94-355(d)(6) and (d)(7). 
(4)  AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right. 
(d)  General requirements. 
(1)  Principal or accessory use. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter (including without limitation, section 94-339), a different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on the lot. 
(2)  Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district development regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within the lot. 
(3)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the building official an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the border of the city, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The building official may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals by the building official or special exception use approvals by the planning commission under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city, provided, however, that the building official is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(4)  Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable FAA standards, shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping so that they will blend into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(5)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting shall be shielded or otherwise directed away from adjacent properties and the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(6)  State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal or state government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring the towers and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of the standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and regulations constitutes grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(7)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in chapter 18 of the City Code or any applicable state or city codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the tower into compliance with the standards. Failure to bring the tower into compliance within that 30 day period constitutes grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(8)  Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
(9)  Not essential services. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities. 
(10)  Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the building official. 
(11)  Public notice. For purposes of this section, any request for special exception use approval or variance, or any appeal of an administrative approval by the building official, shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that arc located within 500 feet of the parcel on which the tower or antenna is located, in addition to any notice otherwise required by chapter 94 or applicable law. 
(12)  Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, except as required by subsection (13) below. 
(13)  Emergency contact. Each tower shall have a sign of six square feet in area identifying the name and address of the tower owner and the telephone number for contacting the owner or its representative in case of emergency. The location of the sign shall be determined by the building official in the case of administratively approved uses, or by the planning commission in the case of special exception uses. 
(14)  Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of section 94-355(h). 
(15)  Multiple antenna/tower plan. The city encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process. 
(16)  Other regulations. In addition to the requirements of this section, the installation or construction of a tower or antenna shall comply with chapter 18 of the City Code and all applicable federal, state, or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
(e)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval by the building official or special exception use approval by the planning commission pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following uses are specifically permitted in any zoning district: 
a.  Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city, provided that a license or lease authorizing the antenna or tower has been approved by the city. 
(f)  Administratively approved uses. 
(1)  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals by the building official for towers and antennas. 
a.  The building official may administratively approve the uses listed in subsection (2) below. 
b.  Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the building official providing the information set forth in sections 94-355(g)(2)a. and 94- 355(g)(2)c. and a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of city commission to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application. 
c.  The building official shall review the application for administrative approval and grant the approval if the proposed use complies with sections 94-355(d), 94-355(g)(2)d., and 94-355(g)(2)e. 
d.  The building official shall respond to each application within 60 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. If the building official fails to respond to the applicant within that 60-day period, then the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
e.  In connection with any administrative approval, the building official may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements in section 94-355(g)(2)d. or separation distances between towers in section 94-355(g)(2)e. by not more than 50 percent. 
f.  In connection with any administrative approval, the building official may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction. 
g.  If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an application for special exception use approval by the planning commission pursuant to section 94-355(g) prior to filing any appeal that may be available under this chapter. 
(2)  List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the building official after conducting an administrative review if such towers and antennas comply with all of the provisions of this section and the following: 
a.  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or antenna, in any heavy commercial or industrial zoning district. 
b.  Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of subsections (1) and (2) below. 
1.  Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is attached to an existing structure bother than a tower may be approved by the building official as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, office, institutional, or multifamily structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided: 
A.  The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure; 
B.  The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and 
C.  The antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
2.  Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the building official and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall be approved, provided that the co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following: 
A.  A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the building official allows reconstruction as a monopole. 
B.  Height. 
(i)  An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna. 
(ii)  The height change referred to in subsection B.(i) above may only occur one time per communication tower. 
(iii)  The additional height referred to in subsection B.(i) above shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth in section 94-355(g). The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations. 
C.  Onsite location. 
(i)  A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its existing location. 
(ii)  After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one tower may remain on the site. 
(iii)  A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to section 94-355(g)(2)e. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of section 94-355(g)(2)e. provided, however, that the onsite relocation of a tower within the separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as established in section 94-355(g)(2)e. shall only be permitted when approved by the building official upon finding that the relocated tower is consistent with the goals set forth in section 94-355(a) and the public health, safety, and welfare. 
c.  New towers in non-residential zoning districts. Locating any new tower in a non-residential zoning district other than industrial or heavy commercial, provided that a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the building official concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 94-355(a) and the requirements of section 94-355(d); the tower meets the setback requirements in section 94-355(g)(2)d. and separation distances in section 94-355(g)(2)e., the tower complies with sections 94-355(g)(2)f:, sections 94-355(g)(2)g., and 94-355(h), and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria: 
(1)  For a single user, up to 90 feet in height; 
(2)  For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and 
(3)  For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height. 
d.  Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other than industrial or heavy commercial that in the judgment of the building official is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 94-355(a). 
e.  Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. 
(g)  Special exception use approvals. 
(1)  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance by the planning commission of special exception use approvals for towers or antennas: 
a.  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 94-355(e) or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to section 94-355(f), then special exception use approval is required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
b.  Applications for special exception use approvals under this section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of article IX ("standards and requirements for submission, review and approval of special exception uses and unique uses") of this chapter, except as modified in this section. 
c.  In granting a special exception use approval, the planning commission may impose conditions to the extent the planning commission concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
d.  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. An applicant for special exception use approval shall submit the information described in this section and a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of the city commission to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application. 
(2)  Towers. 
a.  Information required. In addition to any information required for applications for special exception use approvals pursuant to article IX of this chapter, applicants for special exception use approval by the planning commission for a tower shall submit the following information: 
(1)  A site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), master plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in section 94-355(g)(2)e., adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parring, and other information deemed by the city planner and the planning commission to be necessary to assess compliance with this section. 
(2)  Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable). 
(3)  The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, and residentially zoned properties (platted or unplatted). 
(4)  The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to section 94-355(d)(3) shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known. 
(5)  A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
(6)  Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination. 
(7)  A description of compliance with sections 94-355(d)(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (10), (12), and (13), sections 94-355(g)(2)d. and e., and all applicable federal, state or local laws. 
(8)  A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future users. 
(9)  Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the city. 
(10)  A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers, or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower. 
(11)  A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas within the city based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected. 
b.  Factors considered in granting special exception use approvals for towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of special exception use approval applications pursuant to article IX of this chapter, the planning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special exception, use approval, although the planning commission may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the planning commission concludes that the goals of this section are better served thereby, consistent with the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
(8)  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as provided in section 94-355(g)(2)c. 
(9)  Willingness of the applicant to allow co-location of antennas at a reasonable charge on the applicant's existing towers within the city and within one mile of the city's boundaries. 
(10)  Willingness of the applicant to allow co-location of antennas on the proposed tower at a reasonable charge. 
c.  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the planning commission related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(7)  The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
d.  Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which special exception use approval is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby, consistent with the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75 percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line provided, however, that all towers must be setback a distance equal to at least 100 percent of the height of the tower from the nearest edge of the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
e.  Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which special exception use approval is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce the standard separation requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby, consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. 
(1)  Separation from off-site uses/designated areas. 
(a)  Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site-uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1. 
(b)  Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards established in Table 1. 
Table 1: 
Off-site use/designated area Separation distance Single-family or duplex residential units 1 200 feet or 300 percent height of tower, whichever is greater Vacant single-family or duplex residentially zoned land which is either platted or has preliminary subdivision plan approval (or site condominium approval) which is not expired 200 feet or 300 percent height of tower 2 , whichever is greater Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands 3 100 feet or 100 percent height of tower, whichever is greater Existing multi-family residential units greater than duplex units 100 feet or 100 percent height of tower, whichever is greater Non-residentially zoned lands or non-residential uses None; only setbacks apply  
1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes. 
2 Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback line on adjoining property. 
3 Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any multifamily residentially zoned land greater than duplex. 
(2)  Separation distances between towers. 
(a)  Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. 
(b)  The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2. 
Table 2: 
Existing Towers-Types 
Lattice Guyed Monopole 75 ft. in height or greater Monopole less than 75 ft. in height Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750 Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750 Monopole 75 ft. in height or greater 1,500 1,500 1,500 750 Monopole less than 75 ft. in height 750 750 750 750  
f.  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. 
g.  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which special exception use approval is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby, consistent with the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
(2)  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. 
(3)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
(h)  Buildings or other equipment storage. 
(1)  Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas mounted on structures or rooftops shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
a.  The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 144 square feet of gross floor area or be more than six feet in height. 
b.  If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than five percent of the roof area. 
c.  Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
The equipment cabinet or structure shall not be included in calculating maximum building height for purposes of section 94-188. 
(2)  Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles shall be located in accordance with the following: 
a.  In all districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be located: 
(1)  In a front or side yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is no greater than three feet in height or ten square feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of three feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 to 48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches. 
(2)  In a rear yard, provided that the cabinet or structure has an eave height of not more than ten feet and not more than 240 square feet in gross floor area The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches. 
(3)  Antennas located on towers. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas mounted on towers shall not contain more than 240 square feet of gross floor area or have an eave height of more than ten feet, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard and setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(4)  Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of subsections (h)(1) through (3) may be modified by the building official in the case of administratively approved uses, or by the planning commission in the case of uses permitted by special exception use, to encourage co-location. 
(5)  Compatibility. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with all antennas located in residential districts shall be designed and constructed with materials (such as siding and shingles) compatible with residential dwellings, as determined by the building official in the case of administratively approved uses, or by the planning commission in the case of special exception uses. 
(i)  Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within that 90-day period shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(j)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(2)  Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas. Notwithstanding section 94-355(i), bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval by the building official or special exception use approval by the planning commission and without having to meet the separation requirements specified in section 94-355(g)(2)d. and e. The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the facility originally approved by the city. The rebuilt facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in section 94-355(i). 
(k)  PUD districts; MP district. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section, wireless telecommunications towers and antennas shall be permitted in the RPUD-1, RPUD-2, CPUD, MPUD, and IPUD districts only if they are included in the PUD final area site plan approved by the planning commission pursuant to article VIII of this chapter. In reviewing a request to permit a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna in a PUD district, the planning commission shall apply the criteria set forth in this section as applicable. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, wireless telecommunications towers and antennas shall be permitted in the MP district only if they are included in the development plan approved by the planning commission pursuant to section 94-182 of this chapter. In reviewing a request to permit a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna in a MP district, the planning commission shall apply the criteria set forth in this section as applicable. 
(l)  Conflict. Except as provided in subsection (k), in the event of any conflict between the regulations of this section and any other provision of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 97-494, § 3, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 94-356. - Standards for residential driveways. 
(a)  All residential driveways that are greater than 125 feet in length (measured from the public or private street right-of-way to the closest point of the residential structure to be measured along the center line of the driveway) shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The driveway must be approved by the building official after review and recommendation by the fire chief or his designee for compliance with this section. 
(2)  The inside radius of all horizontal curves shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
(3)  The design of any bridge or crossing of a culvert greater than 48 inches in diameter shall be approved by a registered professional engineer. All bridges and culverts shall be capable of supporting a vehicle with a front axle weight of 18,000 pounds and a rear axle weight of 30,000 pounds. 
(4)  All gates blocking access to a residential driveway shall have any emergency access code determined by the fire department and shall cause the gate to remain open until the code is cancelled, or be equipped with a keyed switch that will keep the gate open. The keyed switch must use a Knox Box Key. 
(5)  The driveway shall have a surface capable of supporting a vehicle with a front axle weight of 18,000 pounds and a rear axle weight of 30,000 pounds and shall be maintained in a condition which is accessible to and useable by fire and other emergency vehicles during construction on the lot or parcel served by the driveway. 
(6)  The surface of the driveway shall have a minimum width of ten feet except that the driveway entrance at the road shall meet the requirements of the city for driveway approaches. 
(7)  The area within two feet of each side of the driveway surface, and within 13 feet six inches above the driveway surface, shall be kept reasonably free of obstructions, such as tree trunks and large branches, which may interfere with use of the driveway by fire vehicles. 
(8)  A clear area allowing for the maneuvering and turn-around of firefighting apparatus will be provided near the end of the driveway at the residential structure. The design and location of the clear area shall be approved by the building official after review and recommendation by the fire chief or his designee. 
(9)  Every driveway over 400 feet in length shall widen to 22 feet for 60 feet in length to provide a passing/pullout lane. Any driveway over 800 feet in length shall have at least two such passing/pullout lanes. The location of the passing/pullout lane(s) must be approved by the building official after review and recommendation by the fire chief or his designee. When it is deemed necessary, because of the distance from a water source or for efficiency of operations to mark passing lanes, such lanes will be marked with a sign as required by the building official after review and recommendation by the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  All residential driveways that are 800 feet or more in length, measured as provided in subsection (a) above, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall be met. 
(2)  Marker posts, for purposes of providing distance information to the main structure(s) for fire or other emergency response personnel, may be required. The need for these posts and their locations shall be determined by the building official after review and recommendation by the fire chief or his designee. 
(3)  An adequate number of additional passing/pullout lanes so as to allow uninterrupted fire department access and operations shall be provided as approved by the building official after review and recommendation by the fire chief or his designee. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a "residential driveway" means an improved or unimproved path, road, or ground surface that provides vehicular access from a public or private street to a single-family or two-family residential dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 02-488, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 94-357. - Architecture and building facade design standards. 
(a)  Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to provide design standards for the review of commercial, office and industrial buildings in order to achieve the following community objectives: 
(1)  To ensure compatibility of land uses and to mitigate the impact of development on nearby properties. 
(2)  To ensure that uses of land shall be situated in appropriate and harmonious relationships. 
(3)  To promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. 
(4)  To encourage building facade treatments that are articulated and enhanced in order to reduce the massive scale and impersonal appearance of large buildings. 
(5)  To maintain and improve community character by creating a pedestrian scale element for urbanized sites. 
(6)  To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and building relationships. 
(7)  To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the design of buildings. 
(8)  To create a sense of "place" and add elements of uniqueness to development projects, thereby boosting the value, quality and economic sustainability of the City of Walker's urbanized areas. 
(9)  To enhance and protect property values on the site and throughout the city. 
These standards are intended to balance the property owner's right to develop land with the cultivation of urban environments that are built to human scale, create an attractive street frontage, and incorporate means and materials that enhance visual interest, economic value and private market sustainability within the city. 
The requirements and standards of this section shall apply to all uses in the ORP, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, ML, MH, MP, MPUD, CPUD and IPUD districts. The planning commission shall apply the requirements and standards of this section to the uses in these districts as part of the planning commission's site plan review pursuant to article X of this chapter or, for PUD districts, pursuant to article VIII of this chapter. 
In PUD districts, however, the requirements and standards of this section may be modified by the planning commission based on findings linked to section 94-213 and the following: 
(1)  The proposed material quality, combinations and colors are consistent with the overall facade design plan and the building design concept. 
(2)  The proposed facade design and materials are consistent or compatible with existing buildings on the site or in the general area. 
(3)  Strict adherence to the requirements of this section is not necessary to achieve the purposes of this section due to the building's size, orientation, location or similar factors. 
The PUD process, however, shall not be used only as a means to avoid or reduce the intent, purpose and standards of this section. 
(b)  Building facades. All facades, as defined in section 94-5, of buildings in the zoning districts identified in subsection (a) shall comply with the requirements of this section. Facade materials shall be complementary to existing or proposed buildings within and around the site, provided that such buildings adhere to the standards herein. It is not intended to discourage contrasts in design materials, but special attention shall be given to avoid adverse effects on the economic stability and value of surrounding businesses. 
(1)  Facade materials and colors. 
a.  A significant percentage of the building facade must be constructed from one or more of the following materials: 
i.  Traditional hard coat stucco; 
ii.  Brick; 
iii.  Natural or cast stone; 
iv.  Tinted and/or textured masonry block; 
v.  Glass; 
vi.  Architectural precast panels; 
vii.  Textured concrete; 
viii.  Decorative steel siding, fascia or panels; 
ix.  Exterior cedar materials; 
x.  Similar materials as approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Smooth-faced gray concrete block and smooth-faced tilt-up concrete panels are discouraged as primary facade materials. 
c.  Pole-barn-style metal siding, vinyl siding and aluminum siding are prohibited as primary facade materials. These sidings may be used as facade trim material. 
d.  Facade colors should complement existing or adjacent structures. 
e.  All facades shall include materials consistent with, but not necessarily identical to, those on the front. Use of markedly inferior materials for side and rear facades shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Wall designs and features. 
a.  Facades shall be designed to eliminate large expanses of blank walls. Among other methods, this can be accomplished via the application of two or more of the following every 50 feet in wall length: 
i.  Doors with corniced parapets over the main entry door; 
ii.  Display windows that orient street-level customers to product; 
iii.  Arched entryways, awnings, arcades or outdoor patios; 
iv.  Recessed entryways; 
v.  An expression of architectural or structural bays through a change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as offsets, reveals or projecting ribs. See figure 1. 
vi.  Change in texture, color or masonry pattern; 
vii.  Pilasters, piers or columns; 
viii.  Other applications as approved by the planning commission. 
At least one of the elements above shall repeat horizontally or vertically. 
Figure 14 

b.  Facades that are side or rear walls and that do not face a public or private street may include false windows and door openings defined by frames, sills and lintels, or similarly proportioned modulations of the wall, but only when actual doors and windows are not feasible, as determined by the planning commission. 
(3)  Building entrances. 
a.  Building facades shall exhibit clearly defined, highly visible and articulated (see figure 2) entrances that feature at least two of the following: 
i.  Canopies or porticos; 
ii.  Overhang; 
iii.  Recesses or projections of at least three percent of wall length; 
iv.  Arcades; 
v.  Raised cornice parapets over the door; 
vi.  Distinctive roof forms; 
vii.  Arches; 
viii.  Outdoor patios; 
ix.  Display windows; 
x.  Planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sifting; 
xi.  Other applications as approved by the planning commission. 
Figure 15 

(4)  Bases and top treatments. 
a.  All facades shall have a recognizable "base" consisting of one or more of the following: 
i.  Thicker walls, ledges or sills; 
ii.  Integrally textured materials such as stone or other masonry; 
iii.  Integrally colored and patterned materials such as smooth-finished stone or tile; 
iv.  Lighter or darker colored materials, mullions or panels; 
v.  Planters; 
vi.  Other applications as approved by the planning commission. 
b.  All facades shall have a recognizable "top" consisting of one or more of the following: 
i.  Cornice treatments, other than just colored "stripes" or "bands," with integrally textured materials such as stone or other masonry or differently colored materials; 
ii.  Sloping roof with overhangs and brackets; 
iii.  Stepped parapets; 
iv.  Other applications as approved by the planning commission. 
(5)  Roofs. 
a.  Screening devices shall be used to conceal flat sections of roofs and rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units, from public view. 
b.  High-intensity and/or reflective primary colors are prohibited on any roof area visible from a public or private road, service drive, parking area or adjacent property. 
(6)  Industrial buildings. 
a.  For purposes of industrial buildings only, "facade," as used in this section, shall mean any exterior wall of a building that faces and is visible from a public or private street, a freeway, or an adjoining residential zoning district or residential use. 
b.  Subject to subsection (b)(6)c. below, each separate entrance of a multitenant industrial building shall comply with subsection (3) regardless of whether the entrance is located on a facade as defined herein. 
c.  For industrial buildings, the planning commission may modify the facade requirements of this section. with special consideration to exterior walls and loading dock areas that do not face a public or private street, based on the following standards: 
i.  The proposed material quality, combinations and colors are consistent with the overall facade design plan and the building design concept. 
ii.  The proposed facade design and materials are consistent or compatible with existing buildings on the site or in the general area. 
iii.  Strict adherence to the requirements of this section is not necessary to achieve the purposes of this section due to the building's size, orientation, location or similar factors. 
(7)  Building elevation plan submittal requirements. At the time of application for site plan review or PUD site plan review, the applicant shall submit the appropriate number of copies of the proposed building elevation plans and colored renderings and a materials list to the planning director. These will be distributed to the planning commission. 
The planning commission may seek comment from the building official and/or a third-party architect to determine if and how the submitted plans meet the standards of this section, Fees for a third-party architect will be paid for via the standards of the city's escrow policy. 
In order to assure compliance with this section, the building elevation plans and a materials list shall be approved as part of the final site plan or PUD site plan. 
Presentation of material samples to the planning commission is encouraged. 
(8)  Renovations and alterations to existing buildings. When renovations, alterations or additions are made to an existing building that require site plan review pursuant to article X of this chapter (except for minor changes to an approved site plan under section 94-287(b)) or modification of a PUD final area site plan pursuant to article VIII of this chapter (except for minor modifications to an approved PUD final area site plan under subsection 94-213(10)b., all facades of the existing building shall comply or be brought into compliance with the requirements and standards of this section. 
However, the planning commission may modify the extent of the facade improvements otherwise required by this section based on the following standards: 
1.  The pre-existing building's size, shape and construction materials. 
2.  The potential visual impact on adjacent sites. 
3.  The pre-existing building's setbacks, location and orientation. 
4.  The size of the expanded, altered, or renovated area in relation to the existing building. 
5.  Whether the requirements of this section are necessary to achieve the purposes of this section. 
This section shall apply to the facade requirements for renovations, alterations or additions to an existing building notwithstanding any contrary provision of article VI. 
(Ord. No. 06-547, § 2, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Sec. 94-358. - Prohibition on marihuana establishments and medical marihuana facilities. 
(a)  Pursuant to law and Section 6 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, as amended, marihuana establishments are prohibited with the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Marihuana facilities are prohibited within the boundaries of the city. 
    As used in this section, "marihuana establishment(s)" means that term as defined in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1 as amended, and "marihuana facility(ies)" means that term as defined in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 18-645 , § 1, 1-14-19) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-645 , § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 20019 repealed the former § 94-358 and enacted a new § 94-358 as set out herein. The former § 94-358 pertained to prohibition on marihuana facilities and derived from Ord. No. 17-636, § 2, adopted July 10, 2017. 
Sec. 94-359. - Backyard chickens. 
(1)  The keeping of backyard chickens is permitted as an accessory use if all the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The parcel of land is located within a residential zoning district and the principal use of the parcel is a single-family residential dwelling. 
(b)  The parcel of land is not less than 0.5 acres in size. 
(c)  No more than five chickens may be kept on any parcel of land. 
(d)  Chickens that crow and roosters shall not be permitted. 
(e)  The outdoor slaughtering of chickens is prohibited. 
(f)  Chickens shall not be allowed to roam the parcel or any public streets, land, alleys, vacant lots or other open or public places, or upon any third-party premises. 
(g)  The enclosed area where the chickens are kept shall be located within the rear yard (as defined in the Zoning Ordinance), not within the main building or any attached accessory buildings, and shall be at least 20 feet from any dwelling and at least ten feet from any property line. 
(h)  Materials used to construct the enclosed areas shall exclude tarps, plastic, fabric, rubber, paper, cardboard, or other non-traditional building materials. 
(2)  Chicken coops shall be kept and maintained in a manner so as to minimize to the greatest extent possible any adverse impacts to the property on which they are kept, surrounding properties, and any other areas of the city, including, without limitation, dust, dirt, noise, odor, vermin, the attraction of other birds or animals, the potential spread of infection, disease or contamination or other health or safety hazards or nuisance conditions. All chicken coops shall: 
(a)  Be constructed and maintained in compliance with all applicable building code regulations; 
(b)  Be of sufficient size and design, and constructed of such material, so that it can be maintained in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition; 
(c)  Be kept, at all times, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, in good repair, and in compliance with all applicable health and safety laws and regulations; 
(d)  Be a maximum of 80 square feet in area and eight feet in height; 
(e)  Contain sufficient square footage to allow the chicken housed within to move around freely, and provide an interior height of at least six inches higher than the head of the chicken in the enclosure when the chicken is in the normal standing position. A run for chickens shall be of a length, width, and height to provide adequate space for an animal to exercise. 
(f)  Be enclosed on all sides and from above. 
(g)  Be screened from view from the street and neighboring properties with a sight-obscuring fence, wall or landscaping in such quantities to sufficiently prevent the sight of the area from the street or neighboring properties during all seasons. 
(3)  All chickens shall be fed only within the confines of the chicken coop. All feed for the animals shall be stored in sealed containers that will prevent intrusion by insects, rodents and other vermin. 
(4)  Litter must be regularly removed and properly disposed of in compliance with all local, state, and federal regulations. 
(5)  The keeping of chickens shall follow all other local, state, and federal regulations. 
(6)  Prior to installation of any backyard chicken enclosure or keeping of any backyard chickens, a registration and application form must be submitted to the city zoning administrator which includes a property address, a property parcel ID number, and a signed and dated acknowledgement of the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-638 , § 2, 7-10-17) 
Secs. 94-360-94-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - REGULATED USES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 94-376. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  In the development and execution of this article, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or when one or more of them are located in near proximity to a residential zone, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this article. These controls are for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses within any one area, or to prevent deterioration or blighting of a nearby residential neighborhood. These controls do not legitimatize activities which are prohibited by this chapter or the City Code. 
In regulating sexually oriented businesses, it is the purpose of this article to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented business within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city commission, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 122 S. Ct. 1728 (2002); Thomas v. Chicago Park District, 122 S. Ct. 775 (2002); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. City of Memphis, 48 F3d 220 (6th Cir. 1995); Broadway Books v. Roberts, 642 F. Supp. 486 (E.D. Tenn. 1986); Bright Lights, Inc. v. City of Newport, 830 F. Supp. 378 (E.D. Ky. 1993); Richland Bookmart v. Nichols, 137 F3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Deja Vu v. Metro Government, 1999 U.S. App. LEXIS 535 (6th Cir. 1999); Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton, 7923 F2d 470 (6th Cir. 1991); Threesome Entertainment v. Strittmather, 4 F. Supp. 2d 710 (N.D. Ohio 1998); J.L. Spoons, Inc. v. City of Brunswick, 49 F. Supp. 2d 1032 (N.D. Ohio 1999); Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F3d 129 (6th Cir. 1994); Nightclubs, Inc. v. City of Paducah, 202 F3d 884 (6th Cir. 2000); O'Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); Deja Vu of Nashville, Inc., et al. v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, 2001 U.S. App. LEXIS 26007 (6th Cir. Dec. 6, 2001); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); Connection Distrib. Co. v. Reno, 154 F3d 281 (6th Cir. 1998); Sundance Assocs. V. Reno, 139 F3d 804 (10th Cir. 1998); American Library Association v. Reno, 33 F3d 78 (D.C. Cir. 1994); American Target Advertising, Inc. v. Gianni, 199 F3d 1241 (10th Cir. 2000); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); ILQ Investments, Inc. v. City of Rochester, 25 F3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1896 (D. Md., Feb. 6, 2002); Currence v. Cincinnati, 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 1259 (6th Cir., Jan. 24, 2002); and other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S 14519; 135 Cong. Rec. S 5636; 134 Cong. Rec. S 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona-1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas-1997; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California-1991; Los Angeles, California-1977; Whittier, California-1978; Austin, Texas-1986; Seattle, Washington-1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma-1986; Cleveland, Ohio; Dallas, Texas-1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin-1993; Bellevue, Washington-1998; Newport News, Virginia-1996; New York Times Square Study-1994; and from, "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually. Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the city commission finds that sexually oriented businesses as a category of establishments are correlated with harmful secondary effects, and that the foregoing reports are reasonably believed to be relevant to the problems that the city is seeking to abate and prevent in the future. 
(Ord. No. 83-312, § 1, 8-23-83; Ord. No. 03-498, § 1, 4-14-03) 
Sec. 94-377. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated: 
(a)  Adult cabaret means a nightclub, restaurant, or other establishment which regularly features or displays: 
(1)  Live performances predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any specified sexual activity; or 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
(b)  Adult merchandise store means an establishment that emphasizes merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. An establishment emphasizes merchandise that is predominantly distinguished by its "emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area" if any one or more of the following applies to the establishment: 
(1)  25 percent or more of the establishment's retail display space (excluding bathrooms, office areas, fitting rooms, eating areas, storage areas, closets, and other nonpublic areas) is used for the sale of merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
(2)  25 percent or more of the establishment's visible inventory is comprised of merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
(3)  25 percent or more of the establishment's gross revenues are generated by the sale or rental of merchandise that is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. 
(4)  The establishment is operated consistently with its being an adult-orientated [adult-oriented] business (e.g., advertising is directed to an "adults only" market; the establishment self-imposes, or imposes consistent with the state or federal law, prohibitions on minors being present in the establishment, etc.). 
(c)  Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with close-circuit television (as distinguished from commercial cable services) transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent, or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room, for a period of time that is less than ten hours, if the rental of such rooms accounts for more than ten percent of the establishment's gross revenues. 
(d)  Adult-oriented business means a business or commercial establishment engaging in one or more of the following enterprises: 
(1)  Adult cabaret; 
(2)  Adult merchandise store; 
(3)  Adult motel; 
(4)  Adult theater; 
(5)  Escort agency; 
(6)  Nude model studio; or 
(7)  Sexual encounter center. 
(e)  Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which regularly features live performances predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any specified sexual activity or which regularly or primarily shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or any specified anatomical area. This definition includes, without limitation, establishments which offer individual viewing booths. 
(f)  Body-art establishment means a body-piercing establishment or a tattoo parlor, or a combination of a body-piercing establishment and a tattoo operated on the same premises. 
(g)  Body piercing means the performation [perforation] of human tissue, other than an ear, for a non-medical purpose and other than performation [perforation] of human tissue by a licensed medical practitioner. 
(h)  Body piercing establishment means an establishment where body piercing is performed, whether or not it is in exchange for compensation or any other form of consideration. 
(i)  Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration and regardless of who pays that consideration, agrees to act or offers to act as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
(j)  Escort agency means a person or entity which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. An escort agency is deemed to be operated in the location where (1) a request for an escort is received, or (2) the escort and the person requesting the escort are together. 
(k)  Massage means a method of treating the external parts of the human body by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or vibrating with the hand or any instrument. 
(l)  Massage establishment means any establishment having a fixed place of business where massages are administered for pay, including, but not limited to, massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths, and steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include (1) a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist duly licensed by the state, (2) barbershops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck, or the shoulders, or (3) any other person or establishment exempted from the massage parlor or massagist licensing pursuant to section 22-50 of the City Code. This definition shall also not be construed to include a nonprofit or governmental organization owning or operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court, fitness center, or other educational, cultural, recreational, and athletic facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area. 
(m)  Material means anything tangible, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner, including, but not limited to, anything printed or written, any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, picture, drawing, pictorial representation, motion picture, photograph, video tape, vide disk, film, transparency, slide, audiotape, audio disk, computer tape, holographic images, or any other medium used to electronically produce or reproduce images, or any mechanical, chemical, or electronic reproduction. Material includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and other latent representational objects whether or not processing or other acts are required to make the content of the material apparent. This definition is intended to include material which is the project of any technology, whether that technology is available on the effective date of the ordinance that added this definition or becomes available after that date. 
(n)  Merchandise means material and novelties. 
(o)  Novelty means any instrument, device, or paraphernalia which depicts or describes any specific anatomical area or any specific sexual act, or which is designed for use, or commonly used, in connection with specific sexual activities, excluding condoms and other birth-control and disease-prevention products. 
(p)  Nude model studio means any place where a person who displays any specified anatomical area is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured [sculpted], photographed, or similarly depicted by any other person who pays money or any form of consideration, but does not include the following: 
(1)  An educational institution funded, chartered, or recognized by the State of Michigan; or 
(2)  Any modeling session for a local, nonprofit organization that is not open to the public or to any persons other than members of the organization, that is for the purpose of instruction in the artistic depiction in two-dimensional or three-dimensional media of the human form, during which no specified sexual activities occur and during which the model remains in a fixed pose. 
(q)  Sexual encounter center means an establishment, except that which is part of the practice of and under the supervision and control of a physician, psychologist, or psychiatrist licensed to practice in Michigan, that offers: 
(1)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons exposes or displays any specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  The matching and/or exchanging of persons for any specified sexual activities. 
(r)  Specified anatomical area means any or more of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast at or below the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(s)  Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; or 
(2)  A sex act, actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of activities set forth in (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(t)  Tattoo, tattooed, tattooing means any method of placing permanent designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols, or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance, by the aid of needles or other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin, resulting in either the coloration of the skin, or the production of scars and scarring. 
(u)  Tattoo parlor means an establishment where persons are tattooed for consideration, other than by a licensed medical practitioner, or any place where tattooing is regularly conducted whether or not it is in exchange for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 83-312, § 1, 8-23-83; Ord. No. 00-466, § 2, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 01-470, § 2, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 02-495, § 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 03-498, § 2, 4-14-03; Ord. No. 03-501, § 1, 6-9-03) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-378. - Regulated uses. 
    The following uses are subject to the provisions of this article: 
Adult-oriented businesses; 
Body art establishments; 
Massage establishments. 
(Ord. No. 83-312, § 1, 8-23-83; Ord. No. 00-466, § 3, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 01-470, § 3, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 03-498, § 3, 4-14-03) 
Cross reference- Amusement parlors, § 10-26 et seq.; massage parlors and massagists, § 22-26. 
Sec. 94-379. - Location of regulated uses. 
(a)  Any of the regulated uses listed in section 94-378 is permitted if: 
(1)  The use is located within a district where the use is permitted and complies with all other regulations applicable in such district. 
(2)  The use is located outside a 100-foot radius from any lot zoned or occupied for residential or agricultural purposes, or upon which is located a school, public park, library, child care facility, or church or place of worship. 
(3)  The use is located outside a 500-foot radius from any other regulated use. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the measurement of a radius shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property line of the use to the nearest property line of the residential or agricultural property, school, public park, library, child care facility, church, or place of worship. 
(5)  The use is operated to comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code and applicable state and federal law. Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit activity that is otherwise prohibited by the City Code (including, but not limited to, "public nudity" which is prohibited by section 50-42 of the City Code) or by applicable state or federal law. 
(b)  An adult-oriented business shall not be located in the same structure or building or on the same parcel as another adult-oriented business, body art establishment, or massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 83-312, § 1, 8-23-83; Ord. No. 03-498, § 4, 4-14-03) 
Sec. 94-380. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-498, § 5, adopted April 14, 2003, repealed § 94-380, which pertained to conditions and limitations and derived from Ord. No. 83-312, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 1983. 
Sec. 94-381. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-498, § 5, adopted April 14, 2003, repealed § 94-381, which pertained to limit on reapplication and derived from Ord. No. 83-312, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 1983. 
Sec. 94-382. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-498, § 5, adopted April 14, 2003, repealed § 94-382, which pertained to expansion and discontinuance of use and derived from Ord. No. 83-312, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 1983. 
Secs. 94-383-94-405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SIGN REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, adopted July 9, 2007, amended art. XIV in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. XIV derived from Ord. No. 72-164, adopted Feb. 22, 1972; Ord. No. 83-313, §§ 1-5, adopted Aug. 9, 1983; Ord. No. 85-321, §§ 5, 6, adopted April 9, 1985; Ord. No. 87-356, §§ 5-7, adopted Jan. 12, 1988; Ord. No. 88-368, §§ 2, 3, adopted Jan. 10, 1989; Ord. No. 91-392, §§ 4, 5, adopted March 12, 1991; Ord. No. 91-394, § 2, adopted June 11, 1991; Ord. No. 92-406, § 1-3, adopted April 14, 1992; Ord. No. 92-409, §§ 8-10, adopted July 14, 1992; Ord. No. 98-511, § 1, adopted April 13, 1998; Ord. No. 02-489, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2002; and Ord. No. 04-515, § 1, adopted July 12, 2004. 

Sec. 94-406. - Purpose, intent and general. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This article is intended to regulate the size, number, location and manner of display of signs in the city in a manner consistent with the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and further the health, safety and welfare of city residents, property owners and visitors. 
(2)  To reduce traffic and pedestrian accidents caused by signs which obstruct vision, distract, disorient or confuse drivers or pedestrians, or are improperly secured or constructed. 
(3)  To conserve and enhance community character by reducing visual clutter which can arise due to excessive signage, temporary signage or other signage that is improperly located or unreasonably distracting. 
(4)  To promote uniformity in the size, number and placement of signs within districts. 
(5)  To promote the economic viability of commercial areas by minimizing visual clutter and allowing for proper placement of signs to safely direct motorists to their destination. 
(6)  To promote the use of signs that are safe, aesthetically pleasing, compatible with their surroundings and legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. 
    The regulations contained in this article involve a determination by the city that the sign owner's or user's right to convey a message must be balanced against the public's right to be free of signs which unreasonably compete for attention, distract drivers and pedestrians, or produce confusion. In balancing the sign owner's or user's desire to attract attention with the public's right to be free of unreasonable distractions, it is recognized that sign regulations should afford businesses a reasonable opportunity to communicate. It is also determined, however, that oversized, projecting, distracting, cluttered or crowded signs can lead to pedestrian and driver confusion, disorientation and distraction, and endanger the public health, safety and welfare. To lessen such adverse consequences, reasonable limitations and restrictions are appropriate with respect to the placement, construction, size, type, and design of signs in relation to the location of buildings and uses and the availability of other means of communication. 
    It is further the purpose and intent of this article to regulate, in a manner appropriate to the city, signs which utilize advancements in technology. These newer technologies pose additional risks of impacting adjacent areas and adversely dominating the environment in which they operate unless regulated in a reasonable fashion, particularly in the case of larger signs. On-site signs utilizing these newer technologies are found to be different in kind and character from larger off-site signs. While reasonable regulations are likely to minimize adverse secondary effects from on-site digital and similar signage in terms of preserving the character and repose of adjacent areas, protecting property values, and reducing traffic hazards caused by undue distractions, those same regulations regarding similar off-site signs will not sufficiently minimize such adverse secondary effects due to the latter's sheer size, visibility, and nature. 
(b)  Permits required. A sign permit shall be required for the erection, use, construction or alteration of all signs except those exempted herein. For purposes of this section, "alteration" shall not mean changing the sign copy to promote, advertise, or identify another use, the normal maintenance of a sign, or changing the text of reader boards. 
(c)  Sign measurement. Except as otherwise expressly provided for in this article, all signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The area of a sign shall be measured as the area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight-line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, logo, or any other figure of similar character, together with any frame, architectural feature or other material or color forming part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed. 
(2)  The area of a freestanding sign that has two or more faces shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces. However, if two such faces are placed back to back and are no more than two feet apart at any point, the area of the two back-to-back faces shall be counted as one face with the larger of the two sign faces to be counted as the relevant sign face for sign area measurement purposes. 
(3)  The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the highest point on the sign to the grade of the adjacent street or parking lot, whichever is spatially closer to the sign. 
(d)  Design, construction and location standards. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this article, all signs shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  All signs shall be properly maintained so as not to become unsightly through disrepair or as a result of the weather. 
(2)  Sign supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be maintained in such a manner as not to cause a public safety hazard. 
(3)  Signs shall be constructed to withstand all wind and vibration forces that can be normally expected to occur in the vicinity, per the standards of the Michigan Building Code. The sub-grade base material of any ground-mounted sign must be constructed in a manner such that the sign and sign base will meet the wind loading capacity required under the Michigan Building Code, as reviewed and verified by the building official. 
(4)  Subject to subsections (8) and (9), illuminated signs shall ensure that the source of any illumination is enclosed, shielded and directed so as to prevent light from shining towards adjacent parcels or spaces. 
(5)  A light pole or other supporting member shall not be used for the placement of any sign unless the building official determines that such pole or supporting member is specifically designed for such use and all building code and other applicable structural and safety requirements are satisfied. 
(6)  A sign shall not be erected in any place where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color, or other characteristics, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, or constitute a nuisance per se. 
(7)  No sign or its supporting mechanism shall project into or be placed within the right-of-way of a street. 
(8)  There shall be no flashing, blinking, scrolling, strobe, or intermittent illumination on or from any sign. 
(9)  Except as otherwise provided herein, electronic reader boards are permitted as on-site signs so long as no part of the display shall scroll, move or change more often than once every 30 seconds. Background graphics or displays are also subject to this restriction. Electronic reader boards, as accessory components of on-site signs, may not exceed 50 percent of the permitted sign area allowed for that sign. An electronic reader board must have installed a fully operational ambient light monitor, which shall continuously monitor and automatically adjust the brightness level of the display based on ambient light conditions consistent with the following: 
a.  The maximum brightness levels shall not exceed 0.2 foot candles over ambient light levels measured at 150 feet of the source, consistent with subsection b., below. Certification must be provided to the city demonstrating that the sign has been preset to automatically adjust the brightness to these levels or lower. Re-inspection and recalibration may be periodically required by the city in its reasonable discretion to ensure that the specified brightness levels are maintained at all times. 
b.  Brightness of digital signs shall be measured and regulated as follows: 
(i)  At least 30 minutes following sunset, a foot candle meter shall be used to obtain an ambient light reading for the location. This is done while the sign is off or displaying black copy. The reading shall be made with the meter aimed directly at the sign area at the preset location. 
(ii)  The sign shall then be turned on to full white copy to take another reading with the meter at the same location. 
(iii)  If the difference between the readings is 0.2 foot candles or less, the brightness is properly adjusted. 
(10)  No sign shall interfere with the clear vision area of any highway, street or road, or at the intersection of two or more streets, or at the intersection of a sidewalk or improved public street and a driveway. 
(11)  No physical part of a sign or a sign itself shall move. 
(12)  All signs are subject to the applicable height regulations noted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 08-558, § 4, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 10-579, §§ 4, 5, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 11-603, §§ 2, 3, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 16-634 , § 3, 1-9-17) 
Sec. 94-407. - Permitted signs and signboards. 
    Only those signs expressly authorized in a district, as provided for in this article, may be constructed, located or used in any district. 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 10-579, § 6, 3-8-10) 
Sec. 94-408. - Nonconforming signs and billboards. 
    All signs and billboards shall conform to the regulations as set forth in this article and its amendments. Any sign or billboard not conforming shall be deemed a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the provisions in article VI, except that section 94-138 shall not apply to signs and billboards. 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 94-409. - Signs in residential districts. 
(a)  A single community entrance sign may be permitted in an AA, A, A-2, SA, S, ARM, ARM District One, RMT Residential, RPUD-1, RPUD-2 district or the residential portion of a MPUD district. The community entrance sign shall be in compliance with section 94-406, be limited to a ground-mounted sign, not exceed 24 square feet in area, be located a minimum of five feet from the street right-of-way line, not exceed four feet in height, not exceed two feet in width as measured from face to face, and be constructed primarily from carved wood, brick, stone, wrought iron, terra cotta, glazed tile or similar decorative material in order to reflect and enhance the residential character of the area. 
(b)  Signs for churches and public or private schools in AA, A, A-2, SAS, S, ARM, ARM District One, RMT Residential, RPUD-1, RPUD-2 district, or the residential portion of an MPUD district, shall be limited to a single ground-mounted sign not to exceed 24 square feet in area; shall be located a minimum of five feet from the street right-of-way line; shall not exceed four feet in height, shall not exceed two feet in width as measured from face to face; shall be constructed primarily from carved wood, brick, stone, wrought iron, terra cotta, glazed tile, in order to reflect and enhance the residential character of the area. In addition, and where not in conflict, such signs shall be subject to the standards and limitations contained in subsection (a) for community entrance signs. 
(c)  Reader boards are not permitted in residential districts, except for churches and schools; provided that those signs with reader boards are subject to the standards found in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 10-579, § 7, 3-8-10) 
Sec. 94-410. - Signs in mixed use and commercial districts. 
(a)  This section applies to all signs within a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, CPUD and the nonresidential portions of an MPUD district, except as otherwise noted in this article. 
(b)  A lot shall only be allowed one freestanding/pylon sign or one ground-mounted sign, not one of each type of sign. 
(c)  Freestanding/pylon signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Freestanding/pylon signs shall display the street address numbers of the site(s) to which they principally relate. The street address numbers shall be legible from the associated street. 
(2)  Only one freestanding/pylon sign is allowed per lot. 
(3)  Freestanding/pylon signs shall be allowed one square foot in area for each one lineal foot of front building wall, subject to the following: 
i.  The front building wall will be that considered when determining the front building setback. 
ii.  For corner lots, the front building wall will be that facing the street that carries the most average daily traffic. 
iii.  For development sites involving 100,000 square feet of building area or less, the maximum permitted total area for a freestanding/pylon sign is 80 square feet, regardless of front building wall length. 
iv.  For development sites involving more than 100,000 square feet of building area, the maximum permitted total area for a freestanding/pylon sign is 120 square feet, regardless of front building wall length. 
(4)  Freestanding/pylon signs and their supporting mechanisms shall be in compliance with section 94-406 and shall be located a minimum of five feet from any lot line. 
(5)  No freestanding/pylon sign shall exceed a maximum height of 20 feet, as measured according to subsection 94-406(c)(3). 
(6)  No freestanding/pylon sign shall exceed two feet in width, as measured from face to face. 
(7)  The supporting mechanism(s) of a freestanding/pylon sign shall not exceed 30 percent of the overall width of the sign. 
(8)  Freestanding/pylon signs shall have only structural support in the area between the ground surface immediately below the sign and eight feet above the ground. 
(9)  If the structural support mechanisms of a sign consists of more than one pole, a pole cover may be used to cover each such support pole, provided that in no case shall the horizontal distance between a pole cover and another pole cover, or between a pole cover and any uncovered pole or other structural support, be less than three feet, as measured between the closest points of adjacent pole covers or uncovered supports. 
(10)  No freestanding/pylon sign shall be permitted on the same lot as a billboard unless the freestanding sign is not visible from the traveled portion of a freeway or the freestanding sign is located more than 500 feet from the billboard. The minimum distance between billboards shall be governed by section 94-413. 
(d)  Ground-mounted signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Ground-mounted signs shall display the street address numbers of the site to which they principally relate. The street address numbers shall be legible from the associated street. 
(2)  Only one ground-mounted sign is allowed per lot. 
(3)  Ground-mounted signs and their supporting mechanisms shall not exceed six feet in height or 48 square feet in area. The required masonry base shall be included in the overall height measurement. 
(4)  Ground-mounted signs and their supporting mechanisms shall comply with sections 94-406 and 94-407 and shall be located a minimum of five feet from any lot line. 
(5)  No ground-mounted sign shall exceed two feet in width as measured from face to face. 
(6)  The supporting mechanism(s) of a ground-mounted sign shall consist of a block, brick or textured concrete base with the street address numbers presented in a manner legible from the adjacent street. The minimum height for this required masonry base shall be 18 inches above grade. 
(e)  Wall-mounted signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Wall-mounted signs shall be allowed one square foot in area for each one lineal foot of front building wall, subject to the following: 
i.  The front building wall is that considered when determining front building setbacks. 
ii.  For corner lots, the front wall will be that facing the street that carries the most average daily traffic. 
iii.  For development sites involving 100,000 square feet or less of building area, the maximum permitted total area for wall-mounted signage is 80 square feet, regardless of front building wall length. 
iv.  For development sites involving more than 100,000 square feet of building area, the maximum permitted total area for wall-mounted signage is 120 square feet, regardless of front building wall length. 
v.  The aggregate area of wall-mounted signs on multi-occupant buildings shall not exceed the limitation in this section (see subsections (1), (1)iii., and (1)iv.). The area of wall-mounted signs for each occupant or tenant of a multi-occupant building shall not exceed one square foot for each one lineal foot of front building wall occupied by such occupant or tenant. 
vi.  Wall-mounted signs are only allowed on the front building wall, except that buildings on corner lots may be allowed wall-mounted signs on both walls facing streets. However, wall-mounted signs shall not face a residential zoning district unless the district and the building are separated by a public or private street or another nonresidential zoning district. Wall-mounted signs placed on corner lot buildings shall not exceed the square footage permitted per this subsection. 
vii.  Wall-mounted signs may be permitted on non-front building walls or non-corner lots for property adjacent to I-96, U.S. 131 or I-196. Such wall-mounted signage shall be subject to review and approval by the city planning commission. Such wall-mounted signage square footage shall apply towards the amount granted per this subsection. 
(f)  Directional signs are permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Directional signs may contain a logo of an on-premises establishment, but no advertising text or copy. 
(2)  Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in area or three feet in height, and shall be set back at least five feet from any lot line. 
(3)  Directional signs shall be limited to traffic circulation and parking control functions. 
(4)  Directional signs shall be limited in number to one sign per onsite driveway plus two additional on-site signs. An increase in the number of signs exceeding these standards shall be reviewed and approved by the city planning commission. 
(g)  Canopy, awning and marquee signs are permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Canopy, awning and marquee signs shall be illuminated by either shielded external light fixtures or internal light fixtures that do not project a glare or create a visual hazard on adjacent streets, service drives or residences. 
(2)  Canopy, awning and marquee signs shall be included in the square footage calculations for wall-mounted signs as described in subsection (e). 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 08-558, § 5, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 13-611, § 3, 1-28-13 ; Ord. No. 16-634 , § 3, 1-9-17) 
Sec. 94-411. - Signs in office and industrial districts. 
(a)  This section applies to all signs within an ORP, ML, MH, MP or IPUD district. 
(b)  Freestanding/pylon signs are not allowed. 
(c)  Ground-mounted signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Ground-mounted signs shall display the street address numbers of the site(s) to which they principally relate. The street address numbers shall be legible from the associated street. 
(2)  Only one ground-mounted sign is allowed per lot. 
(3)  Ground-mounted signs and their supporting mechanisms shall not exceed six feet in height or 48 square feet in area. The required masonry base shall be included in the overall height measurement. 
(4)  Ground-mounted signs and their supporting mechanisms shall be in compliance with section 94-406 and shall be located a minimum of five feet from any lot line. 
(5)  No ground-mounted sign shall exceed two feet in width as measured from face to face. 
(6)  The supporting mechanism(s) of a ground-mounted sign shall consist of a block, brick or textured concrete base with the street address numbers presented in a manner legible from the adjacent street. The minimum height for this required masonry base shall be 18 inches above grade. 
(d)  Wall-mounted signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Wall-mounted signs shall be allowed one square foot in area for each one lineal foot of front building wall, subject to the following: 
i.  The front building wall is that considered when determining front building setbacks. 
ii.  For corner lots, the front wall will be that facing the street that carries the most average daily traffic. 
iii.  For development sites involving 100,000 square feet or less of building area, the maximum permitted total area for wall-mounted signage is 80 square feet, regardless of front building wall length. 
iv.  For development sites involving more than 100,000 square feet of building area, the maximum permitted total area for wall-mounted signage is 120 square feet, regardless of front building wall length. 
v.  The aggregate area of wall-mounted signs on multi-occupant buildings shall not exceed the limitation in this section (see subsections (1), (1)iii., and (1)iv.). The area of wall-mounted signs for each occupant or tenant of a multi-occupant building shall not exceed one square foot for each one lineal foot of front building wall occupied by such occupant or tenant. 
vi.  Wall-mounted signs are only allowed on the front building wall, except that buildings on corner lots are allowed wall-mounted signs on both walls facing streets. However, wall-mounted signs shall not face a residential zoning district unless the district and the building are separated by a public or private street or another nonresidential zoning district. Wall-mounted signs placed on corner lot buildings shall not exceed the square footage permitted per this subsection. 
vii.  Wall-mounted signs may be permitted on non-front building walls or non-corner lots for property adjacent to I-96, U.S. 131 or I-196. Such wall-mounted signage shall be subject to review and approval by the city planning commission. Such wall-mounted signage square footage shall apply towards the amount granted per this subsection 94-411(d). 
(e)  Directional signs are permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Directional signs may contain a logo of an on-premises establishment, but no advertising text or copy. 
(2)  Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in area or three feet in height, and shall be setback at least five feet from any lot line. 
(3)  Directional signs shall be limited to traffic and parking control functions. 
(4)  Directional signs shall be limited in number to one sign per onsite driveway plus two additional onsite signs. An increase in the number of signs exceeding these standards shall be reviewed and approved by the city planning commission. 
(f)  Canopy, awning and marquee signs are permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Canopy, awning and marquee signs shall be illuminated by either shielded external light fixtures or internal light fixtures that do not project a glare or create a visual hazard on adjacent streets, service drives or residences. 
(2)  Canopy, awning and marquee signs shall be included in the square footage calculations for wall-mounted signs as described in subsection (d). 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 08-558, § 6, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 13-611, § 4, 1-28-13 ; Ord. No. 16-634 , § 3, 1-9-17) 
Sec. 94-412. - Temporary signs. 
    Commercial special event signs, community special event signs realtor signs and political signs shall only be permitted consistent with the standards noted in this Section. 
(1)  Commercial special event signs. Commercial special event signs shall be classified according to the definitions noted in section 94-5. 
a.  Pedestrian signs and portable manual reader board signs are not allowed. 
b.  Inflatable signs are allowed via a temporary sign permit. 
c.  Flag and streamer signs are allowed without a temporary sign permit, subject to the following standards: 
i.  A minimum lot width of 300 feet. 
ii.  A minimum setback from all lot lines of five feet. 
iii.  A minimum height/clearance standard of ten feet as measured from the ground immediately beneath the flag and streamer signs. 
iv.  A strand length equal to the front lot line multiplied by three, but not to exceed 1,500 feet of strand. 
v.  The lot must be zoned C-4 Outdoor Commercial. 
d.  Banner signs, yard signs, and flag and streamer signs are permitted only in nonresidential zoning districts. 
e.  Banner signs, yard signs and inflatable signs shall not be placed on any lot, parcel or premises unless a sign permit has been issued by the zoning administrator. 
f.  Applications for banner signs, yard signs and inflatable signs shall include the following: 
i.  The name, mailing address, e-mail, fax number and telephone number of the property owner, business owner and applicant for the permit. 
ii.  Identification of the street address and parcel number of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
iii.  A site plan, drawn to scale, accurately identifying the location of the proposed sign on the subject property. 
iv.  A scaled drawing which accurately depicts the dimensions and display area of the proposed sign. 
v.  Identification of the specific calendar dates on which the sign will be displayed. 
vi.  A nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city commission. 
g.  Commercial special event signs shall be located in compliance with section 94-406. 
h.  Commercial special event sign permits may authorize the display of the approved signs for up to seven consecutive days, except as noted herein for inflatable signs. 
i.  A maximum of two commercial special event signs shall be authorized by a permit. 
j.  In a nonmultitenant building, up to ten permits authorizing the valid display of approved commercial special event signs may be issued in a calendar year for any individual business, except for inflatable signs, which are limited to a total of 14 display days in a calendar year. 
k.  In the case of a multitenant building, up to ten permits authorizing the valid display of approved commercial special event signs may be issued in a calendar year for any individual business, except for inflatable signs, which are limited to a total of 14 display days in a calendar year. 
l.  Yard signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area or four feet in height and shall not be mounted higher than six feet above the surrounding ground level. 
m.  Banner signs shall not exceed 30 square feet in area and shall not be mounted higher than the building roofline. 
n.  Inflatable signs shall be subject to the following regulations: 
i.  Signs shall not be mounted on, or anchored to, any roof surface. 
ii.  An inflatable sign shall not be more than 20 feet in height, as measured from the point where the sign rests on a surface or from the point of tie-down if it does not rest on a surface. 
iii.  Signs shall be securely anchored to the ground or to a building in accordance with the requirements of the Walker codes as amended. 
iv.  Any electrical motor, pump or similar device used to inflate the sign shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Walker codes as amended. 
v.  Signs shall be set back a minimum distance of one and one-half times its height from all property lines. 
vi.  Signs shall not interfere with traffic or pedestrian circulation or visibility. 
vii.  Signs shall not interfere with or obstruct fire lanes or utility lines. 
viii.  Signs shall not result in a reduction of the number of parking spaces required for the site on which the inflatable sign is located. 
ix.  All signs shall be equipped with a quick deflation system so that the sign will deflate instantly if it breaks loose from its anchor. 
x.  All signs shall be taken down if wind speeds exceed 30 knots (35 mph). The installer of the sign shall be responsible for monitoring weather conditions. 
xi.  Signs may be illuminated from the inside or by exterior lights placed to direct light glare away from adjacent roadways and properties. 
xii.  Signs shall not have any flashing, colored or blinking lights. 
xiii.  An inflatable sign installer shall carry at least one million dollars in liability insurance coverage and shall provide proof of this to the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of the temporary sign permit. 
o.  All commercial special event signs shall be removed by the applicant or property owner when the approved permit expires. 
p.  Holiday periods: A single banner sign, not to exceed 30 square feet in area, or a single yard sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area or four feet in height and not be mounted higher than six feet above the surrounding ground level, shall be allowed for each tenant without a temporary sign permit in compliance with the following holiday periods: 
i.  Martin Luther King Jr. Day and seven days prior; 
ii.  Valentine's Day and seven days prior; 
iii.  President's Day and seven days prior; 
iv.  Easter and seven days prior; 
v.  Memorial Day and seven days prior; 
vi.  July 4 and seven days prior; 
vii.  Labor Day and seven days prior; 
viii.  Halloween and seven days prior; 
ix.  Veteran's Day and seven days prior; 
x.  Thanksgiving and seven days prior and through January 2. 
    The single banner sign or single yard sign shall be located in compliance with section 94-406, shall not be mounted higher than the building roofline and must be removed by the end of the first working day after the holiday period ends. 
(2)  Community special event signs. 
a.  Community special event signs are permitted in any zoning district without a sign permit. 
b.  A community special event sign may be located either on or off the lot on which the special event is to be held. 
c.  The maximum number, size and height of community special event signs shall be as follows: 
i.  A maximum of two community special event signs shall be permitted for a special event. 
ii.  The display of community special event signs shall be limited to the 14 days immediately preceding and including the date of the special event. 
iii.  Each community special event sign shall have a maximum size of 24 square feet in area. 
iv.  Each community special event sign shall be located in compliance with section 94-406. 
v.  Each community special event sign shall not be mounted or displayed higher than 25 feet above the ground immediately under the sign. 
vi.  All community special event signs shall be removed within 48 hours of the conclusion of the special event which is being advertised. 
(3)  Realtor signs. 
a.  Realtor signs are permitted in any zoning district without a sign permit. 
b.  A realtor sign may only be located on a lot offered for sale, lease or rent. 
c.  The maximum number, size and height of realtor signs shall be as follows: 
i.  A maximum of two realtor signs shall be permitted for a specific lot. 
ii.  In nonresidential zoning districts, each realtor sign may have a maximum size of 16 square feet in area. 
iii.  In residential zoning districts, each realtor sign may have a maximum size of six square feet in area. 
iv.  Ground-mounted realtor signs may not exceed a maximum height above ground level of four feet. 
v.  Each realtor sign shall be located in compliance with section 94-406. 
vi.  All realtor signs shall be removed within 48 hours of the conclusion of the sale, lease or rental which is being advertised. 
(4)  Political signs. 
a.  Political signs are permitted in any zoning district without a sign permit. 
b.  Each political sign shall be located in compliance with section 94-406. 
c.  For lots zoned residential or agricultural, no more than one political sign per candidate or issue is allowed on a lot, a political sign may not exceed six square feet in area, and a political sign may not be mounted higher than four feet above the surrounding ground level. 
d.  For lots zoned commercial, office or industrial, no more than one political sign per candidate or issue is allowed on a lot, a political sign may not exceed 16 square feet in area, and a political sign may not be mounted higher than six feet above the surrounding ground level. 
(5)  Contractor signs. 
a.  Contractor signs are permitted in any zoning district without a sign permit. 
b.  A contractor sign may only be located on a lot where the contractor is conducting work. 
c.  The maximum number, size and height of contractor signs shall be as follows: 
i.  One contractor sign per business shall be permitted on a specific lot. 
ii.  Each contractor sign may have a maximum size of twelve (12) square feet in area. 
iii.  Ground-mounted contractor signs may not exceed a maximum height above ground level of four feet. 
iv.  Each contractor sign shall be located in compliance with section 94-406. 
v.  All contractor signs shall be removed within two weeks of the completion of onsite work. 
(6)  Temporary construction site signs. 
a.  Temporary construction site signs are permitted in any zoning district without a sign permit. 
b.  A temporary construction site sign may only be located on a lot where a development project has been approved by the city. 
c.  The maximum number, size and height of temporary construction site signs shall be as follows: 
i.  A maximum of two signs shall be permitted within the boundaries of a specific development project. 
ii.  Each sign may have a maximum size of 32 square feet in area. 
iii.  Ground-mounted signs may not exceed a maximum height above ground level of six feet. 
iv.  Each sign shall be located in compliance with section 94-406. 
v.  All signs shall be removed within two weeks of the completion of the development project that is being advertised. 
(Ord. No. 10-579, § 8, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 11-595, §§ 1-6, 8, 3-28-11) 
Sec. 94-413. - Billboards. 
    Billboards are, by their size and nature, different in scope, impact, and purpose from other types of signage in the city. Among other matters, billboards advertise or communicate goods, services or messages not conducted, sold, or generated on the lot where the billboard is located. Billboards are significantly larger in size than other types of stand-alone signage allowed in the city and their principal purpose is to attract the attention of the travelling public and to divert that attention from the road. The potential impact of a billboard on adjacent areas is significantly greater than other types of signage. Moreover, the potential for distraction to motorists and pedestrians is greater than for other signs. Recently, more businesses desire to utilize advancements in technology which allow signs (including billboards) to change copy electronically (e.g., utilizing an LED or digital type of sign). These newer technologies exacerbate the potential negative impacts of a billboard in terms of dominating the environment in which they operate due to light spillover and light pollution as well as creating additional distractions for the travelling public. The intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Establish size, illumination, location and operating standards and regulations for billboards, and 
(2)  Prohibit billboards utilizing these newer technologies in order to minimize the secondary effects that can accompany the display of these types of signs, preserve the character and repose of adjacent areas, protect property values in all areas of the city, and reduce traffic, pedestrian, and similar hazards caused by undue distractions. 
    In addition to the provisions of subsection 94-406(a) and this section 94-413, the city's basis for regulating billboards in the manner chosen is further identified in findings of fact adopted by the city commission on the same date with this ordinance amendment (Resolution No. ___). 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, billboards are only allowed within 100 feet of a freeway on property in the IPUD, ML, MH, or MP zoning districts, subject to all of the following regulations: 
(1)  Each billboard may not exceed a height of 35 feet above the preexisting grade at the base of the billboard support pole(s). 
(2)  Each billboard shall be located not less than 1,000 feet from residential zoning districts and not less than 1,500 feet from any existing residential dwelling or uses. 
(3)  Each billboard shall be located not less than 2,000 feet from any other billboard. For purposes of this subsection, the distance between billboards on opposite sides of the freeway shall be measured as the distance between the points at which lines drawn perpendicular to the freeway from the location of each billboard intersect with a line along the center of the freeway. 
(4)  Each billboard shall be located not less than 500 feet from any other freestanding sign which is located on the same side of the freeway within the city and which is visible from the traveled portion of the freeway; provided, however, that the minimum distance between billboards shall be governed by subsection (3). 
(5)  Each billboard shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from the freeway right-of-way, as measured from the closest point or edge of the billboard. 
(6)  All measurements provided for in this section shall be measured radially and without respect to political or jurisdictional boundaries. 
(7)  The area of a sign panel on a billboard shall not exceed three square feet for each one foot between the billboard and the nearest property line that intersects the property line abutting the freeway; provided, however, that the width of each sign panel on a billboard shall not exceed 14 feet and the length of each sign panel on a billboard shall not exceed 48 feet and, provided further that, notwithstanding the preceding provisions, irregularly shaped sign extensions not exceeding three percent of the area of a sign panel may extend beyond the perimeter of a sign panel on a billboard. 
(8)  No billboard shall contain more than one sign panel facing the same direction of traffic on the freeway. 
(9)  No billboard shall contain more than two sign panels. 
(10)  The light rays of an illuminated billboard shall be cast directly upon the billboard and shall not be visible to or directed towards motorists on the freeway except as reflected from the billboard. 
(11)  The sign area limitations in sections 94-410 and 94-411 shall not include the area of billboards permitted by this section. 
(12)  Billboards shall be permitted in the MP district pursuant to all other requirements of this section, subject to the following: 
a.  If a development plan has been approved for an industrial park, billboards shall be permitted provided that the development plan and restrictive covenants are first amended pursuant to section 94-182. 
b.  If a development plan has not been approved for an industrial park, a billboard shall be permitted provided that the owner of the property submits a written statement to the planning commission that either the billboard shall be included in the development plan and restrictive covenants when the property is developed for an industrial park or the billboard shall be removed prior to the development of the property as an industrial park. 
(13)  Each billboard shall comply with section 94-406. 
(14)  No billboard shall be erected unless a building permit has been issued therefore by the building inspector. 
(15)  A billboard shall not be constructed within the freeway right-of-way and shall not be constructed on any private property located between the boundary lines of the freeway, including, without limitation, railroad rights-of-way, utility easements, and other property owned or leased by railroads, utility companies, or any other private parties. 
(16)  Digital billboards and mechanical billboards, as defined in section 94-5, are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 10-579, § 9, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 11-603, § 4, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 94-414. - Temporary construction site signs. 
    In addition to the signs otherwise permitted by this article, temporary construction site signs are permitted in any zone district subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Number of signs permitted. One temporary construction site sign is permitted for each street frontage of a development project, except that one additional sign may be erected on any frontage which is in excess of 500 lineal feet. Separate street frontages shall not be combined for purposes of computing total frontage. A temporary construction site sign permitted in connection with one (1) street frontage shall not be placed on any other frontage. 
(2)  Location. Temporary construction site signs shall be located in compliance with section 94-406. Further, temporary construction site signs shall not be located nearer to a right-of-way line than one-half the minimum yard setback required for the principal building on the lot. 
(3)  Height. A temporary construction site sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height measured from ground level at the base of the sign. 
(4)  Area. The total area of the largest exposed surface of a temporary construction site sign shall not exceed 48 square feet, except that in connection with the construction of not more than one single-family dwelling or of not more than one two-family dwelling, the total area of the largest exposed surface of a temporary construction site sign shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
(5)  Installation and construction. Temporary construction site signs which are not affixed to a building or structure shall be firmly anchored in the ground and shall be constructed and fastened to supports capable of withstanding a minimum of ten pounds of pressure per square foot of the area of a sign. 
(6)  Removal. Unless the board of zoning appeals after public notice and hearing finds that a reasonable need for continued use of the sign exists and an absence of injurious effect on contiguous property is shown, temporary construction site signs shall be removed upon the earlier of the following: 
a.  Completion of the construction of a project; 
b.  Issuance by the building inspector of a certificate of occupancy for all or any portion of a project; or 
c.  Within two years of the date of final plat approval where the development involves platted lots, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 07-551, § 2, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 94-415. - Removal of accessory signs. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, with the exception of billboards, freestanding signs, freestanding/pylon signs, ground-mounted signs, and directional signs are permitted only when accessory to a principal use of and a principal building on a lot or premises. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, with the exception of billboards, freestanding signs, freestanding/pylon signs, ground-mounted signs, and directional signs are prohibited on a vacant lot. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, with the exception of billboards, sign faces of any type must be removed upon the cessation of the principal use on the lot on which the sign face was associated. If a building associated with a principal use on a lot is demolished, with the exception of billboards, all freestanding signs, freestanding/pylon signs, ground-mounted signs, and directional signs shall be removed from the lot at the same time as the principal building. With the exception of billboards, any freestanding signs, freestanding/pylon signs, ground-mounted signs, and directional signs remaining on a lot after demolition of the principal building shall constitute a violation of this chapter notwithstanding that such signs may have been lawfully nonconforming prior to the demolition of the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 16-630 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Secs. 94-416-94-435. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR SOUND, VIBRATION, ODOR, GASES, GLARE AND HEAT, LIGHT, ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION, SMOKE, DUST, DIRT, FLY ASH, DRIFTED AND BLOWN MATERIAL AND RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 

Sec. 94-436. - Prohibited levels. 
    It shall be unlawful to carry on or permit to be carried on any activity or operation or use of any land, building or equipment dangerous to human life or health or that produces irritants to the sensory perception greater than the measures established in this article which are hereby determined to be the maximum permissible hazards to humans or human activities. 
Sec. 94-437. - Sound. 
    The intensity levels of sound created by any activity or operation or use of any land, building or equipment shall be governed by the city noise control ordinance, article IV of chapter 34 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-382, § 1, 1-9-90) 
Sec. 94-438. - Vibration. 
    All machinery shall be so mounted and operated as to prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of 0.003 root-mean-square of one-inch r.m.s. measured at any lot line of its source. 
(Ord. No. 85-323, § 1, 11-12-85) 
Sec. 94-439. - Odor. 
    The emission of noxious, odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines, when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of clean air or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines, is prohibited. 
Sec. 94-440. - Toxic gases. 
    The escape of or emission of any gas which is injurious or destructive or explosive shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated, except as required in the provision of essential services. 
Sec. 94-441. - Glare and heat. 
    Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view from any point along the lot line, except during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied. 
Sec. 94-442. - Light. 
    All lighting shall be arranged to reflect light away from adjoining properties in residential and agricultural districts. 
Sec. 94-443. - Electromagnetic radiation. 
    The rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives with respect to the propagation and dissemination of electromagnetic radiation are hereby made a part of this article and shall be on file in the office of the building inspector. 
Sec. 94-444. - Smoke, dust, dirt and fly ash. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever any air contaminator for a period or periods aggregating more than two minutes in any one-half hour which is: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart. The Ringelmann Chart, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this article, shall be the standard. However, the Umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringelmann Chart. A Ringelmann Chart shall be on file in the office of the administrative official. 
(2)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the smoke described in subsection (1), except when the emission consists only of water vapor. 
The quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed two-tenths of one grain per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Sec. 94-445. - Drifted and blown material. 
    The drifting or airborne transmission beyond the lot line of dust, particles or debris from any open stockpile shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated. 
Sec. 94-446. - Radioactive materials. 
    Radioactive materials shall not be emitted so as to be unsafe to human health or life. 
Secs. 94-447-94-465. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - OFFSTREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 94-466. - Required offstreet parking generally. 
    Offstreet parking required in conjunction with all land and building uses shall be provided as prescribed in this section: 
(1)  The minimum number of offstreet parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the table in section 94-467. For uses not specifically mentioned therein, offstreet parking requirements shall be interpreted by the board of zoning appeals from requirements for similar uses. 
(2)  Any area once designated as required offstreet parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equally required facilities are provided elsewhere. Offstreet parking existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than would be required in this article for such building or use. 
(3)  The offstreet parking may be provided either by individual action or by a parking program carried out through public action, whether by a special assessment district or otherwise. 
(4)  Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required offstreet parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for each individual use computed separately. However, if an offstreet parking area is shared by two or more buildings or uses, the operating hours of which do not overlap, the total required number of parking spaces may be reduced to reflect the peak hour demand, as determined appropriate by the planning commission. 
(5)  Required offstreet parking shall be for the use of occupants, employees, visitors and patrons and shall be limited in use to motor vehicles. The use of required offstreet parking for storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. Offstreet parking, whether public or private, for nonresidential uses shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the offstreet parking lot, without crossing any major thoroughfare. 
(6)  (a)  Residential offstreet parking spaces shall comply with this subsection and shall be located on the lots they are intended to serve. 
(b)  Residential offstreet parking spaces may only be provided on an improved parking surface, which is defined as a uniform surface meeting the following minimum construction standards: 
Material Type Material Depth Base Material and Depth Asphalt 2 inches Aggregate at 4 inches Poured Concrete 4 inches Sand at 2 inches Bricks/Paving Stones 2 inches Sand at 4 inches Note: Application of all materials shall support a front axle weight of 18,000 pounds and a rear axle weight of 30,000 pounds and shall otherwise adhere to American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards.  
(c)  Residential offstreet parking spaces for the following uses may only be provided on an improved parking surface, as defined in subsection (b): 
i.  Lots with an area equal to or less than one acre, that contain one or two dwelling units, and that have a front building setback of 65 feet or less from the road right-of-way. 
ii.  All lots containing multiple-family dwellings. 
(d)  Gravel is prohibited. 
(e)  Residential offstreet parking spaces for motor vehicles must be contiguous to the residential driveway. 
(f)  Residential offstreet parking spaces on any lot that contains one or two dwelling units cannot cover more than 30 percent of a required front yard. 
(g)  Residential offstreet parking spaces must maintain a three-foot setback from any property line. 
(7)  If offstreet parking in permanent public ownership and operation exists in quantity and location greater than would be necessary to fulfill the parking requirements of this article for the existing contiguous buildings, then the excess number of parking spaces may be prorated to the land area within 300 feet as measured under subsection (5). The planning commission shall calculate the proration of the excess number of parking spaces and, based on that calculation, may apply a credit towards the minimum number of parking spaces otherwise required to be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new building or new use. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, §§ 22, 23, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 13-611, § 1, 1-28-13 ; Ord. No. 17-637 , § 1, 7-10-17) 
Sec. 94-467. - Table of required offstreet parking spaces. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Floor area : The sum of all horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or dwelling unit, measured form he exterior fades of the exterior walls or form the centerline of walls separating dwelling units. Unenclosed porches, courtyards, patios and cellars shall not be considered as part of floor area, except when utilized for commercial or industrial purposes. 
    Gross floor area (GFA) : The area within the perimeter of the outside walls of the building, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, storage rooms, utility rooms, inventory rooms, thickness of walls, columns or other features (as illustrated below). 
    Usable floor area (UFA) : That area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandize or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers (as illustrated below). Floor area used or intended to be used for hallways, stairways, elevator shafts, utility or sanitary facilities or for the storage or processing of merchandise or food products shall be excluded from this computation of UFA. Measurement of UFA shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of a structure measured from the internal faces of the exterior walls. 
  
Floor Area 
(b)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the following table: 
Use Spaces Per Unit of Measurement 
(Rounded Off to Nearest Unit) Residential Uses Detached single-family residential 2 Each dwelling unit Multifamily residential 2 Each dwelling unit Residential units above commercial establishments 2 Each dwelling unit plus the required number of spaces for the commercial establishment as required by this section Civic and Institutional Uses Hospitals, housing for the elderly, nursing homes, adult foster care facilities, independent living facilities 11/4 Each bed Private clubs, fraternities, dormitories 1 2 beds, or 100 square feet usable floor area (UFA), whichever is greater Theaters, auditoriums 1 3 seats Churches, mortuaries 1 3 seats, or 21 square feet of usable floor area (UFA) of auditorium, whichever is greater Elementary, junior high schools 1 2 teachers, employees and administrators; or 21 square feet of usable floor area (UFA) of largest auditorium or other public assembly room, whichever is greater High schools, colleges 1 2 teachers, employees and administrators; plus 1 space per 6 students; or 21 square feet of usable floor area (UFA) of largest auditorium or other public assembly room, whichever is greater Dancehalls, exhibition halls and assembly halls without fixed seats 1 100 square feet of usable floor area (UFA) Community center 1 300 square feet of gross floor area Note: 3050 Walkent-Knottnerus Site. 41,000 sq. ft. building. 1,278 occupancy load. Commercial and Office Uses Banks 1 300 square feet of gross floor area (GFA), plus 3 stacking spaces per teller/ATM lane Offices-General 1 500 square feet of usable floor area (UFA), plus 1 parking space for each 2 employees Professional offices of doctors and dentists with no overnight stay 10 First doctor or dentist 8 Second doctor or dentist 6 Third doctor or dentist 4 Each additional doctor or dentist Stadiums and sports arenas 1 4 seats, or 12 feet of benches Bowling alleys 7 Alley Swimming pools 1 30 square feet of water area Restaurants/fast food establishments with drive-up windows 1 2 customer seats plus 1 space per employee at peak hours plus 5 stacking spaces per drive-up window Restaurants/banquet halls/fast food establishments without drive-up window 1 2 customer seats plus 1 space per employee at peak hours Commercial/retail building not more than 50,000 square feet except as otherwise specified in this article 1 200 square feet of usable floor area (UFA) Commercial/retail building more than 50,000 square feet except as otherwise specified in this article 1 250 square feet usable floor area (UFA) Hotels, motels, extended stay establishments, rooming houses 1 Each sleeping room Auto repair shops (motor and/or body) 1 Each 200 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) in the structure Beauty parlors or barbershops 2 Each barber or beauty shop chair Conference centers 1 4 meeting room seats Auto/vehicle wash-Manual 1 Each employee plus 3 stacking spaces per stall Auto/vehicle wash-Automatic/tunnel 10 stacking spaces Each tunnel or stall plus 1 space per employee Child care centers 1 Each 300 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) Bar/Night Club 1 2 customer seats plus 1 space per employee at peak hours Extra: 1 100 square feet of dance floor area Industrial, Manufacturing and Warehousing Uses Industrial uses, including manufacturing, assembly, processing, research, packaging, research and testing laboratories; creameries, bottling works; printing, plumbing, or electrical workshops; telephone exchange buildings 11/2 Each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) or 1 space per employee on largest shift, whichever is greater Industrial uses such as wholesale business, distribution, truck terminals, and warehousing 1 Each 15,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) or 1 space per employee, whichever is greater Industrial office areas 1 Each 300 square feet of office area plus the required number of spaces for the industrial uses as required by this section Movie Studio 1 Every 2 employees, measured at peak shift  
(Ord. No. 88-361, § 6, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 06-545, § 1, 3-27-06; Ord. No. 10-588, § 4, 10-11-10) 
Sec. 94-468. - Offstreet parking lot layout, construction and maintenance. 
    Offstreet parking spaces shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Offstreet parking spaces shall comply with all minimum stall width, stall depth, aisle width, parking module width and other requirements prescribed by table 9-1 and figure 9-1 below. (The dimensional terms in table 9-1 are defined by the diagram in figure 9-1.) 
Table 9-1 
Parking Layout Dimension Requirements 
S w 
Basis 
Stall 
Width 
(feet) WP 
Stall 
Width 
Parallel 
to Aisle 
(feet) D 
Stall 
Depth 
to Wall 
(feet) DI 
Stall 
Depth to 
Interlock 
(feet) AW 
Aisle 
Width 
(feet) W 1 W 2 
Wall- 
to- 
Wall 
(feet) W 3 W 4 
Interlock 
to 
Interlock 
(feet) Two-way aisle-90 degrees 9.00  9.00 17.5 17.5 26.0 N/A 61.0 64.0 61.0 Two-way aisle-60 degrees 9.00 10.4  18.0 16.5 26.0 N/A 62.0 46.0 59.0 One-way aisle-75 degrees 9.00  9.3  18.5 17.5 22.0 40.5 59.0 N/A 57.0 One-way aisle-60 degrees 9.00 10.4  18.0 16.5 18.0 39.0 54.0 N/A 51.0 One-way aisle-45 degrees 9.00 12.7  16.5 14.5 15.0 41.0 48.0 N/A 44.0  
Figure 16 

(2)  Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided for vehicles to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives not less than 12 feet in width. 
(3)  Parking spaces shall be set back from abutting residential districts as follows: 
Where the 
parking lot 
abuts residential 
districts Required setback of 
parking spaces At side lot lines 10 feet from such side lot line With contiguous common frontage in same block Equal to the residential required setback, or average of existing setback in common block frontage, whichever is less Across the street and opposite residential lots fronting on such street Equivalent to the opposite residential required setback Across the street and opposite, or contiguous to and in same block, with residential side lot lines on such street 10 feet from street lot lines Rear lot line None  

(4)  The land between the setback line and the lot line in a parking lot required by subsection (3) is for the purposes of this article called a buffer strip. There shall be bumper stops or wheel chocks provided so as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the buffer strip. The ground of the buffer strip shall be used only for the purpose of plant materials. 
(5)  Where buffer strips are not required, bumper stops or wheel chocks shall be provided, so located as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the lot line. 
(6)  Where the boundary of any offstreet parking space is located within 20 feet of property zoned for residential use, a suitable chainlink wire fence shall be provided, or such other fence which, in the judgment of the building inspector, serves the same function and is not detrimental to surrounding properties, but shall not extend into the required front open space of the abutting residential lot. 
(7)  The parking lot shall be drained to dispose of surface water. Surface water from any offstreet parking area or loading area of 1,000 square feet or more must be disposed of through an underground drainage system in such manner that both streets and neighboring properties are not harmed or their use impaired. The underground system must include such catchbasins, manholes, storm sewer connection and other structures as may be necessary to properly dispose of such surface water. If a storm sewer system is available, the drainage system of the offstreet parking area or loading area shall be connected to it. No offstreet parking area or loading area drainage system may be connected to a sanitary sewer system. 
(8)  The surface of the parking lot, including drives and aisles, excepting the buffer strips, shall be constructed of a dustless and durable all-weather surfacing material. 
(9)  Parking structures may be built to satisfy offstreet parking regulations when located in other than residential districts, subject to the area, height, bulk and placement regulations of such district in which located. 
(10)  Required offstreet parking areas for three or more vehicles shall have individual spaces marked and shall be so designed, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk or alley, and so that any vehicle may be parked and unparked without moving another. 
(Ord. No. 72-164, 2-22-72; Ord. No. 93-421, § 1, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Sec. 94-469. - Offstreet loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, retailing, wholesaling or other uses involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services adjacent to the opening used for loading and unloading in order to avoid interference with public use of highways, streets or alleys. The space for standing, loading and unloading services shall not include any portion of the layout for offstreet parking pursuant to the requirements of section 94-468 (including, without limitation, offstreet parking spaces, parking aisles, and defined drives for ingress and egress). 
    Such loading and unloading space shall be in an area minimum ten feet by 40 feet with a 14-foot height with a 14-foot height clearance and shall be provided according to the following table: 
Gross usable floor area in square feet Loading and unloading spaces 
required in terms of square feet of 
usable floor area 0 to 20,000 One space 20,001 to 100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet of excess over 20,000 square feet 100,001 to 500,000 Five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 square feet of excess over 100,000 square feet Over 500,000 Fifteen spaces plus one space for each 80,000 square feet of excess over 500,000 square feet  
(Ord. No. 93-421, § 2, 7-13-93) 
Sec. 94-470. - Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment; parking and storage of mobile home dwellings. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, "major recreational equipment" is defined as including boats and boat trailers; travel trailers; pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles); motorized dwellings; tent trailers; snowmobiles; ORVs (off-road vehicles) and similar vehicles or equipment; and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by recreational equipment or not. "Major recreational equipment" does not include "mobile home dwellings." 
(b)  No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except as follows: 
(1)  All major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored either wholly within a carport or enclosed building, or within the rear yard or side yard of the lot, as provided by this section. 
(2)  If the lot is less than or equal to one acre in size, a maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment, plus one additional piece of major recreational equipment that is not more than 16 feet long, may be stored on the lot outside of a carport or enclosed building. If the lot is larger than one acre, a maximum of three pieces of major recreational equipment may be stored on the lot outside of a carport or enclosed building. However, in no case shall more than one piece of equipment be parked or stored within the side yard of any lot at any one time. 
(3)  If parked or stored within the side yard, the equipment shall be parked or stored only in the side yard which is adjacent to the garage and shall not extend any farther toward the street than the closest adjacent principal building (or closest adjacent portion of the building) next to which the equipment is parked or stored. In no case shall the equipment be parked or stored within, or extend into, the front yard of the lot or within a side yard that is not adjacent to a garage. 

(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, a maximum of one piece of major recreational equipment may be parked within the front yard of a residential lot during loading and unloading of the equipment, but in no case for a period to exceed 72 hours provided, however, that: 
a.  Major recreational equipment (except a boat) which exceeds 34 feet in length or eight and one-half feet in width shall not be parked or stored anywhere, or for any purpose, on a residential lot for more than 48 hours; and 
b.  A boat which either (i) exceeds 34 feet in length, or (ii) exceeds nine feet in width, shall not be parked or stored anywhere, for any purpose or for any period of time, on a residential lot unless it is within a wholly enclosed building. 
(5)  Major recreational equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any other location not approved for those purposes. 
(6)  The parking or storage of major recreational equipment shall comply with all other applicable laws and ordinances, including, without limitation, article V of chapter 78 of this Code. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the length of any major recreational equipment, other than trailers, shall be measured from the rear of the unit to the front of the unit or the front of the hitch attached to the unit, whichever is longer. The length of any major recreational equipment that is a trailer of any type shall be measured from the rear of the trailer to the front of the hitch. 
(d)  No mobile home dwelling shall be parked or stored for any period of time on any residential lot or in any location not approved for such use, except as otherwise permitted by section 94-173 or section 94-350. 
(Ord. No. 88-360, § 1, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 91-392, § 7, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 91-393, § 1, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 16-632 , § 1, 9-26-16) 
Sec. 94-471. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
(a)  Automotive vehicles of any kind or type (except as permitted in section 94-470) without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings. 
(b)  Automotive trailers of any kind or type (except as permitted in section 94-470) with or without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in a completely enclosed building or within the rear yard or side yard of the lot. If parked or stored within the side yard, the automotive trailer shall be parked or stored only in the side yard which is adjacent to the garage and shall not extend any farther toward the street than the closest adjacent principal building (or closest adjacent portion of the building) next to which the trailer is parked or stored. In no case shall the trailer be parked or stored within, or extend into, the front yard of the lot or within a side yard that is not adjacent to a garage. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, a maximum of one automotive trailer may be parked in the front yard of a residential lot during loading and unloading but in no case for a period to exceed 48 hours. For purposes of this subsection, an "automotive trailer" is any trailer designed or used to be drawn by a motor vehicle to carry persons or property. 
(c)  It shall be illegal to park or garage a commercial vehicle on any lot in a residential or agricultural district except that one commercial vehicle per lot shall be permitted if such vehicle is not larger than a regularly manufactured pickup or panel truck of 11/2 ton capacity and is operated by a member of the family residing on such lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-522, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 94-472. - Driveways and areas used for display or storage of property in commercial zones. 
    All driveways and areas used for the display or storage of any tangible property in connection with any use permitted in a commercial zone shall comply with the provisions of subsections (1), (3), (6), (7) and (8), and the first and last sentences of subsection (4) of section 94-468; provided, that this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Areas used for the storage of plants, trees and shrubbery. 
(2)  The area within a drive-in theater or outdoor theater used for the parking of vehicles from which persons observe the movies or other entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 74-109, 9-20-74) 
Secs. 94-473-94-495. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - UNIQUE USES 

Sec. 94-496. - General requirements for allowance. 
    Unique uses may be permitted only as expressly provided for by this article and in accordance with the standards and requirements of article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 24, 1-10-89) 
Sec. 94-497. - Unique uses permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted as unique uses in any zoning district within the city if approved by the planning commission as provided by this article and as provided by article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Airports. 
(2)  Amusement parks. 
(3)  Circuses. 
(4)  Fairgrounds. 
(5)  Federal, state, county or municipal service buildings and facilities. 
(6)  Racetracks. 
(7)  Major recreational facilities. 
(8)  Public utility buildings and structures. 
(9)  Natural resources utilization, exploitation, mining or development (not including mineral mining), except that water wells shall be considered an accessory use and not a unique use. 
(10)  Removal of sod, or removal or redistribution of topsoil, except as necessarily incident to normal farming operations or to the performance of work with respect to a building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-367, § 25, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 91-395, § 10, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 97-503, § 5, 10-13-97) 
Secs. 94-498-94-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 94-521. - Purpose. 
    The requirements of this article are intended to provide for the regulation and permitting of the uses and associated improvements described in section 94-523 which are inherently impermanent or which are proposed to be engaged in for only a short and definite period of time. Further, where expressly permitted by this article, such temporary uses may be conducted outdoors, notwithstanding any limitation or prohibition against such outdoor activity otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-358, § 1, 3-8-88; Ord. No. 99-528, § 1, 2-8-99) 
Sec. 94-522. - Standards and procedures applicable to all temporary uses. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 94-523, all temporary uses provided for by this article shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Temporary use permit required. It shall be unlawful to engage in any temporary use as provided by this article within the city without first obtaining a temporary use permit therefor. Upon application, the building official may issue a temporary use permit for any of the uses set forth in section 94-523. 
(2)  Applications. 
a.  Submission deadline. All applications for a temporary use permit shall be made at least 21 days prior to the proposed commencement date for the use, provided that the building official may approve a lesser time period consistent with the requirements of this article. 
b.  Site plan. Before establishment, all temporary uses shall be subject to approval of a site plan. The site plan shall describe the nature and location of the activities and temporary improvements involved, the time period for which the temporary use permit is requested, and such other information in sufficient detail as the building official determines is reasonably necessary to adequately review the application and to ensure that the use will be conducted in a manner consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Standards of review. A temporary use permit as provided by this article shall not be granted unless the building official determines that a proposed temporary use will meet the following requirements: 
a.  Nuisance, hazardous features. The temporary use will not result in any hazard or nuisance to the contiguous or adjacent users or uses of property or otherwise be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare of the community. 
b.  Traffic and circulation. The temporary use will not create hazardous vehicular or pedestrian traffic conditions on or adjacent to the site of the temporary use, or result in traffic in excess of the capacity of streets serving the use. A temporary use permit shall not be issued if the building official determines that the proposed use will: 
1.  Unreasonably interfere with the use of the street or sidewalk for pedestrian or vehicular travel; 
2.  Unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to, or use of property adjacent to the street; 
3.  Interfere with street cleaning or snow removal activities; 
4.  Cause damage to the sidewalk or street, or to trees, benches, landscaping or other objects lawfully located therein; 
5.  Cause violation of any state or local laws; or 
6.  Reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, street lighting, sign, or other traffic control device. 
c.  Public facilities and services. Adequate utility, drainage, refuse management, sanitary facilities, emergency services and access, and similar necessary facilities and services will be available for the temporary use. 
d.  Natural environment. The temporary use will not have a substantially adverse impact on the natural environment. 
e.  Site suitability. The site is suitable for the proposed temporary use, considering flood hazard, drainage, soils, and other conditions which may constitute a danger to life, health or property. 
f.  Building, electrical and other codes. The temporary use and all associated temporary improvements, including, but not limited to, tents, stands, temporary electrical systems, temporary heating systems, and temporary lighting systems will comply with all applicable provisions of the building code, the National Electrical Code, and such other codes as are from time to time adopted or amended pursuant to chapter 14 of this Code. 
(4)  Signs. Temporary signs proposed in connection with a temporary use may be allowed in such shape, size, construction, location and duration as approved by the building official in compliance with the provisions of article XIV of this chapter applicable to the zoning district in which the temporary use will be located, provided that where the building official determines that a temporary sign proposed in connection with a temporary use will result in a hazard or nuisance or will otherwise be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare of the community, the building official may impose more restrictive requirements than required by article XIV of this chapter. 
(5)  Duration. A temporary use shall be permitted only for as short a time as practicable. In no case shall a temporary use permit be issued for a period in excess of the time limitations as provided by section 94-523. 
(6)  Conditions to approval. Reasonable conditions may be required by the building official in connection with the approval of any temporary use permit. The conditions imposed may include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed temporary use will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the use; to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy; to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land; and to protect the health, safety and welfare and the social and economic well-being of those who will use the temporary use under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed use, and the community as a whole. Specifically, the conditions imposed may be related to such matters including, but not limited to, location, size, height, construction, screening, parking, traffic and pedestrian access, hours of operation, noise, odor, sanitation, disposal of trash or refuse, lighting and electrical systems, or any other physical or operational aspects of a proposed temporary use which might adversely affect health, safety or welfare. Any condition imposed must be clearly specified in writing by the building official on the temporary use permit. 
(7)  Issuance or denial. 
a.  Prior to the building official's determination to issue or deny a temporary use permit, the application shall be reviewed by other city staff members including, without limitation, the planning director, city engineer, fire chief, and police chief. The building official shall consider the recommendation of such city staff in deciding to issue or deny the temporary use permit under this section and in imposing conditions pursuant to subsection 94-522(6) if the permit is issued by the building official. 
b.  If the building official determines that the application sufficiently complies with the requirements set forth in sections 94-522 and 94-523, other applicable ordinances, and state and federal statutes, the building official shall issue a temporary use permit within 14 days of submission of the application. The following information shall be clearly indicated by the building official on any permit issued: 
1.  The commencement and termination dates of the permit; 
2.  Specification of any conditions to approval imposed pursuant to this article; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) or organization(s) to whom the permit is issued (referred to in this article as the "owner or operator"); 
4.  The type of temporary use for which the permit has been issued, including a general listing of the types of activities the use will involve; and 
5.  The location of the site for which the permit has been issued, and a general indication of the location of activities on the site. 
c.  If the building official determines that the application does not sufficiently comply with the requirements set forth in sections 94-522 and 94-523, the building official shall deny the permit and shall provide the applicant with a written statement of the reasons for the denial within 14 days of submission of the application. 
(8)  Validity. 
a.  A temporary use permit is valid only at the location described in the permit. 
b.  A temporary use permit is valid only for the uses or activities described in the permit, subject to any conditions imposed. 
c.  A temporary use permit is valid only for the dates and duration specified in the permit. 
d.  A temporary use permit is valid only if conspicuously and continuously displayed at the site of the temporary use for the duration of the permit. 
(9)  Termination. All temporary use permits are valid for the entire period as stated in the permit, unless revoked or suspended prior to termination. At the end of the time period stated in the permit, the use shall be discontinued and all temporary structures shall be removed. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(10)  Revocation or suspension. The building official may revoke or suspend a temporary use permit at any time on the failure of the owner or operator of the use covered by the permit to comply with any or all requirements of this article or conditions imposed upon issuance of the permit or with any other applicable provisions of state or local law. Notice of such revocation or suspension shall be made by letter from the building official to the owner or operator of the use for which the permit has been granted, hand-delivered or mailed, return receipt requested, setting forth the grounds upon which the permit was revoked or suspended, the date and time upon which the revocation or suspension is effective, and informing the owner or operator of the appeals procedure. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner or operator of such activity shall cease operation of the activity immediately. The provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to preclude the use of any other remedy prescribed by law or by this chapter with respect to violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(11)  Appeal of building official's determination. 
a.  An appeal by any person aggrieved by an action of the building official in granting, denying, revoking or suspending a temporary use permit may be made to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with this chapter. Any request for an appeal must be made within five working days of the decision being appealed. 
b.  In the case of an appeal from the revocation or suspension of a temporary use permit, the aggrieved party may first request a meeting with the building official to present his grounds for appeal. The building official shall meet with the aggrieved party within two working days of the date upon which the appeal is received. Within one working day of the date of the meeting, the building official shall inform the aggrieved party, in writing, of his decision to affirm, modify or rescind the revocation or suspension of the permit. 
(12)  Fees. The fee for a temporary use permit required by this article shall be established by resolution of the city commission. No permit shall be issued unless such fee has been paid to the city treasurer. 
(13)  Maintenance and cleanup of premises. 
a.  The area occupied by the temporary use must be kept in a neat and well-kept manner at all times. 
b.  A cash deposit of $200.00 shall be required to ensure the cleaning and removal, within 24 hours after the closing of the sale or event, of all temporary improvements, signs, trash, and debris resulting from the temporary use. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of the use to abandon the permitted premises without such cleaning and removal. If any owner or operator fails to do such cleaning and removing, the city may enter upon the premises, do such cleaning and removing, and charge the cost thereof to the deposit. The remainder, if any, shall be refunded. An owner or operator who performs his obligations as required by this section shall be refunded his deposit within 15 days of termination or revocation of the temporary use permit. Acceptance of the temporary use permit by the owner or operator of the use upon issuance by the building official shall constitute the grant of permission by the owner or operator for the city to enter upon the premises and clean them if necessary under the terms of this section. 
(14)  Use of public property; approval required; liability insurance required. 
a.  No portion of a temporary use may take place on the public right-of-way or other publicly owned property unless the applicant shall first have obtained approval for such use from the city commission or other public body having jurisdiction over the property. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit for a temporary use that will take place, wholly or in part, on publicly owned property, the applicant shall obtain comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts of at least $500,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, and $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate, with a company authorized to do business in the state. The insurance shall insure the applicant against liability for death or bodily injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the temporary use or conduct incident thereto, and shall name the city as an additional insured party. The insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the permit. Proof of such insurance shall be furnished to the city prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 88-358, § 1, 3-8-88; Ord. No. 99-528, §§ 2, 3, 2-8-99) 
Sec. 94-523. - Temporary uses permitted upon obtaining a temporary use permit from the building official. 
    Subject to the requirements of section 94-522, and subject to the requirements of this section, the building official may, upon application, issue a temporary use permit for any of the following uses: 
(1)  Temporary outdoor sales or tent sales by retail merchants. The temporary outdoor sale and display of customary store goods and merchandise in connection with the promotional activities of retail merchants is permitted, subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Maximum permit period: 14 days in any 12-month period. 
b.  Location: Such temporary outdoor sale and display of goods and merchandise is permitted only in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, or CPUD zoning districts and shall be conducted within an area immediately adjacent to the place where such goods and merchandise are customarily sold in connection with an existing business. 
c.  Outdoor display of used items excluded: The outdoor display of used appliances, used furniture, used housewares, used plumbing, used building materials, and other similar used merchandise shall not be authorized under this section except as approved as a regulated use in article XIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Outdoor Christmas tree sales not associated with sales from a principal building. Christmas trees may be stored, displayed and sold outdoors without the use of a building or other structure, subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Maximum permit period: 60 days in any 12-month period. 
b.  Location: Christmas trees may be sold outdoors on property located in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, CPUD, ML, MH, and IPUD zoning districts. Except as required by the building official, the display of Christmas trees need not comply with the setback requirements of this chapter, provided that no tree shall be displayed within 30 feet of the intersection of the curbline of any two streets or the intersection of the curbline of a street and a driveway, nor within the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor sales of produce. The temporary outdoor display and sale of produce at a roadside stand, subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Maximum permit period: May 15 through November 15 of each year. 
b.  Location: Temporary outdoor displays and sales of produce at a roadside stand is permitted only in the C-2, C-3, C-4, or CPUD zoning districts. Except as required by the building official, the roadside stand need not comply with the setback requirements of this chapter provided that no produce or the roadside stand shall be located within 30 feet of the intersection of the curb line of any two streets, the intersection of a street and a driveway, or within the public right-of-way. 
c.  Parking: The roadside stand shall have adequate parking, but the parking area shall not be required to have a dustless and durable all-weather surfacing material, notwithstanding subsection 94-468(8). 
d.  Prohibition on sales of other items: No items other than produce shall be displayed or sold at a roadside stand permitted under this section. 
e.  Signs: Notwithstanding section 94-410, temporary signs of not more than an aggregate of 16 square feet shall be permitted on the same premises to identify the location of the roadside stand provided that signs shall comply with all other applicable requirements. 
f.  Definition: For purposes of this section, "produce" shall mean fresh fruits and vegetables harvested for direct sale to retail customers. The term "produce" shall not include flowers or any other plants or plant materials (except fresh fruits and vegetables as provided herein). 
(4)  Temporary outdoor events in commercial districts. The following temporary outdoor uses are permitted only in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, or CPUD zoning districts (subject to the requirements set forth in a. through d. below): Carnivals, fairs, festivals, athletic tournaments or contests, auto shows, and similar uses (as determined by the board of zoning appeals), provided, however, that the temporary outdoor uses permitted under this section shall not be construed to include flea markets, livestock shows, motorized vehicle racing or other similar operation of motorized vehicles, concerts, and similar uses having excessive noise, odor, or other external impacts (as determined by the board of zoning appeals). The temporary outdoor uses permitted in this subsection shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Maximum permit period: Seven days in any 12-month period for a particular event and 30 days in any 12-month period for all temporary outdoor uses permitted under this section. 
b.  Location: Such temporary outdoor uses are permitted only on a lot or combination of contiguous lots of at least five acres. 
c.  Hours: Such temporary uses shall not be permitted to operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. through 8:00 a.m. 
d.  Additional requirements: In addition to the standards in subsection 94-522(3), a temporary outdoor use permit shall not be granted under this section unless the building official determines that the proposed temporary use meets the following requirements: 
1.  The temporary use has adequate parking remaining on the premises or adequate off-street parking on nearby property to avoid traffic congestion and safety hazards. The applicant shall provide the building official with written documentation of the consent of the property owner to parking on other property if such premises are not owned by the applicant. 
2.  The temporary use has adequate security for the temporary outdoor use to protect the public health and safety including private security guards and limited access points. 
3.  The temporary use has adequate facilities on the premises for the temporary housing of any workers in a safe and sanitary manner in motor homes and recreational vehicles that have indoor, self-contained toilet facilities and in compliance with all applicable laws, codes, and ordinances. 
(5)  Temporary housing in connection with permitted indoor uses. The temporary housing of workers required to care for animals in connection with permitted indoor uses (such as animal shows and circuses) in assembly halls, concert halls, and similar places of assembly or entertainment is permitted in the C-2 district, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Maximum permit period: Such temporary use shall be permitted for the duration of the permitted indoor use (such as animal shows or circuses) as specified on the temporary use permit issued by the building official. 
b.  Additional requirements: In addition to the standards in subsection 94-522(3), a temporary use shall not be granted unless the building official determines that the proposed temporary housing is provided in a safe and sanitary manner on the premises in motor homes or recreational vehicles that have indoor, self-contained toilet facilities and in compliance with all applicable laws, codes, and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 88-358, § 1, 3-8-88; Ord. No. 99-528, §§ 4-6, 2-8-99) 
Secs. 94-524-94-549. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SUSTAINABLE ENERGY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-572, § 1, adopted June 16, 2009, added § 94-524 to the Code. At the editor's discretion, reserved §§ 94-524 through 94-549 have been added to art. XVIII to accommodate growth and the new provisions have been redesignated as §§ 94-550 through 94-555. Also at the editor's discretion, the single section included in the ordinance has been broken down into multiple sections to make its various provisions easier to locate. 

Sec. 94-550. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the location, installation and operation of wind energy turbines (WETs). Among other goals, the regulations in this section are intended: 
(1)  To promote the safe, effective and efficient use of WETs to produce electricity and reduce the consumption of fossil fuels. 
(2)  To preserve and protect public health, safety, welfare and quality of life by minimizing the potential adverse impacts of WETs. 
(3)  To establish standards and quantifiable procedures to direct the site location, engineering, installation, maintenance and decommissioning of WETs. 
(4)  To define and delineate between various types of WETs in order to properly regulate the different WET technologies. (See Figure 1.) 
Figure 1 

(Ord. No. 09-572, § 1A., 10-16-09) 
Sec. 94-551. - Definitions. 
    Ambient sound level: The amount of background noise at a given location prior to the installation of a WET which may include, but is not limited to, traffic, machinery, lawnmowers, general human activity and the interaction of the wind with the landscape. Ambient sound level is measured on the decibel-dB(A)-weighted scale as defined by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
    Anemometer: A wind speed indicator constructed for the purpose of analyzing the potential for installing a WET at a given location. An anemometer includes a tower, base plate, anchors, cables and hardware, wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment, a data logger, instrument wiring and telemetry devices used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time. Telemetry data can include instantaneous wind speeds or characterizations of a wind resource at a given location. 
    Decommissioning: The process of terminating the operation of a WET by completely removing the entire WET and all related buildings, structures, foundations, supports, equipment and, as appropriate, onsite access roads. 
    Large wind energy turbine (L-WET): A tower-mounted wind energy system, standing greater than 150 feet tall and up to 400 feet tall, that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of equipment (e.g., base, blade, rotor, foundation, generator, nacelle, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, etc.) L-WETs have nameplate capacities that indentify maximum kilowatts. 
    Medium wind energy turbine (M-WET): A tower-mounted wind energy system standing between 150 feet tall and 121 feet tall that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of equipment (e.g., base, blade, rotor, foundation, generator, nacelle, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, etc.) M-WETs have nameplate capacities that do not exceed 250 kilowatts. 
    Nacelle: The encasement which houses the interior electricity-generating components, gear box, drive tram, brakes and related equipment of a WET. 
    Net metering: A special metering and billing agreement between utility companies and their customers which facilitates the connection of sustainable energy generating systems to the power grid. 
    Occupied building: A structure used by or which houses residents, customers, workers or visitors. 
    Operator: The entity responsible for the day-to-day operations and maintenance of a WET. 
    Owner/applicant: The person, firm, corporation, company, limited liability corporation or other entity seeking city approval under this section, as well as its successor(s), assign(s) or transferee(s), for a WET or anemometer. An owner/applicant must have the legal authority to represent and bind the landowner or lessee who will construct, own, and operate the WET or anemometer. The duties and obligations regarding a zoning approval for any approved WET or Anemometer shall be with the owner/applicant of the WET or anemometer, and jointly and severally with the owner and operator or lessee of the WET or Anemometer if different than the owner/applicant. 
    Rotor: A blade of a WET that is connected to the rotor hub and nacelle and acts as an airfoil assembly that exacts kinetic energy directly from the wind. 
    Rotor diameter: The cross-sectional dimension of the circle swept by the rotating blades of a WET. 
    Shadow flicker: The moving shadow created by the sun shining through the rotating blades of a WET. The amount of shadow flicker created by a WET is calculated by a computer model that measures WET location, elevation, and tree cover, location of adjacent structures, wind activity and sunlight angle. 
    Small tower-mounted wind energy turbine (STM-WET): A tower-mounted wind energy system standing up to 120 feet that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of equipment (e.g., base, blade, rotor, foundation, generator, nacelle, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, etc.) STM-WETs have nameplate capacities that do not exceed 30 kilowatts. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected that involves permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such a location. 
    Small structure-mounted wind energy turbine (SSM-WET): A structure-mounted wind energy system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of equipment (e.g., base, blade, rotor, foundation, generator, nacelle, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, etc.) SSM-WETs are attached to a structure's roof, walls or another elevated surface. SSM-WETs have nameplate capacities that do not exceed ten kilowatts. The total height of a SSM-WET unit does not exceed 15 feet as measured from the highest point of the adjacent roof or structure, excluding chimneys, antennae or other similar features. 
    Survival wind speed: The maximum wind speed, as designated by the WET manufacturer, at which a WET in an unattended state is designed to survive without damage to any structural equipment or the loss of the ability to function normally. 
    Total height: The vertical distance as measured from the ground level of the base of a WET tower to the uppermost vertical extension of a rotor blade, or the maximum height reached by any part of a WET. 
    Tower: A freestanding monopole that supports a WET. 
    Wind energy overlay district: A specific zoning district for the location of L-WETs. 
    Upwind turbines: As opposed to a "downwind turbine," an upwind turbine has the rotor blades facing into the wind source direction. 
    Wind energy turbine (WET): A structure-mounted or tower-mounted small, medium or large wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of specialized equipment and structures. 
(Ord. No. 09-572, § 1B., 10-16-09) 
Sec. 94-552. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all WETs proposed for construction after the effective date of the ordinance adding this article. All WETs constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance adding this article shall not be required to meet the standards of this article; however, any physical modification to an existing WET that materially alters the size, type, equipment or location shall require approval per the standards of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 09-572, § 1C., 10-16-09) 
Sec. 94-553. - Temporary uses. 
    Anemometers are permitted in all zoning districts as a temporary use, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The construction, installation or modification of an anemometer shall require a building permit; 
(2)  Anemometers must conform to all applicable local, state and federal safety, construction, environmental, electrical, communications and FAA requirements; 
(3)  Anemometers are subject to the requirements of this article for total height, setbacks, separation, location, safety and decommissioning that correspond to the size of the WET(s) proposed on the site; 
(4)  An anemometer without an accompanying WET shall not be located on a site for more than 13 months when testing for SSM-WET, STM-WET or M-WET installation potential; and, 
(5)  An anemometer without an accompanying WET shall not be located on a site for more than three years when testing for L-WET installation potential. 
(Ord. No. 09-572, § 1D., 10-16-09) 
Sec. 94-554. - Permitted uses. 
    SSM-WETs and STM-WETs are a permitted use in all zoning districts, subject to the following: 
(1)  [Building permit.] SSM-WETs and STM-WETs must receive a building permit prior to construction, installation, relocation or modification. The owner/applicant or operator must apply for and receive the building permit. 
(2)  [Minimum requirements.] All SSM-WETs and STM-WETs shall be subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  [Upwind turbines.] Upwind turbines shall be required unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, based on technical specifications and site-specific information. 
b.  Visual appearance. 
i.  SSM-WETs and STM-WETs, including accessory buildings and related structures, shall be a nonreflective, nonobtrusive color, such as white, gray or black. 
ii.  The appearance of the WET and all accessory structures shall be maintained throughout the life of the unit. 
iii.  Exterior lighting of a tower, rotor blades and nacelle shall only be allowed in order to meet FAA mandatory requirements. 
iv.  Exterior lighting of accessory buildings or entrance points shall be permitted, provided that such exterior lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff "shoebox" fixtures. These fixtures shall not be mounted on poles or other structures that exceed a height of 20 feet, as measured from the grade at the base of the fixture. 
v.  SSM-WETs and STM-WETs may not contain commercial signage, banners, flags or advertising logos, except for the identification of the turbine manufacturer and unit specifications for regulatory purposes. 
(3)  Ground clearance. The lowest extension of any rotor blade or other exposed moving component of an SSM-WET or STM-WET shall be at least 15 feet above the ground, as measured from the highest point of grade within 30 feet of the base of the WET. In addition, the lowest extension of any rotor blade or other exposed moving component of an SSM-WET or STM-WET shall be at least 15 feet above any outdoor areas intended for human use that are located below the WET. Examples include balconies, roof gardens, etc. 
(4)  Noise control. 
a.  Where an adjacent parcel contains a residential use, the noise produced by a SSM-WET or STM-WET may not exceed the lowest ambient sound level that exists between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. along any adjacent property line used for residential purposes. 
b.  Where no adjacent parcel contains a residential use, the noise produced by a SSM-WET or STM-WET may not exceed the lowest ambient sound level that exists between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on the parcel, plus five decibels dB(A). 
(5)  Vibration. An SSM-WET or STM-WET shall not produce vibrations that are perceptible to humans beyond any property line upon which a WET is located. 
(6)  Wire supports. Guy wires or similar apparatus shall not be allowed as part of an SSM-WET or STM-WET installation. 
(7)  SSM-WET height. The mounted height of an SSM-WET shall not exceed 15 feet above the highest point of the adjacent roof or structure. 
(8)  SSM-WET setbacks. 
a.  An SSM-WET shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from any property line, public right-of-way, public easement or overhead utility lines. 
b.  If the SSM-WET is affixed by any extension to a structure's walls, roof or other elevated surface then the setback from property lines, public rights-of-way, public easements or overhead utility lines shall be measured from the furthest outward extension of moving WET components. 
(9)  SSM-WET separation distances. If more than one SSM-WET is installed on a property, then a distance equal to the mounted height of the adjacent SSM-WET must be maintained between the bases of each SSM-WET. 
(10)  STM-WET height : The total height of a STM-WET shall not exceed 120 feet. 
(11)  STM-WET setbacks. 
a.  On a property containing occupied buildings, STM-WETs shall only be located in the rear yard. 
b.  An STM-WET shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from all occupied buildings on the subject property. This setback will be measured from the base of the tower. 
c.  A minimum setback equal to the total height of the STM-WET shall be required to any property line, public right-of-way, public easement or overhead utility lines. This setback will be measured from the base of the tower. This setback may be reduced if the applicant provides a registered engineer's certification that the WET is designed to collapse, fall, curl or bend within a distance less than the total height of the WET. 
(12)  STM-WET separation distances. If more than one STM-WET is installed on a property, then a distance equal to the total height of the tallest STM-WET must be maintained between the bases of each STM-WET. 
(13)  Site plan review. SSM-WETs and STM-WETs are subject to site plan review by the planning commission, subject to the following: 
a.  SSM-WETs and STM-WETs shall be exempt from the site plan review standards found in article X but shall be subject to the standards and requirements contained in this section. 
b.  Owner/applicants of SSM-WETs and STM-WETs proposed for installation shall provide the following to the city: 
i.  A completed application for site plan review plus any applicable fees and/or escrow deposit approved by the city commission; 
ii.  A scaled site plan drawing clearly illustrating the proposed WET(s) and all accessory structures/equipment in relation to all onsite and adjacent buildings, property lines, rights-of-way, public easements and overhead utility lines. Setbacks as required in this section shall be shown to scale on the site plan. 
iii.  A scaled site plan that clearly displays property dimensions, existing buildings on the subject property and on adjacent properties, sidewalks, non-motorized pathways and streets. 
iv.  A scaled site plan that includes existing and proposed on-site grading/topography at two-foot contour intervals. 
v.  Product-specific technical information from the manufacturer of the SSM-WET or STM-WET. This information shall include the proposed total height and type of WET, maximum noise output in decibels, total rated generating capacity, product dimensions, rotor blade diameter and a detail of accessory structures. 
vi.  Documented compliance with the noise and vibration generation requirements set forth in this article. 
vii.  Documented compliance with applicable local, state and federal regulations including, but not limited to, public safety, construction, environmental, electrical, communications and FAA requirements. 
viii.  Proof of liability insurance. 
ix.  Documented evidence that the utility company has been informed of, and approved, the owner/applicant's intent to install an interconnected, customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
x.  A narrative that explains the proposed methods that will be used to perform maintenance on the WET(s) in compliance with the manufacturer's recommendations and requirements. 
xi.  A narrative that explains how the WET will be tested after installation for compliance with the noise and vibration regulations of this section. 
(14)  Safety requirements: 
a.  If the SSM-WET or STM-WET is connected to a public utility system for net metering purposes, it shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth in the public utility's current service regulations that meet federal, state and industry standards applicable to wind power generation facilities. Any such connection shall be inspected and approved by the appropriate utility company. 
b.  The SSM-WET or STM-WET shall be equipped with an automatic braking, governing or feathering system in order to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over-speeding or excessive pressure on the WET. 
c.  A clearly visible warning sign regarding voltage shall be placed at the base of the WET. 
d.  The structural integrity of the WET shall conform to the design standards of the International Electrical Commission; specifically IEC 61400-1 "Wind Turbine Safety and Design," IEC 61400-2 "Small Wind Turbine Safety," IEC 61400-22 "Wind Turbine Certification," and IEC 61400-23 "Blade Structural Testing," as amended or succeeded. 
(15)  Signal interference. The SSM-WET or STM-WET shall not interfere with communication systems, such as, but not limited to, radio, telephone, television, satellite or emergency services communication systems. 
(16)  Decommissioning. 
a.  The SSM-WET or STM-WET owner/applicant shall complete decommissioning within 12 months after the end of the WETs useful life. The term "end of useful life" is defined as zero electricity generation for a period of 12 consecutive months from a particular WET. 
b.  All decommissioning expenses are the responsibility of the owner/applicant. 
c.  The planning commission may grant an extension of the decommissioning period based upon request of the owner/applicant. Such extension period shall not exceed one calendar year. 
d.  If the SSM-WET or STM-WET Owner/Applicant fails to complete the act of decommissioning within the period described in this section, the SSM-WET or STM-WET shall thereafter be deemed a public nuisance and subject to abatement as provided by law. 
e.  For STM-WETs, following removal of all items noted in (e) above, the site shall be graded and stabilized to prevent soil erosion in a manner consistent with the post-WET use of the property. 
(17)  Public noise complaints. Should an aggrieved person allege that the SSM-WET or STM-WET is not in compliance with the noise requirements of this article, the administrative enforcement procedure shall be as follows: 
a.  The complainant shall notify the city zoning administrator in writing regarding the noise level. 
b.  The zoning administrator shall coordinate with the police department to test the decibel level for compliance with the standards of this article. 
c.  If the test results are unsatisfactory, the complainant may request a noise level test by a certified acoustic technician. The complainant will be required to submit a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to pay for the noise level test. 
d.  If the noise level test indicates that the noise level complies with the standards of this article, then the city will use the deposit to pay for the test. 
e.  If the noise level test indicates that the WET is in violation of this article, then the owner/applicant shall reimburse the city for the noise level test while taking immediate action to bring the WET into compliance with this article. The city may require the WET to be shut down until compliance can be achieved. 
f.  Under circumstances as noted in [subsection] e. above, the city shall refund the cash deposit to the complainant. 
(Ord. No. 09-572, § 1E., 10-16-09) 
Sec. 94-555. - Special exception uses. 
    Medium wind energy turbines (M-WETs) shall be considered a special exception use within the AA-Agricultural; ORP-Office, Research and Parking; C-1 through C-4 Commercial; ML-Light Industrial, MH-Heavy Industrial and MP-Industrial Park zoning districts. 
    Large wind energy turbines (L-WETs) shall be considered a special exception use only within the Wind Energy Overlay district. 
(1)  M-WETs and L-WETs must receive a building permit prior to construction, installation, relocation or modification. The owner/applicant or operator must apply for and receive the building permit. 
(2)  All M-WETs and L-WETs shall be subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  [Upwind turbines.] Upwind turbines shall be required unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, based on technical specifications and site-specific information. 
b.  Visual appearance. 
i.  M-WETs and L-WETs shall be mounted on a tubular tower. 
ii.  M-WETs and L-WETs, including accessory buildings and related structures, shall be a nonreflective, nonobtrusive color, such as white, gray or black. 
iii.  The appearance of the WET and all accessory structures shall be maintained throughout the life of the unit. 
iv.  Exterior lighting of a tower, rotor blades and nacelle shall only be allowed in order to meet FAA-mandated requirements. 
v.  Exterior lighting of accessory buildings or entrance points shall be permitted, provided that such exterior lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff "shoebox" fixtures. These fixtures shall not be mounted on poles or other structures that exceed a height of 20 feet, as measured from the grade at the base of the fixture. 
vi.  M-WETs and L-WETs shall not contain commercial signage, banners, flags or advertising logos, except for the identification of the turbine manufacturer and unit specifications for regulatory purposes. 
(3)  Ground clearance. 
a.  M-WET. The lowest extension of any rotor blade or other exposed moving component of an M-WET shall be at least 15 feet above the ground, as measured from the highest point of grade within 50 feet of the base of the tower. In addition, the lowest extension of any rotor blade or other exposed moving component of an M-WET shall be at least 15 feet above any outdoor areas intended for human use that are located below the WET. Examples include balconies, roof gardens, etc. 
b.  L-WET. The lowest extension of any rotor blade or other exposed moving component of an L-WET shall be at least 50 feet above the ground, as measured from the highest point of grade within 150 feet of the base of the tower. 
[(4)]  Shadow flicker. The owner/applicant(s) or operator(s) shall conduct an analysis of potential shadow flicker onto any occupied building with direct line-of-sight to the M-WET or L-WET. The analysis shall identify the locations of shadow flicker that may be caused by the WET and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations from sunrise to sunset over the course of a year. The analysis shall identify situations where shadow flicker may affect the occupants of the buildings for more than 30 hours per year, and describe measures that shall be taken to eliminate or mitigate the problems. Shadow flicker on a building shall not exceed 30 hours per year. 
(5)  Noise control. 
a.  Where an adjacent parcel contains a residential use, the noise produced by an M-WET or L-WET may not exceed the lowest ambient sound level that exists between the hours of 9:00 PM and 9:00 AM along any adjacent property line used for residential purposes. 
b.  Where no adjacent parcel contains a residential use, the noise produced by an M-WET or L-WET may not exceed the lowest ambient sound level that exists between the hours of 9:00 PM and 9:00 AM on the parcel, plus 5 Decibels dB(A). 
(6)  Vibration. An M-WET or L-WET shall not produce vibrations that are perceptible to humans beyond any property line upon which a WET is located. 
(7)  Wire supports. Guy wires or similar apparatus shall not be allowed as part of an M-WET or L-WET installation. 
(8)  Electrical system. All electrical controls, control wiring, grounding wires, power lines, and all other electrical system components of the M-WET or L-WET shall be placed underground within the boundary of each parcel at a depth designed to accommodate the existing land use to the maximum extent practicable. Wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring are exempt from this requirement. 
(9)  Quantity of WETS. 
a.  No more than one M-WET shall be installed for every two and one-half acres of land included in the subject parcel. 
b.  The number of L-WETs shall be determined based on WET setbacks and separation distances as required in this section. 
(10)  Total height. 
a.  The total height of an M-WET shall not exceed 150 feet. 
b.  The total height of an L-WET shall not exceed 400 feet. 
(11)  M-WET setbacks and separation. 
a.  Occupied building setback. An M-WET shall be setback at least 20 feet from all occupied buildings on the subject parcel, as measured from the base of the tower. 
b.  Property line setbacks. With the exception of the locations of public roads (see below) and parcels with occupied buildings (see above), all internal property line setbacks shall be equal to the total height of the M-WET, as measured from the base of the tower. This setback may be reduced by the planning commission as part of a special exception use permit if the applicant provides a registered engineer's certification that the WET is designed to collapse, fall, curl, or bend within a distance or zone shorter than the total height of the WET. 
c.  Public road setbacks. Each M-WET shall be set back from the nearest public road a distance equal to the total height of the M-WET, as measured from the nearest boundary of the road right-of-way to the base of the tower. 
d.  Communication and electrical lines. Each M-WET shall be set back from the nearest above-ground public electric power line or telephone line a distance equal to the total height of the M-WET, as measured from the base of the tower to from the existing power line or telephone line. 
e.  Tower separation. M-WET separation shall be based on industry standards and the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(12)  L-WET setbacks and separation. 
a.  Occupied building setback. Each L-WET shall be set back from the nearest occupied building located on the same parcel as the L-WET a minimum of two times its total height, or 1,000 feet, whichever is greater, as measured from the base of the tower. 
b.  Property line setbacks. With the exception of the locations of public roads (see below) and parcels with occupied buildings (see above), all internal property line setbacks shall be a minimum of one and one-half times the total height of the L-WET, as measured from the base of the tower. This setback may be reduced by the planning commission as part of a special exception use permit if the applicant provides a registered engineer's certification that the L-WET is designed to collapse, fall, curl, or bend within a distance or zone shorter than the total height of the WET. 
c.  Wind Energy Overlay district setbacks. There shall be a setback distance equal to two times the total height of the L-WET, as measured from the base of the tower, to any border of the Wind Energy Overlay district. 
d.  Public road setbacks. Each L-WET shall be set back from the nearest public road a minimum distance of 400 feet or one and one-half times the total height of the L-WET, whichever is greater, as measured from the nearest boundary of the road right-of-way to the base of the tower. 
e.  Communication and electrical lines. : Each L-WET shall be set back from the nearest above-ground public electric power line or telephone line a distance no less than 400 feet or one and one-half times its total height, whichever is greater, as measured from the base of the tower to from the existing power line or telephone line. 
f.  Tower separation. L-WET tower separation shall be based on industry standards and manufacturer's recommendations. 
(13)  Access driveway. All L-WETs shall be accessible from an access road in order to offer an adequate means by which public safety vehicles may readily access the site in the event of an emergency. All access roads shall be constructed to standards approved by the city engineer, police chief and fire chief. 
(14)  Signal interference. An M-WET or L-WET shall not interfere with communication systems, such as, but not limited to, radio, telephone, television, satellite or emergency services communication systems. 
(15)  Special exception use permit required. M-WET and L-WET projects require a special exception use permit prior to the commencement of any on-site construction. Special exception use permit applications for M-WET(s) and L-WET(s) shall follow the administrative procedures prescribed in article IX. 
As part of the application for a special exception use permit, the owner(s)/applicant(s) of proposed M-WET and L-WET projects shall provide the following to the city: 
a.  A narrative explaining the proposed methods that will be used to perform maintenance on the WET(s) in compliance with the manufacturer's recommendations and requirements. 
b.  A copy of the lease, or recorded document, with the landowner(s) if the owner/applicant does not own the land for the proposed M-WET or L-WET. 
c.  A statement from the landowner(s) of a leased site that he/she will abide by all applicable terms and conditions of the special exception use permit, if approved. 
d.  In the case of a condominium development, a copy of the condominium development's master deed and bylaws addressing the legal arrangement for the M-WET or L-WET. 
e.  The proposed number, representative types and total height of each M-WET or L-WET to be constructed; including their manufacturer and model, product specifications including maximum noise output (measured in decibels), total rated capacity, rotor diameter, and a description of ancillary facilities. 
f.  Documentation verifying the developer/manufacturer's confirming specifications for M-WET or L-WET tower separation as proposed on the site plan. 
g.  Documented compliance with the noise, vibration and shadow flicker requirements set forth in this article. 
h.  Engineering data concerning construction of the M-WET or L-WET and its base or foundation, including soil boring information. 
i.  A certified, registered engineer's certification that certifies the M-WET or L-WET meets or exceeds the manufacturer's construction and installation standards. 
j.  The anticipated construction schedule. 
k.  A description of the routes to be used by construction and delivery vehicles and of any road improvements that will be necessary to accommodate construction vehicles, equipment or other deliveries. 
l.  An agreement or bond which guarantees the repair of damage to public roads and other areas caused by construction of the L-WET 
m.  A copy of the WET maintenance and operation plan, including anticipated regular and scheduled maintenance. Additionally, a description of the procedures that will be used for lowering or removing the M-WET or L-WET to conduct maintenance, if applicable. 
n.  Documented compliance with applicable local, state and national regulations including, but not limited to, all applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical, and communications standards. 
o.  Documented compliance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, the Michigan Airport Zoning Act, the Michigan Tall Structures Act, and any applicable airport overlay zone regulations. 
p.  Proof of comprehensive liability insurance. 
q.  A statement indicating if hazardous materials will be used and stored on the site. 
r.  Evidence that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected, customer-owned generator and that such connection has been approved. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
s.  A written description of the anticipated life of each M-WET or L-WET; the estimated cost of decommissioning; the method of ensuring that funds will be available for decommissioning and site restoration; and removal and restoration procedures and schedules that will be employed if the M-WET(s) or L-WET(s) become inoperative or nonfunctional. 
t.  A decommissioning plan that will be carried out at the end of the M-WET's or L-WET's useful life, which shall be submitted as a participating landowner agreement, regarding equipment removal upon termination of the lease. 
i.  As part of the participating landowner agreement, an independent and certified professional engineer shall estimate the total cost of decommissioning ("decommissioning costs") with no regard to salvage value of the equipment, and the cost of decommissioning net salvage value of the equipment. 
ii.  When determining this amount, the city may also require an annual escalator or increase based on the Federal Consumer Price Index (or equivalent or its successor). Said estimates shall be submitted to the city after the first year of operation and every fifth year thereafter. 
iii.  M-WET and L-WET owner(s) shall post and maintain decommissioning funds in an amount equal to 100 percent of decommissioning costs. The decommissioning funds shall be posted and maintained with a bonding company or federal or state chartered lending institution chosen by the owner(s) and participating landowner(s) posting the financial security. The bonding company or lending institution shall be authorized to conduct such business as approved by city. 
iv.  Decommissioning funds shall be in the form of a performance bond made out to the city. 
v.  A condition of the bond shall be notification by the bond company to the city when the bond is about to expire or be terminated. 
vi.  Failure to keep the bond in effect while an M-WET or L-WET is in place will be a violation of the special exception use permit. If a lapse in the bond occurs, the city may take action, up to and including requiring the cessation of operations of the WET until the bond is reposted. 
vii.  The owner(s)/applicant(s) shall be responsible to record, at its sole expense, a copy of the approved participating landowner agreement with the Kent County Register of Deeds and supply a copy, after recording, to the city. 
u.  A study assessing any potential impacts on the natural environment, including, but not limited to, assessing the potential impact on endangered species, bats, birds and/or other wildlife, wetlands and fragile ecosystems. The study shall conform to state and federal wildlife agency recommendations based on local conditions. 
v.  Other relevant information as may be requested by the city to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(16)  Site plan review required. M-WETs and L-WETs are subject to site plan review by the planning commission consistent with the following: 
a.  M-WET and L-WET projects are exempt from the site plan review standards found in article X. 
b.  Owner/applicants of proposed M-WET and L-WET projects shall provide the following to the city: 
i.  A completed and signed application for site plan review by the planning commission plus any applicable fees and/or escrow deposit approved by the city commission; 
ii.  A scaled site plan, sealed by a professional engineer, including: 
1.  Contact information for the owner(s)/applicant(s) and operator(s) of the M-WET or L-WET as well as contact information for all property owners on which the M-WET or L-WET is located. 
2.  A site location map with identification and location of the properties on which the proposed M-WET or L-WET will be located. 
3.  The location and dimensions of all proposed WET(s) and all accessory structures/equipment, including security fencing, exterior lighting and power grid connectivity equipment, whether buried or above ground. 
4.  The location of all on-site and adjacent property lines, rights-of-way, public easements and overhead utility lines. 
5.  The location and dimension of all setbacks as required in this section. 
6.  All property dimensions, zoning districts, existing buildings on the subject property and on adjacent properties, sidewalks, non-motorized pathways, large trees and streets. 
7.  Existing and proposed on-site grading/topography at two-foot contour intervals. 
8.  Soil erosion and storm water drainage plans per chapter 34 of the City Code. 
9.  Plan view and cross sectional details of all proposed access drives. 
(17)  Safety requirements. 
a.  If the M-WET or L-WET is connected to a public utility system for net metering purposes, it shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth in the public utility's current service regulations that meet federal, state and industry standards applicable to wind power generation facilities. Any such connection shall be inspected and approved by the appropriate utility company prior to operation. 
b.  The M-WET or L-WET shall be equipped with an automatic braking, governing or feathering system in order to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over-speeding or excessive pressure on the WET. 
c.  Security measures shall be in place to prevent unauthorized trespass and access. Each M-WET or L-WET shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above ground surfaces. All access doors to M-WETs or L-WETs and accessory electrical equipment shall be locked and/or fenced as appropriate. 
d.  All spent lubricants, cooling fluids, and any other materials shall be properly and safely removed in a timely manner. 
e.  Each M-WET or L-WET shall have one sign, not to exceed two square feet in area, posted at the base of the tower and on the security fence if applicable. The sign shall contain at least the following: 
1.  A warning of high voltage; 
2.  Names of manufacturer and owner/operator(s); 
3.  Emergency contact numbers (list more than one number). 
f.  The structural integrity of the WET shall conform to the design standards of the International Electrical Commission; specifically IEC 61400-1 "Wind Turbine Safety and Design," IEC 61400-2 "Small Wind Turbine Safety," IEC 61400-22 "Wind Turbine Certification," and IEC 61400-23 "Blade Structural Testing," as amended or succeeded. 
(18)  Decommissioning. 
a.  The M-WET or L-WET owner/applicant shall complete decommissioning within 12 months after the end of the WETs useful life. The term "end of useful life" is defined as zero electricity generation for a period of 12 consecutive months from a particular WET. 
b.  Decommissioning shall include the removal and disposal of each M-WET or L-WET, accessory buildings and structures, electrical components, and all foundations to a minimum depth of 60 inches. 
c.  All access drives to the M-WET or L-WET shall be removed, cleared, and graded by the owner/applicant, unless the property owner(s) requests, in writing, a desire to maintain the access drives. All access drives shall remain private and the city shall have no duty to undertake any maintenance or repair of such drives. 
d.  The WET site and any disturbed earth shall be stabilized, graded, and cleared of any debris by the owner/applicant of the M-WET or L-WET or its assigns. If the site is not to be used for agricultural practices following removal, the site shall be seeded to prevent soil erosion. 
e.  All decommissioning expenses are the responsibility of the owner/applicant. 
f.  The planning commission may grant an extension of the decommissioning period based upon a reasonable and explanatory request by the owner. Such extension period shall not exceed one calendar year. 
g.  The performance bond agent shall release the decommissioning funds noted in subsection (14)T. when the owner/applicant has demonstrated in writing, and the city concurs in writing, that decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed. 
h.  If the M-WET or L-WET owner/applicant fails to complete the act of decommissioning within the period described in this article, then, consistent with the participating landowners' agreement, the city may proceed as follows: 
i.  The city may proceed to collect against the performance bond and request a release of the decommissioning funds. 
ii.  The commission shall designate a contractor to complete the decommissioning. 
iii.  All decommissioning expenses shall be charged to the performance bond of the owner/applicant, or its successors or assigns or such other means available at law or equity. 
iv.  All outstanding Decommissioning expenses shall become a lien against the premises. 
v.  Nothing herein shall limit the right of the city to pursue all means of enforcement otherwise available at law for a violation of this article including, without limitation, seeking injunctive relief. 
(19)  Certification and compliance. 
a.  The city shall be notified of a change in ownership of an M-WET or L-WET or a change in ownership of the property on which the M-WET or L-WET is located within 60 days of such a transaction. 
b.  The city reserves the right to inspect any M-WET or L-WET, in order to ensure compliance with the article. Any cost associated with the inspections shall be paid by the owner/applicant of the WET. 
c.  A sound pressure level analysis shall be conducted from a reasonable number of sampled locations at the perimeter and in the interior of the property containing any M-WETs or L-WETs to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article. Proof of compliance with the noise standards is required within 90 days of the date the M-WET or L-WET becomes operational. Sound shall be measured by a third-party, qualified professional, with the associated fees being paid by the owner/applicant. 
d.  The M-WET or L-WET owner/applicant or operator(s) shall provide the city with a copy of the yearly WET maintenance inspection. 
(20)  Public noise and shadow flicker complaints. 
a.  Noise. Should an aggrieved person allege that the M-WET or L-WET is not in compliance with the noise requirements of this article, the administrative enforcement procedure shall be as follows: 
i.  The complainant shall notify the city zoning administrator in writing regarding the noise level. 
ii.  The zoning administrator shall coordinate with the police department to test the decibel level for compliance with the standards of this article. 
iii.  If the test results are unsatisfactory, the complainant may request a noise level test by a certified acoustic technician. The complainant will be required to submit a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to pay for the noise level test. 
iv.  If the noise level test indicates that the noise level complies with the standards of this article, then the city will use the deposit to pay for the test. 
v.  If the noise level test indicates that the WET is in violation of this article, then the owner/applicant shall reimburse the city for the noise level test while taking immediate action to bring the WET into compliance with this article. The city may require the WET to be shut down until compliance can be achieved. 
vi.  Under circumstances as noted in [subsection] v. above, the city shall refund the cash deposit to the complainant. 
b.  Shadow flicker. Should an aggrieved person allege that the M-WET or L-WET is not in compliance with the shadow flicker requirements of this article, the administrative enforcement procedure shall be as follows: 
i.  The complainant shall notify the city zoning administrator in writing regarding the shadow flicker level. 
ii.  The zoning administrator shall examine the shadow flicker complaint on the site. 
iii.  If the zoning administrator finds justifiable cause, a shadow flicker level test by a certified technician may be authorized by the city. The complainant will be required to submit a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to pay for the shadow flicker level test. 
iv.  If the shadow flicker level test indicates that the shadow flicker level complies with the standards of this article, then the city will use the deposit to pay for the test. 
v.  If the shadow flicker level test indicates that the WET is in violation of this article, then the owner/applicant shall reimburse the city for the shadow flicker level test while taking immediate action to bring the WET into compliance with this article. The city may require the WET to be shut down until compliance can be achieved. 
vi.  Under circumstances as noted in [subsection] v. above, the city shall refund the cash deposit to the complainant. 
(Ord. No. 09-572, § 1F., 10-16-09) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1976 Code, as updated through August 27, 1991, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1976 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede August 27, 1991, but which were not included in the 1976 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since August 27, 1991, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 71-150  7- 1-71 Ch. 94 71-155  9- 2-71 94-35 94-174 72-164  2-22-72 94-5 94-35 94-169 94-171 94-174 94-180 94-188 94-337 94-339 94-346 94-411 94-468 72-168  4-20-72 94-5 94-341 72-171  8- 3-72 94-169 72-178 10-19-72 94-174 94-179 94-188 94-341 72-182 10-24-72 1 94-167 73-191  3-27-73 1-25 App. A, §§ 1-25 74-109  9-20-74 94-472 74-207  4-18-74 94-174 75-213  2-25-75 94-5 75-217  4-22-75 1 94-167 2 94-171 3 94-343 75-224 12-23-75 1 94-32 77-232  4-12-77 4 94-178 77-239  7-12-77 1 94-167 2 94-347 3, 4 94-5 77-240  9-13-77 1 94-168 2 94-188 3 94-347 78-251  9-12-78 1 94-171 2 94-168 3, 4 94-188 5 94-348 79-266  8-28-79 1 94-5 79-267  8-28-79 1, 2 94-180, 94-181 79-268 11-13-79 1 94-188 79-272  1-22-80 1 94-173 80-276  6-24-80 1 94-341 80-278  6-24-80 1, 2 94-5 81-282  3-10-81 1 94-176, 94-177 2 94-349 82-296  4-13-82 1(b) 94-57 82-300  7-13-82 3 94-31 83-307  4-12-83 1 94-350 83-312  8-23-83 1 94-376-94-382 83-313  8- 9-83 1, 2 94-406, 94-407 3-5 94-409-94-411 83-314 10-11-83 1, 2 94-350 3, 4 94-5 83-315 11- 8-83 1 94-171 2-4 94-5 84-319 11-13-84 1 
2 94-351 
94-5 85-321  4- 9-85 2-4 94-5 5 94-412 6 94-410 7 94-182 85-322  4- 9-85 1 94-5 85-323 11-12-85 1 94-438 85-327 12-23-85 1 94-179 86-335  7- 8-86 1 94-60 2, 3 94-62, 94-63 86-336  7- 8-86 1 94-182 86-338  7- 8-86 1, 2 94-188 3 94-182 86-339  8-12-86 1 94-174 86-340  8-12-86 1, 2 94-5 86-343 10-28-86 1-3 94-178-94-180 4 94-5 87-353 10-13-87 1 94-343 2, 3 94-5 87-354 10-13-87 1 94-5 87-356  1-12-88 1 94-183-94-186 2 94-211, 94-212 94-214-94-218 94-220-94-222 3, 4 94-172 5-7 94-409-94-411 88-358  3- 8-88 1 94-521-94-523 88-359  3- 8-88 1, 2 94-171 3 94-180 88-360  6-14-88 1 94-470 88-361  6-14-88 1 94-5 2, 3 94-167 4, 5 94-171, 94-172 6 94-467 7 94-5 88-363  9-13-88 1 94-36 88-367  1-10-89 1, 2 94-142, 94-143 3-6 94-167-94-170 7, 8 94-171 9 94-172 10 94-174 13-16 94-176-94-179 17 94-180 18 94-180 94-182 19, 20 94-181 21 94-182 22, 23 94-466 24, 25 94-496, 94-497 37 94-61 38 94-246-94-253 39 94-276-94-286 40, 41 94-5 42 94-116 88-368  1-10-89 1 94-5 2 94-413 3 94-411 88-369  1-10-89 1 94-352 2 94-5 11, 12 94-175 88-370  1-10-89 1 94-185 3 94-216 89-279  8- 8-89 1 94-56 89-382  1- 9-90 1 94-437 90-384  3-27-90 1, 2 94-180 91-390  1-22-91 1 94-180 91-392  3-12-91 1, 2 94-338, 94-339 3 94-352 4 94-406 5 94-410 7 94-470 8 94-56 9-11 94-5 91-393  6-11-91 1 94-470 91-394  6-11-91 1 94-352 2 94-410 91-395  8-13-91 2 94-167 3 94-171 4 94-173 5, 6 94-180 7, 8 94-181 9 94-5 10 94-497 91-401 12-10-91 1 70-68 91-402  1- 1-92 1 82-27 92-403  3-10-92 1 78-46 2 78-62 92-404  3-24-92 2 18-34 3 38-31 4 18-69 5 18-72 6, 7 18-112, 18-113 92-405  3-24-92 2 18-59 3 18-64 5, 6 18-66, 18-67 8 18-69 9 18-72 10-13 18-86-18-89 92-406  4-14-92 1 94-410 2, 3 94-412 92-407  4-14-92 1 82-27 92-408  5-12-92 1(5-D) 94-307 94-310 1(5-D.1) 94-306 1(5-D.3), 1(5-D.4) 94-308, 94-309 1(5-D.6)-1(5-D.11) 94-311-94-316 2 94-5 92-409  7-14-92 1-5 94-183-94-187 6 94-219 7 94-220-94-222 8, 9 94-410 10 94-411 92-410  8-11-92 1 58-65 92-412 10-13-92 18-66, 18-67 92-413 12- 8-92 1 86-51 2 86-96 92-414 12- 8-92 1 38-53 92-415 12-22-92 1 78-1 93-416  1-19-93 1 78-120-78-125 93-417  3- 9-93 1       Rpld 50-38(d) 2       Rpld App. A, §§ 1-25 93-418  4-27-93 1 58-99 93-419  6-22-93 1       Rpld 86-121-86-154       Added 86-121-86-154 93-420  7-13-93 1 94-179 2 94-249.1 93-421  7-13-93 1, 2 94-468, 94-469 3 94-5 93-422  8-10-93 1-8 Adopting ordinance, p. vii 93-423  8-10-93 1, 2 34-210, 34-211 93-424  9-15-93 1 23-1-23-18 93-425  9-15-93 1 62-57.1 94-426 11-23-93 1 82-100-82-104 94-427  1-25-94 1 74-33(6) 2 74-65 94-428  1-25-94 1 34-331-34-339 94-429  2-22-94 1 50-130-50-132 94-430  3- 8-94 1 34-233 94-431  3-22-94 1, 2 6-4, 6-5 94-432  4-12-94 1       Added 94-352(4) 94-434  5-10-94 1 1-2 2 1-11 94-435  5-10-94 1 48-1-48-6 94-436  5-10-94 1 90-3 94-437  5-10-94 1 70-68 94-438  9-13-94 1 34-240 2       Rpld 34-242 3       Added 48-6(a)(11) 94-439  9-13-94 1 22-87 2       Added 48-6(a)(6) 94-440  9-13-94 1 34-139 2 34-139(a) 3       Added 48-6(a)(7), (8) 4-7 34-128 94-441  9-13-94 1       Rpld 34-206-34-215 2       Added 34-206-34-219 3       Added 48-6(a)(10) 94-442  9-13-94 1-6 74-34-74-40 94-443  9-27-94 1, 2 94-31, 94-32 3-5 94-34-94-36 6       Added 48-6(a)(18) 94-444  9-27-94 1 18-147 2 18-171 3, 4       Added 48-6(a)(4), (5) 94-445 10-25-94 1 94-188(b)(15) 2       Added 48-6(a)(9) 94-446 10-25-94 1, 2 18-113, 18-114 3, 4       Rpld 18-116, 18-117 5       Added 48-6(a)(3) 94-447 10-25-94 2-8 82-27 94-448 10-25-94 2 18-34 3 38-31 4 18-69 5 18-72(a) 94-449 10-25-94 2, 3 18-42, 18-43 4 19-59 5, 6 18-61, 18-62 7       Added 48-6(a)(2) 8       Rpld 18-63 9 18-64 10, 11 18-66, 18-67 12 18-69 13 18-72 14       Rpld 18-87 15, 16 18-88, 18-89 94-450 10-25-94 1 38-58 2       Added 48-6(a)(13) 94-451 10-25-94 1 10-50 2       Added 48-6(a)(1)       Rnbd 48-6(a)(1)       as 48-6(a)(15)       Rnbd 48-6(a)(2)       as 48-6(a)(17) 94-452 10-25-94 1 70-37 2       Added 48-6(a)(14) 94-453 10-25-94 1 82-97 2       Added 48-6(a)(16) 94-454 12-13-94 1 38-32 2       Added 48-6(a)(12) 94-455 12-13-94 1 34-189 94-456 12-13-94 1 94-5 2, 3 94-180, 94-181 4 94-254 5 94-337 6 94-353 94-457 12-27-94 1 34-235 95-458  2-14-95 1       Added 94-182(d)(4) 2 94-188 95-459  3-14-95 1 34-55(4) 2 34-57(6) 95-460  4-11-95 1 94-351 95-461  4-25-95 1       Added 18-90-18-110.49 95-462  5- 9-95 1-11 82-27 95-463  6-13-95 1       Added 22-25 2 22-26 3-6 22-29-22-32 7 22-34 8 22-37 9 22-42 10 22-43 11       Added 22-43.1 12, 13 22-50, 22-51 95-464  6-13-95 1 50-132 95-465  6-13-95 1 78-1 95-466  7-11-95 1       Dltd 94-180(b)(15) 2       Added 94-180(c) 3       Rnbd 94-180(c)-(e)       as 94-180(d)-(f) 4       Added 94-181(c) 5       Rnbd 94-181(c)-(e)       as 94-181(d)-(f) 95-467  7-11-95 1 94-175(b)(16) 2       Added 94-175(b)(17) 95-468  7-25-95 2-5 18-57-18-60 6 18-65 7-13 18-68-18-74 14 18-112 95-469 10-10-95 1 94-254(a)(1)b. 95-470 10-24-95 1-4 34-206-34-209 5 34-211 6 34-213(e) 7 34-213(l) 8 34-218 9 34-301(c) 10 34-305 11 62-1 12 62-32 13 62-42 14 86-123 95-471 10-24-95 2 6-17 3 6-18 4 6-19 5       Added 6-20 95-472 11-14-95 1 74-32 95-473 11-28-95 1 94-171(d)(7)a. 2 94-171(d)(7)b. 3 94-171(d)(7)h. 4 94-254(a)(4) 95-474 12-12-95 1       Added 34-57.1 2       Added 48-6(a)(7)       Rnbd 48-6(a)(7)-(18)       as 48-6(a)(8)-(19) 95-475 12-12-95 1       Added 94-167(c)(5) 2       94-171(b)(10) 95-476 12-12-95 1 14-1       Added 14-26-14-28       Added 14-36, 14-37 2       Added 48-6(a)(2)       Rnbd 48-6(a)(2)-(19)       as 48-6(a)(3)-(20) 96-477  2-13-96 1 34-333 2 34-335 96-478  2-13-96 1       Added 94-354 2 94-5 96-479  2-13-96 1, 2 94-5 3 94-306(a) 4, 5 94-307(a) 6 94-308(c) 7 94-311(3) 8 94-313 9       Added 94-313.1 10       Added 94-317 96-480  2-13-96 1-3 18-141-18-143 96-481  2-13-96 1       Rpld 78-120-78-125 96-482  2-27-96 1 74-90(2) 96-483  3-12-96 1 94-188(b)(3)b. 96-484  3-12-96 1       Dltd 38-81-38-84       Added 38-81-38-86 96-485  8-27-96 1 94-188(b)(15) 96-486  8-27-96 1 94-213(4) 2 94-213(10) 3, 4 94-220, 94-221 96-487  9-10-96 1       Added 50-7.5 96-488  9-23-96 1 70-68(a) 96-489  9-23-96 1 6-9(c) 96-490 10-14-96 1 50-63 96-491 10-28-96 1-3 94-5 4 94-167(b) 5       Added 94-167(c)(6) 6 94-167(d) 7 94-168(b) 8 94-171(b)(11)-(15) 9 94-171(d)(8) 10       Added 94-171(d)(9)-(11) 11 94-172(d) 12 94-175(d)(3) 13       Added 94-175(d)(4), (5) 14       Added 94-176(d)       Rltd 94-176(d), (e)       as 94-176(e), (f) 15       Added 94-177(d)       Rltd 94-177(d), (e)       as 94-177(e), (f) 16       Added 94-178(d)       Rltd 94-178(d), (e)       as 94-178(e), (f) 17       Added 94-179(d)       Rltd 94-179(d), (e)       as 94-179(e), (f) 18 94-180(d) 97-492  2-24-97 1 34-128 2 34-131(1) 97-493  2-24-97 1       Added 78-4 97-494  3-24-97 2 6-19 3       Added 82-1 4-10 82-27 11       Rpld 6-18 97-495  6- 9-97 1, 2 78-32 3 78-45(a) 4 78-46(b) 5       Added 78-46(d)-(j) 6 78-49 7-10 78-51-78-54 11       Added 78-54A 12 78-56 13, 14 78-57(a), (b) 15 78-59 16 78-62 17-20 78-64-78-67 21 78-68(a) 22 78-69 23-26 78-71-78-74 97-496  7-28-97 1       Added 34-55(5) 2, 3 34-56(a), (b) 4, 5 34-57(7), (8) 97-497  8-25-97 1       Added 75-1-75-3       Added 75-20-75-25       Added 75-30-75-32 97-498  9- 8-97 1       Added 94-352a 97-499  9- 8-97 1 94-5 2       Added 94-176(d)(2) 3 94-176(f) 4       Added 94-177(d)(2) 5       Added 94-178(d)(2) 6       Added 94-179(b)(10) 97-500  9- 8-97 1 94-5 2 94-171(d)(1) 3       Added 94-175(b)(18) 4       Added 94-176(b)(19) 5 94-180(b)(3) 97-501  9- 8-97 1 94-254(a)(1)b. 97-502  9- 8-97 1       Added 94-188(16) 97-503 10-13-97 1 94-5 2       Dltd 94-180(b)(14) 3 94-340 4       Added 94-355 5       Dltd 94-497(10)       Rnbd 94-497(11)       as 94-497(10) 97-504 12- 8-97 1       Added 62-43(e) 2 62-33 3 48-6(a) 97-505 11-24-97 1 75-23(c) 97-506 11-10-97 1 34-56(b) 97-507 12-22-97 2       Added 6-5A 98-508  2- 9-98 1 34-233 98-509  2- 9-98 1       Added 80-1-80-24 98-510  3-23-98 2       Added 50-42 98-511  4-13-98 1 94-409 98-512  4-13-98 1       Added 94-337(f), (g) 2       Added 94-338(c) 98-513  4-13-98 1, 2 94-5 3 94-181(b)(2) 4 94-254(a)(7) 98-514  5-11-98 2 18-34(a) 3 18-69(a), (b) 4 18-72(a) 98-515  5-11-98 2 18-59 3 18-64(a) 4-7 18-86-18-89 8-10       Added 18-89.1-18-89.3 98-516  5-11-98 1 18-72(a) 2       Added 18-81, 18-82 98-517  5-11-98 1 18-112 2 18-113 3       Rpld 18-114 98-518  5-11-98 1 18-69(a) 2       Added 18-76, 18-77 98-519  5-11-98 2-71 18-90-18-110.49 72       Added 18-110.13(1) 98-520  5-11-98 1 38-31, 38-32 98-521  5-18-98 1       Added 34-294.1 98-522  6- 8-98 1       Added 94-471(a)-(c) 98-523  6- 8-98 1 94-5 98-524  7-13-98 1       Added 24-1-24-4 98-525  9-14-98 1 94-276-94-290 98-526  9-28-98 1       Rpld 94-180(d)(3)       Rnbd 94-180(d)(4)       as 94-180(d)(3) 99-453 12-27-99 2, 3       Added 82-27(5.82), (5.83)       Added 82-27(5.97) 99-527  2- 8-99 1 94-171(c)(5) 99-528  2- 8-99 1 94-521 2 94-522(5) 3 94-522(7) 4 94-523(1)b. 5 94-523(2)b. 6       Added 94-523(3)-(5) 99-529  2-22-99 1 18-113 99-530  2-22-99 1 18-89 99-531  3- 8-99 1 50-63 99-532  3-22-99 1       Added 94-144 99-533  3-22-99 1       Added 94-180(d)(4) 99-534  3-22-99 1 94-181(f) 99-535  4-12-99 1       Added 34-55(6), (7) 2 34-56(d) 3       Added 34-57.2 99-536  5-24-99 1-4 58-27-58-30 99-537  8-23-99 1 70-26(a) 2 70-37(c) 3 18-39(a) 99-538  9-13-99 1 82-27 2-4 82-27(5.15)-(5.15b) 5 82-27(5.15g) 6, 7 82-27(5.15m), (5.15n) 8-10       Added 82-27(5.62c)-(5.62e) 99-539  9-28-99 1-4 34-206-34-209 5 34-211 6 34-213(a) 7 34-213(c)(6)h. 8 34-213(c)(4) 9-11 34-213(d)-(f) 12, 13 34-213(h), (i) 14 34-213(l) 15 34-214(a) 16 34-214(d) 17 34-215 18-20 34-217(a)-(c) 21 34-218 22 34-219(c) 99-540 10-25-99 1       Added 94-318 99-541 10-25-99 1       Added 94-213(3)i. 2 94-213(7)f. 99-542 10-25-99 1       Added 94-175(f) 2 94-176(f) 3 94-177(f) 4 94-178(f) 5       Added 94-179(g) 00-454  2-14-00 1 94-167(f) 2       Added 94-168(g) 3 94-169(f) 4       Added 94-170(f) 5       Added 94-172(g) 6       Added 94-173(g) 00-455  4-10-00 1       Added 50-43 00-456  4-10-00 1       Added 50-44 00-457  4-10-00 1 54-1 2       Added 54-3a 3 54-4 00-458  4-10-00 1 ch. 18, art. II, div. 2B(tit.) 18-81 2       Rpld 18-82 00-459  7-24-00 1       Rpld 82-26-82-28 2       Added 82-26 3       Added 82-120-82-157 4       Added 82-170-82-186 5       Added 82-200-82-204 6       Added 82-220 00-460  7-24-00 1       Added 50-45 00-461  7-24-00 1 34-263(5)m 2 34-292 3 34-294 4 34-300 00-462  8-28-00 1 94-213(5) 2 94-213(8) 00-464  9-25-00 1 22-26 2 22-29 3 22-31 4 22-34 00-465  9-25-00 1 50-45 00-466 10-23-00 2 94-377 3 94-378 00-467 10-23-00 1       Added 94-352(l) 00-468  1-22-01 1       Added 22-1-22-15 48-6(a)(7) 00-469  1- 8-01 1       Added 22-101-22-120 48-6(a)(10) 01-470  1-22-01 2, 3 94-377, 94-378 01-471  5-14-01 1 50-63 01-472  3-26-01 1       Added 50-46 01-473  3-26-01 1 50-47 01-474  4- 9-01 1 94-171(b) 2 94-278 01-475  5-14-01 1 94-350(2) 01-476  6-11-01 1 94-180(b) 2 94-181(b) 01-477  6-25-01 1       Added 35-1-35-8 01-478  7-23-01 1 18-26-18-34 2       Rpld 18-56-18-89.3 3 Art.II, Div. 4,Rnmd as Art. II, Div. 2 18-90 4       Rpld Art. III 01-479 10- 8-01 1 82-150.1 01-480 11-13-01 1 38-1-38-30 01-481 11-13-01 1 38-31-38-32 01-482 12-10-01 1 94-344 2 94-283(8) 02-483  2-11-01 1 50-7.5 02-484  4- 8-02 1 94-470 02-485  3-25-02 1 50-7.5 02-486  4 8-02 1 34-206-34-219 02-487  8-26-02 1 18-33 02-488 10-14-02 1       Added 94-356 02-489 10-14-02 1 94-406 02-490 10-28-02 1       Added 81-1-81-21 2 80-1 02-491 10-28-02 1 18-90-18-110.41 02-492 10-28-02 1 18-30 2       Added 18-31.1 02-493 12- 9-02 1       Added 94-260-94-268 02-494 12-23-02 1       Added 82-27 2 ch. 82, art. II, title 3       Rpld 32-120-82-220 4       Added 82-120-82-129 5       Added 82-130 03-495  1-13-03 2 94-377 03-496  1-27-03 1       Rpld 22-40 03-498  4-14-03 1-4 94-376-94-379 5       Rpld 94-390-94-382 03-499  4-28-03 1 22-50 03-500  4-28-03 1       Added 67-1-67-48 03-501  6- 9-03 1 94-377(l) 03-502  7-14-03 1, 2 94-5 3 94-179(b)(9) 03-503  8-25-03 1 34-56 2 34-57 3 34-55(5) 03-504  9-22-03 1       Added 50-48 03-505  9-22-03 1 82-26 03-507 12-22-03 1 82-27(a) 2       Added 82-27(f) 04-508  4-12-04 1 6-2 04-510  6-28-04 1 38-31, 38-32 04-511  6-28-04 1       Added 48-4.1 04-512  6-28-04 1 50-35 04-513  6-28-04 1 50-1 2       Added 50-1.1 04-514  7-12-04 1 94-352 2 94-188(b)(10) 04-515  7-12-04 1 94-410 04-516  7-12-04 1       Added 78-110-78-118 04-519  9-27-04 1       Added Ch. 54, art. I, title 2       Added 54-30-54-33 3, 4       Added 48-6(a)(19), (20) 04-520 10-25-04 1 2-57 2 2-58 04-522 12-13-04 1       Dltd 51-1-51-4       Added 51-1-51-29.3 2 48-6(a)(19) 04-523 12-27-04 1       Added 82-200-82-209 2       Added 48-6(a)(25) 05-524  2-14-05 1 94-213(12) 2 94-249(3) 3 94-308(b) 4 94-281(a) 05-525  3-28-05 1       Added 82-27(g) 05-526  3-28-05 1       Rpld 18-183 05-527  3-28-05 1 6-2 05-529  5-23-05 1 74-90.1 05-530  5-23-05 1       Added 22-150-22-156 05-531  5-23-05 1 94-183(b) 2 94-184(b) 3 94-185(b) 4 94-186(b) 5 94-187(b) 6       Added 94-213(3)j. 7       Added 94-213(7)e.4. 05-532  6-27-05 1 78-1 2 78-2 05-534  9-12-05 1       Dltd 18-90-18-110.43       Added 18-90-18-110.35 05-535  9-26-05 1 94-308(c)(3) 05-536  9-26-05 1 74-1-74-117 05-537 10-24-05 1 67-36 05-538 11-28-05 1       Dltd 86-61-86-205       Added 86-71-86-169 2       Added 86-170-86-179 3       Added 86-180-86-209 05-540 12-12-05 1 54-29 2 54-29.1 06-541  2-13-06 1       Added 86-81 06-542  2-13-06 1 75-23 06-543  2-13-06 1 34-209 2 34-212 3 34-213 4 34-214 5 34-215 6 34-216 7 34-216.2 8       Added 34-216.3 9 34-210 catchline 10 34-219 catchline 06-544  3-27-06 1 6-9 06-545  3-27-06 1 94-467 06-546  5-22-06 1 18-30 2 18-31.1 06-547  8-28-06 1 94-5 2       Added 94-357 3       Added 94-223 4       Added 94-291 06-548 10- 9-06 1 94-186 2 94-218 06-549 11-27-06 1 34-51 2 34-55 3 34-56 4 34-57 5 34-57.1 6       Rpld 34-57.2 07-550  3-26-07 1 94-187 07-551  7- 9-07 1 94-5 2 94-406-94-413       Added 94-414 3       Added 94-213(2)q. (6)15. 4 98-283(9) 07-552 10- 8-07 1 58-99 07-553 10-22-07 1 38-32 07-554 12-10-07 1 34-231-34-307       Added 34-308 08-555  1-14-08 1       Dltd 94-167(d)(12) 08-556  5-12-08 1 34-186 08-557  6- 9-08 1       Added 70-89-70-99 2 81-21 08-558  7-14-08 1, 2 94-5 3 94-337 4 94-406 5 94-410 6 94-411 08-559  9-22-08 1       Added 94-37 08-560  9-22-08 1 18-90 2 18-91 3 18-92 4 18-93 5 18-94 6       Added 18-94.1 7       Added 18-94.2 8 18-95 9 18-96 10 18-97 11 18-98 12       Rpld 18-99 13 18-100 14       Rpld 18-101 15 18-102 16 18-103 17 18-104 18 18-105 19 18-106 20 18-107 21 18-108 22 18-109 23 18-110 24 18-110.1 25 18-110.2 26 18-110.3 27 18-110.4 28 18-110.5 29 18-110.6 30 18-110.7 31 18-110.8 32 18-110.9 33       Rpld 18-110.10 34 18-110.11 35 18-110.12 36 18-110.13 37 18-110.14 38 18-110.15 39 18-110.16 40 18-110.17 41 18-110.18 42 18-110.19 43 18-110.20 44 18-110.21 45 18-110.22 46 18-110.23 47 18-110.24 48 18-110.25 49 18-110.26 50 18-110.27 51 18-110.28 52 18-110.29 53 18-110.30 54 18-110.31 55 18-110.32 56       Added 18-110.32.1 57 18-110.33 58 18-110.34 59 18-110.35 08-561 12- 8-08 1 38-31(a), (b)       Added (c) 2 38-32 08-562  1-12-09 1       Added 50-140-40-148 08-563  1-12-09 1       Added 66-26 09-564  2-23-09 1       Added 50-49 09-566  2-23-09 1 67-23 09-568  3- 9-09 1 6-6 2 6-8 3 22-9 4 22-13 5 38-53 6 62-56 7 62-57 8 70-81 09-569  3-23-09 1 34-305 09-570  3-23-09 1       Added 2-82 2       added 2-83 3       Rpld 38-81-38-86 09-571  4-13-09 1 94-5 2 94-179 09-572  6-16-09 1       Added 94-550-94-555 09-973  7-13-09 1       Added 94-177-A 09-574  6-22-09 1       Added 94-38 09-575 10-12-09 1 86-170 2       Added 86-171.1-86-171.11 3       Added 86-172.1-86-172.15 4       Added 86-173.1, 86-173.2 5       Added 86-174.1-86-174.35 6       Added 86-175.1-86-175.12 7       Added 86-176.1-86-176.6 8       Added 86-177.1-86-177.8 09-576 10-12-09 1       Added 22-170-22-181 10-577  1-25-10 1       Dltd 18-105 10-578  2-22-10 1-3       Added 22-200-22-202 10-579  3- 8-10 1 94-171(b)(8) 2 94-61 3 94-5 4 94-406(a) 5 (c)(1), (2) 6 94-407 7       Dltd 94-409(a)       Rltd (b)-(d)       as (a)-(c) 8 94-412 9 94-413(1)-(5)       Added (6)       Rnbd (6)-(15)       as (7)-(16) 10-580  4-26-10 1 22-1 2       Rpld 22-6 10-581  4-12-10 1       Added 10-201-10-214 10-582  4-12-10 1 70-68(a) 10-583  4-26-10 1       Added 38-33 2       Added 38-34 3       Added 38-35 10-584  6-14-10 1       Added 50-51 2       Added 50-52 10-585  5-24-10 1 62-1 2 62-2 3 62-3 4 62-4 5 62-31 6 62-32 7 62-33 8 62-34 9 62-35 10 62-36 11 62-37 12 62-38 13 62-39 14 62-40 15 62-41 16 62-42 17 62-43 18       Added 62-44 19 62-56 20 62-57 21 62-57.1 22 62-58 23 62-59 10-586  5-24-10 1 82-102 10-587  5-10-10 1 78-42 10-588 10-11-10 1 94-5 2       Added 94-180(d)(5), (6) 3       Added 94-181(d)(2) 94-467(b) 5 94-177-A3(B) 5.(s) 6       Added 94-178(d)(3) 7       Added 94-179(d)(3) 10-589 10-11-10 1 50-8 10-591 11- 8-10 I 86-71-86-169 10-592  1-10-11 1 22-170 11-593  1-24-11 1 ch. 86, art. IV, 
div. 7, app. A 2       Rpld ch. 86, art. IV, 
div. 7, app. B 3 86-174.23 11-594  2-28-11 1 6-8 11-595  3-28-11 1 94-12 caption 2-5 94-412(1)-(4) 6       Added 94-412(5) 7 94-5 8       Added 94-412(6) 11-597  5- 9-11 1 38-31 2 38-32 11-598  7-11-11 1       Added 94-171-A 11-599  7-11-11 1 22-170 2 22-172 3 22-175 4 22-178 11-600  7-27-11 1 62-2 2 62-3 11-601  8-22-11 1 22-202 11-602  9-26-11 1 34-235 2 94-337 3 94-5 4       Added 94-180(d)(7), (8) 5 94-181(d) 6 94-177-A4.(D) 7 94-177-A5.(n) 11-603  9-26-11 1 94-5 2 94-406(a) 3 94-406(d) 4 94-413 11-604  2- 1-12 1 22-1 12-605  2-25-12 1 22-202 12-606  4-28-12 1 6-9 12-607  6-18-12 1 10-41(b) 2 10-42 3 10-46 12-608  6-28-12 1-5 38-10-38-14 6       Added 38-16 12-609  8-18-12 1 18-33 2 18-110.29 3 67-5(25) 4 67-19 5 67-23 6       Added 67-5(60)-(63) 7, 8       Dltd 34-187, 34-188 12-610  9-29-12 1 94-5 2 94-31 3       Added 94-358 13-611  1-28-13 1 94-466(6) 2 94-343 3 94-410(e) 4 94-411(d) 5 94-177-A3.(B) 6 94-317 13-612  2-11-13 1 18-33 2 67-19 3 74-65 4 94-313.1 5       Rpld 34-331-34-339 13-613  4-22-13 1 6-1 2 6-4 3 6-5 4       Rpld 6-7 5 6-10 13-614  6-10-13 1 70-68 13-615  6-10-13 1       Added 2-84 13-616  6-10-13 1 2-83 13-617  6-24-13 1 38-16(b) 2 38-16(g) 13-618  7-22-13 1       Rpld 22-200-22-202 13-619 10-14-13 1, 2 86-73 3-8 86-85 9-11 86-86 12, 13 86-90 14 86-91 15 86-98(2) 16 86-100(1) 17 86-101(3) 18 86-105 19 86-108 20 86-140(2) 21 86-142(tit.) 22 86-142(2) 23 86-151 24 86-153(5) 25-27 86-155(5) 13-620 12-21-13 1 50-7 2 50-9 3       Added 50-9.5 13-621 12-21-13 1       Rpld 10-26-10-50 14-622  7-28-14 1 6-19 15-623  2- 9-15 1       Added 50-20.5 15-624  2- 9-15 1       Dltd 38-31-38-35       Added 38-31-38-36 15-625  8-24-15 1       Dltd 22-76-22-87       Added 22-75-22-87 15-626 10-26-15 1 94-38 16-627  3-28-16 1 94-56-94-58 16-628  6-27-16 1 18-90-18-92 16-629  6-27-16 1       Added 82-220-82-223 16-630  9-26-16 1       Added 94-415 16-631  9-26-16 1 94-180(f) 16-632  9-26-16 1 94-180 94-188 94-337 94-338 94-344 94-352 94-357 94-468 94-470 16-634  1- 9-17 1 90-3(c) 2 94-182(g) 3 94-406(d), 94-410(d), 94-411(c) 17-635  7-10-17 1 94-5 2 94-337 17-636  7-10-17 1 94-5 2       Rpld 94-358       Added 94-358 17-637  7-10-17 1 94-466 17-638  7-10-17 1 94-5 2       Added 94-359 17-639 10-23-17 1-8 35-1-35-8 18-640  2-12-18 1 1-11 2 6-19 3       Rpld 6-20 18-641  4-23-18 1 94-5 2 94-175-94-177, 94-180 18-642  6-11-18 1-5 38-31-38-35 18-643 10-22-18 1 94-37 18-644 11-12-18 1       Added 22-200-22-202 18-645  1-14-19 1       Rpld 94-358       Added 94-358 19-646  5-20-19 1 50-52(b) 2 50-86 3-6       Rpld 50-87-50-90       Added 50-87-50-90 7       Added 50-91 8, 9       Rpld 50-34-50-35 19-647  5-20-19 1 38-16 19-648  5-20-19 1       Added 94-39  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 15.231 et seq. 78-70 15.231-15.246 81-17 15.261 et seq. 58-97 78-70 15.341 et seq. 2-26 24.201 et seq. 82-27 28.421 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II 28.451 et seq. 38-36 28.601 et seq. 46-1 29.1 et seq. Ch. 38 37.1101 et seq. 78-112 54.211 et seq. 75-21 117.1 et seq. 67-1 117.3 18-112 117.3(k) 38-31 38-33 117.4a Ch. 66 117.4b Ch. 66 117.4d Ch. 66 117.4i 1-11 117.4m 54-32 117.5 2-56 Ch. 66 117.5b 1-1 117.5c Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 3 2-58 123.51 et seq. Ch. 54 123.731 et seq. 62-1 86-27 86-72 125.31 et seq. Ch. 58 58-26 74-2 74-3 74-4 125.33(2) 58-27 125.581 et seq. Ch. 58 74-3 74-4 94-6 94-213 94-249 94-253 94-288 94-310 125.981 et seq. 58-93 66-2 125.1401 et seq. 78-97 78-111 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 18 18-26 18-76 18-81 38-36 125.1651 et seq. 58-62 125.2301 et seq. 82-27 131.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 141.101 et seq. 67-1 86-37 86-51 86-82 86-96 86-151 86-170 168.1 et seq. Ch. 30 168.644a 30-2 168.644a et seq. 30-5 168.644b 30-1 168.644f 30-1 168.644g 30-4 168.644h 30-3 168.644-l 30-1, 30-2 205.23 78-62 205.30 78-46 206.504 et seq. 78-42 211.1-211.157 34-217(e) 211.741 et seq. Ch. 66 211.761 et seq. Ch. 66 247.183 80-1 257.1 et seq. 34-129 34-156 Ch. 82 82-26 82-27 82-91 82-120, 82-121 257.319 6-19 257.319d 82-27 257.320c 82-27 257.322 82-27 257.323 82-27 257.605 Ch. 82 257.606 Ch. 82 257.610 Ch. 82 257.617 82-27 257.619 82-27 257.625 82-1 82-27 257.625m 82-1 280.1 et seq. 67-1 67-5(16) 34-209(b)(12) 282.101 et seq. 34-206 34-301 282.105 34-207 286.841 et seq. 22-200 287.290 Ch. 14 299.401 et seq. 34-305 62-1 299.418b 34-55(b) 299.501 et seq. 62-1 324.101 et seq. 67-1 324.3010 et seq. 86-86 324.3101 et seq. 86-86 324.5150 et seq. 34-55 324.9101 et seq. 34-206 34-301 34-301(c) 94-254(a)(4) 324.11501 et seq. 34-305 62-1 324.11520(2) 62-42(a)(1) 324.1152 34-55 324.11701 et seq. 94-171(d)(7)a., b., h. 324.80176 82-1 324.81134, 324.81135 82-1 324.82127 82-1 324.9101 et seq. 34-209(b)(7) 325.311 et seq. 94-171 330.1100a 6-19 333.1101 et seq. 50-86 82-27 333.6103 50-49 333.7104 50-86 333.7107 50-86 333.7109 50-86 333.7451 50-86 333.16215 82-27 333.16631 86-85 333.20101 et seq. 94-5 333.20106 6-19 333.20301 et seq. 82-27 333.20904 6-19 333.26421 et seq. 50-86 333.26423 50-86 333.27101 et seq. 50-86 333.27951 et seq. 50-86 333.27953 50-86 338.105(1) et seq. 82-27 400.701 et seq. 94-5 408.1001 et seq. 86-73 433.351 et seq. 14-28(b)(3)d. 436.1 et seq. Ch. 6 6-18 436.1-436.58 8-27 436.2 8-27 436.33 8-27 436.33b 50-52 82-27 436.1101 et seq. 50-52 436.1703(3) 6-19 436.1703(18)(d) 6-19 460.701 et seq. 70-94 80-13(k) 484.2101 et seq. 80-1 484.2102 81-3 484.2361 70-94 484.3101 70-91 484.3106(7) 70-93 484.3106(8) 70-93 484.3301 70-91 559.101 et seq. 94-307 560.101 et seq. 67-1 Ch. 74 74-2 74-4 74-62 600.101 et seq. 34-219(e) 600.223 et seq. 26-10 712A.1 et seq. 50-14 50-51 722.1-722.6 6-19 722.111 et seq. 94-5 94-171 722.673 50-42 730.251 et seq. 26-11 730.501 et seq. 26-3-26-5 750.1 et seq. 38-56 750.81 et seq. 50-7 750.81-750.84 50-7.5(a) 750.81a 50-7.5(a) 750.86 50-7.5(a) 750.92 50-1 750.103 50-26 750.167 50-37 750.167(1)(c) 50-28 750.167(1)(e) 6-3 750.169 et seq. 50-11 750.200 et seq. Ch. 38 750.222 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II 750.240 et seq. Ch. 38 750.243a-750.243e 38-10 750.267 et seq. 50-32 750.335a 50-29 750.337 50-26 750.356 et seq. 50-20 750.377 et seq. 50-16 750.411a 50-5 750.463 et seq. Ch. 10 750.479 50-6 750.493d 50-4 750.520.b-g 6-19 750.546 et seq. 50-27 752.362 50-42 752.811 Ch. 10 764.9a et seq. 34-242 764.13 82-27 780.751-780.834 8-27  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section  
this Code 2.2 30-3 3.521 et seq. 86-123 3.560(101) et seq. 82-27 3.560(186) 82-27 4.450(1) et seq. 46-1 82-27 4.1700(71) et seq. 2-26 4.1800(11) et seq. 58-97 78-70 4.1801(1) et seq. 78-70 5.570(1) et seq. 62-1 86-27 86-72 5.2073(k) 18-34 5.2082 1-11 5.2084(2) 1-1 5.2731 et seq. 86-37 5.2931 et seq. Ch. 58 74-4 94-56 94-58 94-213 94-253 94-288 94-310 5.2949(1) et seq. 18-34 5.2991 et seq. Ch. 58 58-26 74-2 74-4 5.2993(2) 58-27 5.3010(1) et seq. 58-62 5.3533(1) et seq. 58-93 66-2 6.1001 et seq. Ch. 30 6.1644 et seq. 30-5 6.1644(1) 30-2 6.1644(2) 30-1 6.1644(6) 30-1 6.1644(7) 30-4 6.1644(8) 30-3 6.1644(12) 30-1, 30-2 7.657(30) 78-46 9.1326 82-27 9.1801 et seq. 34-129 34-156 82-27 82-91 9.1904(1) 82-27 9.1952 82-27 9.2001 82-27 9.2003 82-27 9.2011 82-27 9.2011(1) 82-27 9.2012 82-27 9.2012(5)(3) 82-27 9.2012(b) 82-27 9.2019(4) 82-27 9.2020(3) 82-27 9.2022, 9.2023 82-27 9.2317 82-27 9.2319 82-27 9.2325 82-27 9.2325(1) 82-27 9.2325(1)(5) 82-27 9.2325(1), (2) 
9.2325(1), (3) 82-28 
82-27 9.2325(1), (3)-(5) 82-27 9.2325(1), (4), (5) 82-27 9.2325(2), 9.2325(3) 82-27 9.2325(4), (5) 82-27 9.2325(13) 82-27 9.2326 82-27 9.2331 82-27 9.2375(5) 82-27 9.2383 82-27 9.2383-9.2414(1) 82-27 9.2410(2) 82-27 9.2417 82-27 9.2419 82-27 9.2419(1) 82-27 9.2420 82-27 9.2422 82-27 9.2424-9.2426 82-27 9.2426(3) 82-27 9.2427 82-27 9.2427(1)-(3) 82-27 9.2427(3) 82-27 9.2443 82-27 9.2503(4) 82-27 9.2503(6) 82-27 9.2561 et seq. 82-26, 82-27 9.2608 82-27 12.541 Ch. 14 13.29(1) et seq. 34-305 62-1 13.30(1) et seq. 62-1 13.1820(1) et seq. 34-206 34-301 13.1820(5) 34-207 14.15(1101) et seq. 82-27 14.15(20101)) 94-5 14.575 et seq. 82-27 16.114(1) et seq. 78-97 18.971 et seq. 6-18 19.855(101) et seq. 82-27 24.13009 82-27 24.13101 et seq. 82-27 25.358(11) et seq. 94-5 94-171 26.50(101) et seq. 94-307 27.3178(598.1) et seq. 50-14 27.3911 et seq. 26-11 27.3937(1) et seq. 26-3-26-5 27A.223 et seq. 26-10 27A.4001 et seq. 82-27 27A.6001 82-27 27A.8312 82-27 27A.8395 82-27 28.91 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II 28.191 et seq. 38-56 28.276-28.279 50-7.5(a) 28.276(1) 50.75(a) 28.281 50-7.5(a) 28.298 50-26 28.364(1)(c) 50-28 28.366 et seq. 50-11 28.419 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II 28.440(2) 38-2 28.478 et seq. 50-32 28.567(1) 50-29 28.569 50-26 28.588 50-20 28.609 et seq. 50-16 28.814 et seq. 50-27 28.841 et seq. 82-27 28.843 82-27 28.868(1) et seq. 34-242 28.871(1) 82-27  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1976 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code, as updated through August 27, 1991, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1976 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2, 1-3 1-6, 1-7 1-4 1-2 1-5 1-5 1-6, 1-7 1-3, 1-4 1-8 1-11 1-9-1-11 1-8-1-10 2-1-2-4 2-26-2-29 2-5 46-1 2-6(a)-2-6(f) 2-41-2-46 2-6(g) 2-81 2-16-2-31 58-26-58-41 2-36-2-38 2-56-2-58 2-39-2-42 2-58-2-61 3-1-3-3 34-51-34-53 3-4-3-6 34-65-34-67 3-7 34-55 3-7.1, 3-7.2 34-56, 34-57 3-8-3-14 34-58-34-64 3-25-3-29 34-81-34-85 3-40-3-45 34-101-34-106 4-1 6-1 4-2(a)-(d) 6-4 4-2(e) 6-5 4-3, 4-4 6-6, 6-7 4-5-4-7 6-9-6-11 4-8 6-8 4-9-4-12 6-16-6-19 4-13 6-12 4-14, 4-15 6-14, 6-15 4-16 6-13 5-1 18-1 5-12-5-20 18-26-18-34 5-21 86-1 5-22 38-31 5-23-5-28 18-35-18-40 5-30-5-32 18-41-18-43 5-38, 5-39 18-56, 18-57 5-39.1 18-58 5-40-5-46 18-59-18-65 5-47 18-68 5-50 18-69 5-51 18-75 5-52, 5-53 18-72, 18-73 5-55-5-57 18-69-18-71 5-58 18-74 5-60 18-86 5-67-5-71 18-166-18-170 5-82-5-90 18-181-18-189 5-100 18-111 5-101-5-105 18-114-18-118 5-106, 5-107 18-112, 18-113 5-120-5-123 42-27-42-30 5-124, 5-125 42-36, 42-37 5-126-5-128 42-33-42-35 5-129 42-32 5-130 42-31 5-131 42-26 5-132-5-135 42-38-42-41 5-200-5-205 18-141-18-146 51/2-1-51/2-5 30-1-30-5 6-1 78-31 6-3-6-9 78-32 6-10-6-12 78-33 6-13-6-16 78-34-78-37 6-24-6-29 78-38-78-43 6-29.1 78-44 6-30, 6-31 78-44, 78-45 6-32-6-36 78-45-78-49 6-37-6-46 78-50 6-47-6-72 78-51-78-76 61/2-11-61/2-19 58-61-58-69 61/2-30-61/2-38 58-91-58-99 7-1 38-2 7-2 38-1 7-3 38-3 7-14-7-20 38-51-38-57 7-25-7-28 38-81-38-84 8-1, 8-2 62-1, 62-2 8-2.1 62-3 8-3 62-4 8-4 62-31 8-5-8-12 62-34-62-41 8-13-8-16 62-56-62-59 8-17, 8-18 62-42, 62-43 8-19, 8-20 62-32, 62-33 8-34-8-43 62-81-62-90 8-49-8-54 62-101-62-106 10-1-10-3 50-1-50-3 10-4 50-25 10-5 34-26 10-6 50-4 10-7 34-54 10-8 90-3 10-9, 10-10 50-5, 50-6 10-11 50-17 10-12-10-14 50-7-50-9 10-16-10-18 50-10-50-12 10-20 50-13 10-20.1 50-15 10-21 50-14 10-22 50-16 10-23 90-1 10-23.1 90-2 10-24 50-19 10-25 50-18 10-26 50-20 10-27 50-27 10-28 50-21 10-30 50-23 10-31 50-26 10-33-10-36 50-28-50-31 10-37 50-24 10-38, 10-39 50-32, 50-33 10-40 6-3 10-40.1 6-2 10-40.2 50-34 10-41 50-35 10-42 50-41 10-43-10-45 50-36-50-38 10-46 14-1 10-47, 10-48 50-39, 50-40 10-49 50-22 10-56 50-61 10-57 50-65 10-58-10-60 50-62-50-64 10-70-10-73 22-76-22-79 10-74 22-82 10-75 22-80 10-76 22-85 10-77, 10-78 22-83, 22-84 10-79 22-81 10-79.1, 10-79.2 22-86, 22-87 10-80-10-84 50-86-50-90 10-90-10-94 50-111-50-115 10-101-10-104 10-26-10-29 10-105, 10-106 10-41, 10-42 10-107 10-46 10-108, 10-109 10-44, 10-45 10-110 10-43 10-120-10-127 22-26-22-33 10-127.1 22-34 10-128-10-132 22-35-22-39 10-132.1 22-40 10-133-10-145 22-41-22-53 11-1, 11-2 82-26, 82-27 11-5 82-47 11-6 82-28 11-15 82-45 11-18 82-46 11-19 82-48 11-29, 11-30 82-91, 82-92 11-31 82-96 11-32-11-34 82-93-82-95 11-41-11-44 82-66-82-69 11-45 82-71 11-46 82-70 12-1-12-11 26-1-26-11 13-1-13-14 34-126-34-139 13-20-13-26 34-156-34-162 14-1, 14-2 10-66, 10-67 14-3 10-69 14-14 10-96 14-15-14-17 10-97 14-18-14-22 10-98-10-102 14-33 10-68 14-34 10-70 14-35-14-39 10-72-10-76 14-40 10-71 14-41 10-81 14-42 10-80 14-43 10-82 14-44, 14-45 10-78, 10-79 14-46 10-77 141/2-1-141/2-4 54-1-54-4 15-1-15-25 66-1-66-25 16-1-16-7 70-61-70-67 16-16, 16-17 70-81, 70-82 16-17.1 70-83 16-18-16-20 70-84-70-86 16-20.1 70-87 16-21 70-88 17-1-17-8 34-181-34-188 17-20-17-26 34-206-34-212 17-27, 17-28 34-214, 34-215 17-29 34-213 171/2-16-171/2-27 70-26-70-37 18-1-18-6 74-1-74-6 18-17-18-23 74-31-74-37 18-34-18-37 74-61-74-64 18-48-18-53 74-86-74-91 18-64-18-69 74-111-74-116 18-70, 18-71 74-116, 74-117 19-1-19-3 78-1-78-3 19-11-19-18 78-96-78-103 20-11-20-21 86-26-86-36 20-22 86-39 20-22.1 86-37 20-23 86-38 20-34-20-44 86-71-86-81 20-45 86-85 20-45.1, 20-45.2 86-82, 86-83 20-46 86-84 20-57-20-60 86-106-86-109 20-71-20-94 86-181-86-204 20-96 86-205 20-101-20-105 86-166-86-170 20-200-20-227 86-121-86-148 20-228 86-154 20-229 86-149 20-230, 20-231 86-152, 86-153 20-232, 20-233 86-150, 86-151 21-1, 21-2 34-231, 34-232 21-3 34-233 34-235 21-4 34-234 21-5-21-13 34-261-34-269 21-14-21-30 34-291-34-307 21-31-21-33 34-237-34-239 21-34 34-270 21-35(a) 34-236 21-35(b) 34-271 21-36-21-38 34-240-34-242 App. A, §§ 1.1-1.4 94-1-94-4 2.1-2.3 94-86-94-89 3.1-3.6 94-111-94-116 4.1-4.8 94-136-94-143 5.1, 5.2 94-166, 94-167 5.2A 94-168 5.3-5.6 94-169-94-172 5.6 94-173 5.7-5.20 94-174-94-187 5-A.1-5-A.11 94-211-94-222 5-B.1-5-B.8 94-246-94-253 5-C.1-5-C.11 94-275-94-286 5-D.1-5-D.11 94-306-94-316 6.1-6.17 94-336-94-352 6-A.1-6-A.7 94-376-94-382 7.1-7.8 94-406-94-413 8.1-8.11 94-436-94-446 9.1-9.7 94-466-94-472 10.1, 10.2 94-496, 94-497 10-A.1-10-A.3 94-521-94-523 11.1-11.4 94-31-94-34 11.5 94-36 11.6 94-35 12.1-12.4 94-56-94-59 12.6-12.8 94-60-94-62 12.8A 94-63 12.9, 12.10 94-65, 94-65 13.1, 13.2 94-6 14.1 94-7 15.1 94-5 16.1 94-8 17.1, 17.2 94-9, 94-10  
