CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WARREN, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Adopted: June 9, 1987 
Effective: June 29, 1987 
____________ 
Published in 1987 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF WARREN, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ronald L. Bonkowski 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert A. Binkowski 
Don W. Blevins 
Louis J. Burdi 
Lisa C. Ciaglia 
George L. Dimas 
James R. Fouts 
Jeanne Omelenchuk 
Fred S. Sabaugh 
James W. Workens 
City Council 
____________ 
Walter A. Jakubowski, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Diane S. Sabo 
City Clerk 
____________ 
L. Klimecki Dannis 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
Wayne G. Erdody 
City Assessor 
____________ 
Richard Fox 
City Controller 
PRESENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF WARREN, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
James R. Fouts 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert Boccomino 
Kelly Colegio 
Patrick Green 
Keith Sadowski 
Cecil St. Pierre 
Scott Stevens 
Steven Warner 
City Council 
____________ 
Paul Wojno 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Carolyn Kurkowski Moceri 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Warren of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1967 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 3 is numbered 3-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 1 is 1-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices of the Code have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. David L. Dalenberg, Senior Assistant City Attorney, Ms. Carmella Sabaugh, Former City Clerk, and Mr. Ronald J. Pollet, Deputy City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
	Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE NO. 80-340 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting A New Code for the City of Warren, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof and Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; Providing for a Penalty; Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The City of Warren Ordains: 
Section 1.  The City Code published by Municipal Code Corporation and consisting of Chapters 1 through 41 each inclusive is hereby adopted and enacted. This Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before September 23, 1986, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2.  All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after June 29, 1987, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before September 23, 1986, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of the Code. 
Section 3.  The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of such Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or both in the discretion of the court. 
Section 5.  Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of this Ordinance and in Section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7.  Any ordinance adopted after September 23, 1986, which amends or refers to ordinances codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
Sections 8—50.  The provisions of §§ 8—50 of this Ord. No. 80-340 repealed and amended various Code sections which provisions have not been set out at length herein. The amendments enacted by §§ 8—50 of this ordinance have been accomplished with the publication of Supplement No. 1 and an enumeration of amendments is contained in the Code Comparative Table. 
Section 51.  This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby shall become effective June 29, 1987. 
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing Ordinance No. 80-340 was adopted by the Warren City Council at its meeting held on June 9, 1987. 
	/s/ Diane S. Sabo 
      City Clerk 
 	 
Published: June 23, 1987  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
We, the people of the City of Warren, grateful to God for the blessings of freedom, peace, and justice, and in order to secure the benefits of efficient self government and otherwise to promote our common welfare, do ordain and establish this charter for the government of our city, pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Michigan. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Warren Charter as adopted by the electors on October 2, 1956. Amendments have been inserted and are indicated by history notes in parentheses following the amended sections. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Other changes made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq.; power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - BOUNDARIES AND SUBDIVISION OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 1.1 - Boundaries. 
The following described territory, together with all territories that may be annexed thereto, shall be a body corporate with the official name and title of "City of Warren", shall constitute one ward, and shall be subject to the municipal control of the city: 
Commencing at the intersection of the base line of the state of Michigan and the western boundary line of T. 1N., R. 12E., thence north along the said western boundary line of T. 1N., R. 12E. (substantially the centerline of Dequindre Avenue) to the northern boundary line of T. 1N., R. 12E., thence east along the said northern boundary line of T. 1N., R. 12E. (substantially the centerline of Fourteen Mile Road) to the eastern boundary line of T. 1N., R. 12E., thence south along the said eastern boundary line of T. 1N., R. 12E. (substantially the centerline of Hayes Road and Hayes Road extended) to the northeast corner of Section 25 of T. 1N., R. 12E., thence west along the north line of Section 25 a distance of 200 feet, thence south along a line 200 feet distant from and parallel to the east line of Section 25 to a point 200 feet north of the south line of the northeast ¼ of Section 25, thence westerly from that point to a point on the west line of the east ½ of the east ½ of Section 25 which is 20 feet north of the south line of the northeast ¼ of Section 25, thence south along the west line of the east ½ of the east ½ of Sections 25 and 36 to the base line of the state of Michigan, thence west along the said base line to the point of beginning: and excepting therefrom the territory comprising the City of Center Line, which territory is described as follow: 
Commencing at the north quarter post of Section 22, T. 1N., R. 12E., thence southerly on the north and south quarter section line through Sections 22 and 27 to the center post of Section 27, thence southerly and along the westerly line of the southwest quarter of Section 27 to a point of intersection with a line produced easterly and being the southerly line of the northerly twelve acres of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 28, thence westerly along the southerly line of said northerly twelve acres and said southerly line produced to a point 200 feet westerly of the west property line of the Michigan Central Railroad, thence northerly parallel with and 200 feet westerly on the westerly property line of the Michigan Central Railroad through Sections 28 and 21 to a point on the northerly line of Section 21 and 200 feet westerly of the westerly property line of the Michigan Central Railroad, thence easterly on the north line of Sections 21 and 22 to the north quarter post of Section 22, to the point of beginning. 
State Law reference— Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.61 et seq.  
Sec. 1.2 - Wards. 
The city shall consist of one ward. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for establishment of one (1) or more wards, MCL 117.3(e).  
Sec. 1.3 - Election precincts. 
The city shall be divided into election precincts in the manner required by law. 
State Law reference— Election precincts, MCL 168.654.  
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 2.1 - Records to be public. 
All records of the city shall be public, unless otherwise provided by law, shall be kept in city offices, except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to be elsewhere, and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(l); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.  
Sec. 2.2 - Definitions and interpretations. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of this charter: 
(a)  The word "city" shall mean the city of Warren; 
(b)  The word "council" shall mean the city council of the city of Warren, and shall be synonymous with the word commission, or any other word used in any law to designate the governing body of a city; 
(c)  The word "constitution" shall denote the constitution of the state of Michigan, as it is in effect at the time the provision containing the word "constitution" is to be applied; 
(d)  The word "law" shall denote this charter, the constitution and statutes of Michigan, and the applicable common law; 
(e)  The word "officer" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the mayor, the members of the council, the justices of the peace [2], the administrative officers, deputy administrative officers, and members of city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this charter: provided, that city representatives; [3] on the board of supervisors of Macomb County, when acting in such capacity, shall not be officers of the city within the meaning of this charter; 
(f)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships and associations, as well as to individuals; 
(g)  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include printing, engraving, stencil duplication, lithographing, or any similar method; 
(h)  The words "publish" or "published" shall include publication of any matter, required to be published, in the manner provided by law, or where there is no applicable law, in one or more newspapers of the city or by posting on the official bulletin boards of the city of which the council shall provide and maintain at least ten in the city; 
(i)  The words "public utility" shall include all common carriers in the public streets; water, sewage disposal, electric light, gas, electric power, and heating works; telephone and telegraph lines; subways, conduits, market and market houses, garbage collection, garbage disposal and reduction plants, paving plants and appliances; and such other and different enterprises as the council may from time to time determine or designate; 
(j)  The word "statute" shall denote the public acts of the state of Michigan, as they are in effect at the time the provision containing the word "statute" is to be applied; 
(k)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include hand written script, printing, typewriting, and teletype and telegraphic communications; 
(l)  All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein; 
(m)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Justices of the peace were abolished by MCL 600.9921, which created the district court system. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— There are no longer any so-called city representatives on the board of supervisors since MCL 46.401 et seq., now provides for the election of supervisors by apportioned districts with the county. 
 
Sec. 2.3 - Public records and evidence. 
All papers, books, or other records of any matter required to be kept by any of the several departments of the municipal government, either by law or by the provisions of any ordinance or regulation, shall be deemed public records of such department, and they, or copies duly certified by the custodian thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of their contents in all suits at law or in equity, or in other proceedings. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(l); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.  
Sec. 2.4 - Quorum. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this charter, a quorum of any board created by or under authority of this charter shall consist of a majority of the number of its members, as established by this charter or by the ordinance creating such commission or board. The concurring vote of a majority of such established number of members of each such board shall be necessary for official action by it.  
Sec. 2.5 - Sundays and holidays. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this charter, whenever the date fixed by law or ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day, which is not a Sunday or legal holiday.  
Sec. 2.6 - Penalties for violations of charter. 
Any person found guilty of an act constituting a violation of this charter may be punished by a fine which, in addition to court costs charged to him, shall not exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Imprisonment for violations of this charter may be in the city or the county jail, or in any work house of the state which is authorized by law to receive prisoners of the city. This section shall not operate to limit or prejudice the power to remove officers or discharge employees as provided in this charter.  
Sec. 2.7 - Chapter and section headings. 
The chapter and section heading used in this charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered as part of this charter.  
Sec. 2.8 - Amendments. 
This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference— Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22; Charter amendment procedure, MCL 117.21 et seq.  
Sec. 2.9 - Severability of charter provisions. 
If any provision, section, or clause of this charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the charter, which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, and, to this end, this charter is declared to be severable.  
CHAPTER 3. - MUNICIPAL POWERS AND LIABILITIES 
 
Sec. 3.1 - General powers. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter, the city of Warren shall possess and be vested with all the powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities are, or hereafter may be permitted by law to exercise or to include in their charters. The enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this section or elsewhere in this charter shall not be held to be exclusive. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal powers in the management and control of municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3). 
(b)  The city shall have power to manage and control the finances, rights, interests, buildings, and property, to enter into contracts, to do any act to advance the interests, good government, and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants, and to protect the public peace, morals, health, safety, and general welfare. In the exercise of such powers, the city may enact ordinances, rules, and regulations, and take such other action as may be required, not inconsistent with law. The power of the city shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property, MCL 117.3(j). 
(1)  Abatement of nuisances. To declare as a hazard or nuisance any act or condition, upon public or private property, or both, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of rubbish and the growing of noxious weeds, which is or may be dangerous to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city; to provide for the abatement thereof; and to provide that the costs of such abatement shall be charged as a special assessment against the real property on which the hazard or nuisance is located; 
(2)  Public welfare. To provide for the public welfare by: 
(a)  Trades, occupations and amusements. Regulating trades, occupations, and amusements within the city, and prohibiting trades, occupations, and amusements which are detrimental to the safety, health, morals, or welfare of its inhabitants; 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of trades, occupations and amusements, MCL 117.4i(4). 
(b)  Foods and drugs. Regulating the preparation, storage, transportation, and sale of foods, drugs, and beverages for human consumption; 
(c)  Garbage and rubbish. Collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish; 
(d)  Oil, gasoline stations. Licensing and regulating oil and gasoline stations and the locations thereof, and limiting the number thereof within the city; 
(e)  Vehicles for hire. Licensing and regulating the number of vehicles which carry persons or property for hire and limiting the number thereof within the city, fixing the rates of fare and charges, and determining the location of stands for such vehicles; 
(f)  Signs and billboards. Licensing and regulating billboards and advertising signs and the locations thereof; 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of billboards, MCL 117.4i(5). 
(g)  Buildings and structures. Regulating the construction, erection, alternating, equipment, repair, moving, removal, demolition, and maintenance of buildings and structures and their appurtenances and service equipment; 
(h)  Zoning. Establishing zones within the city and regulating therein the use and occupance of lands or structures; the height, area, size, and location of buildings; the required open spaces for light and ventilation of buildings; and the density of population; 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for zoning, MCL 117.4i(3). 
(i)  Fire prevention. Regulating, limiting, and prohibiting the construction and use of buildings and lands in order to promote the public safety and to prevent fires; 
(j)  Streams, waters, water courses. Regulating and controlling the use of streams, waters, and water courses within the city; 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of water courses, MCL 117.4h(4). 
(3)  Streets and public ways. To establish and reasonably control streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, and the space above and beneath them, and the use thereof by: 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of public ways, MCL 117.4h(1). 
(a)  Same; creating, vacating. Creating and vacating the same and acquiring and disposing of land, or any interest in land, required therefor; 
(b)  Streets and alleys, plan. Providing a plan of streets and alleys within the city and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits; 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for plan of streets and alleys within 3 miles of city, MCL 117.4h(3). 
(c)  Laying sidewalks. Requiring the owners of real property to build and maintain public sidewalks in the area of streets immediately adjacent to such property, and, upon the failure of any owner to do so, constructing and maintaining such sidewalks and assessing the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(d)  Space between curb and sidewalk; weeds, encumbrances. Compelling all persons to care for the untraveled portions of streets lying between the curbs and sidewalks, which abut upon premise's owned, controlled, or occupied by them, and to keep the same free from weeds and from objects which are offensive or hazardous to public health and safety, and, upon the failure of any owner of such property to do so, to cut and remove such weeds and objects and assess the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(e)  Snow, ice, dirt, etc. Compelling all persons to keep sidewalks which are in the area of streets immediately adjacent to the premises owned, controlled, or occupied by them, free from snow, ice, dirt, wood, weeds, or any other object which obstructs such sidewalks, or which makes the same offensive or hazardous to the public health or safety, and upon the failure of any owner of such property to remove or cut such objects and assess the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(f)  Street grades, public utilities; railroads. Providing for the grade of streets and requiring public utility users of the streets to conform thereto with respect to their tracks or facilities located on, above or under the streets; requiring railroads to keep their tracks and the street surface between, and for a distance of one and one half feet or such other distance as may be required by federal or state law, on each side of them in reasonable repair at all times; and requiring railroads to give warning by person or automatic signal of the approach of trains upon or across the streets; 
(g)  Vehicles, trains; speed, stopping, parking. Regulating the speed of vehicles, trains, and locomotives upon or across the streets within the provisions and limitations of law, and the stopping and parking of the same upon the streets and at street crossings; 
(h)  Streets, alleys; lighting. Providing for and regulating the lighting of streets and alleys; 
(i)  Same; preventing encumbrances. Preventing and abating the encumbering of streets and alleys or any part thereof; 
(j)  Buildings, street numbers. Providing for and regulating the numbering of buildings upon property abutting streets and alleys and compelling the owners and occupants thereof to affix numbers thereto; 
(k)  Public ways; public utilities, use. Providing for the use by others than the owner, of property located on or under the streets, alleys, and public places in the operation of a utility, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation therefor to the owner; 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for joint use of public property, MCL 117.4h(2). 
(l)  Trees and shrubs. Providing for the planting and general care and protection of trees and shrubbery within streets and public places, and requesting or preventing the cutting of limbs and branches for the placing and maintenance of utility wires; 
(4)  Public improvements. To undertake any public work or make any public improvement or any repair or replacement thereof whether directly or by contract with private persons; and to participate in any public work or public improvement under any lawful plan by which the whole or partial support of such work or improvement is provided by another governmental unit or agency; 
(5)  Public buildings. To construct, provide, maintain, extend, operate, and improve: 
(a)  Office, community buildings. Within the city; a city hall; city office buildings; community buildings; police stations; fire stations; civic auditoriums; public libraries; and polling places; and, 
(b)  Parks, recreation, transportation, public utility facilities. Either within or without the corporate limits of the city or of Macomb County; public parks; recreation grounds; stadiums; municipal camps; public grounds; zoological gardens; museums; airports and landing fields; cemeteries, levees, embankments, and channels for flood control and other purposes related to the public health, safety, and welfare; electric light and power plants and systems; gas plants and systems; public heating plants and systems; waterworks and water treatment plants and systems; sewage disposal plants and systems; storm sewers; garbage disposal facilities; refuse and rubbish disposal facilities; market houses and market places; public transportation facilities; facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles; hospitals; facilities for the landing of helicopters; and any other structure or facility which is devoted to or intended for public purposes within the scope of the powers of the city; 
(6)  Property for public use. To acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, construction, lease, or otherwise, property, and interests in property, either within or without the corporate limits of the city or of Macomb County, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, including, but not by way of limitations, the uses and purposes set forth in this section, and including the necessary lands therefor; 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for condemnation, MCL 117.4e(2). 
(7)  Joint government agreements. To join with any municipal corporation or with any other unit of government, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract, or otherwise, as may be permitted by law, in the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly, or by one or more on behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately.  
Sec. 3.2 - Vested rights and liabilities continued. 
After the effective date of this charter, the city and all its agencies shall be vested with all property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, and the records, files, books, and papers of the village of Warren and the township of Warren, of which the city shall, in each case, be the successor. No right or liability, contract, lease, or franchise, either in favor of or against either the said village or the said township, existing at the time this charter became effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall be affected in any manner by any change resulting from the incorporation of the city or the adoption of this charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made, except that the same shall be in the name of the city as the successor to the said village and township. All taxes, debts, and liabilities, due to the said village and township from any person, and all fines and penalties, imposed and existing at the time of the incorporation of the city and effective date of its charter, shall be collected by the city.  
CHAPTER 4. - OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 4.1 - City officers. 
(a)  The elective officers shall be the mayor, the seven council members, the clerk, and treasurer. 
(b)  The appointive officers shall be the city attorney, the assessor, the controller, the police commissioner, the fire commissioner, the director of public service and other department heads, and members of the several boards and commissions created by or under authority of this charter. 
(Amended by electors on 11-2-10) 
Editor's note— The municipal court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, which created the district court system. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for election or appointment of a mayor, clerk and treasurer, and such officers as may be deemed necessary, MCL 117.3(a).  
Sec. 4.2 - Eligibility for city office; general qualifications. 
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, a person is eligible to hold an elective city office if he has been a registered elector of the city, or of territory annexed to the city, or both, for at least two years immediately preceding his election or appointment. This requirement may be waived as to persons appointed to the offices of assessor, controller, and any office created by the council, other than membership on a board, by resolution concurred in by not less than five members of the council. When such requirement is waived, the appointment shall be provisional, until the appointee becomes a registered elector of the city. No person shall hold office under a provisional appointment after one year from the date of his first appointment. The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members, subject to the general election laws of the state and review by the courts, upon appeal. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of its officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Sec. 4.3 - Certain persons ineligible for city office. 
(a)  A person who has been convicted of violating any provision of the election laws of the state or of the city, or who has been convicted of a felony or of an offense involving a violation of his oath of office, or who is in default to the city, shall not be eligible for any city office. 
(b)  No person shall simultaneously hold two city offices or a city office and a city employment, nor shall any person simultaneously hold an elective city office and an elective county and school district office. No person who holds an elective county or school district office shall be eligible to qualify for or to assume an elective city office to which he has been elected, until he first resigns from the elective county or school office held by him. Any elective officer who assumes an elective county or school district office shall thereupon be deemed to have vacated the city office held by him. 
(c)  A person who holds or has held an elective city office shall not be eligible for appointment to a city office or employment, for which compensation is paid by the city, until one year has elapsed following the term for which he was elected or appointed. 
(d)  A person shall not be eligible to hold the office of mayor for more than the greater of five (5) complete terms or twenty (20) years. A person shall not be eligible to hold the position of city council, city clerk or city treasurer for more than the greater of three (3) complete terms or twelve (12) years in that office. 
(Res. of 7-14-98; Amended by electors on 8-2-16) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of its officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Sec. 4.4 - Terms of office. 
(a)  The terms of office of all elective officers shall be two years, commencing on and dating from the Monday following their election, unless otherwise provided in this charter. 
(b)  Each appointive officer, except members of boards, shall serve at the pleasure of the officer or authority appointing him. The term of office of each appointive officer to serve on any city board except the library board, the board of review, and the civil service commission of the policemen's and firemen's civil service plan, shall be for three years and shall commence on that date from July 1 of the year in which his appointment is made, except where the appointment is to fill a vacancy. 
(c)  With the consent of the council, and for so long as the council shall permit, an officer may continue, provisionally, in the office held by him, after the expiration of his term, until his successor has been elected or appointed and has qualified for the office. 
(d)  A person shall not be eligible to hold the office of mayor for more than the greater of five (5) complete terms or twenty (20) years. A person shall not be eligible to hold the position of city council, city clerk or city treasurer for more than the greater of three (3) complete terms or twelve (12) years in that particular office. 
(Res. of 7-14-98; Amended by electors on 8-2-16)  
Sec. 4.5 - Notice of appointments. 
Within three days after a person has been elected to office or an appointment has been made or confirmed, if confirmation is required, the clerk shall mail to the person elected or appointed a certificate of such election or appointment.  
Sec. 4.6 - Compensation of officers. 
The council shall fix the compensation for all officers, except as otherwise provided by law. The council shall not act to change the compensation of any elected officer after the thirtieth day preceding the last day for filing nomination petitions for that office, or of an appointive officer, serving for a definite term, after his appointment. Reasonable expenses may be allowed to officers when actually incurred and after they have been audited by the controller. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the compensation of its officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Sec. 4.7 - Oath of office. 
Every officer, before entering upon his duties, and all employees designated by the council, before entering upon their employment, shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by Section 2 of Article XVI of the Constitution, and shall file the same with the clerk. Such oath shall, in each case be taken and subscribed before the clerk, except that the clerk shall do so before the mayor. 
Editor's note— The constitutional oath of office found in Article XVI, Section 2 of the 1908 Michigan Constitution was incorporated without change into Article XI, Section 1 of the 1963 Michigan Constitution.  
Sec. 4.8 - Surety bonds. 
The council may require any officer or employee to give a bond, to be approved by the city attorney, in such sum as the council determines. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of the office or employment concerned. All officers and employees who receive, distribute, or are responsible for city funds or investments shall be bonded. The resignation, removal, or discharge of any officer or employee, or the appointment of another person to the office or employment, shall not exonerate the officer or employee or his sureties from any liability incurred by them. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereof shall be paid by the city. No official bonds shall be issued for a term exceeding three years, except bonds which are required of officers serving terms of office which are longer than three years. No bond shall be renewed upon its expiration but a new bond shall be furnished in each case. The bonds of all officers and employees shall be filed with the clerk, except that the clerk's bond, unless he is covered within the scope of a blanket surety bond, shall be filed with the treasurer. The requirements of this section may be met by the purchase by the city of one or more blanket corporate surety bonds covering all or any group or groups of the officers and employments of the city. Any officer or employee who is covered by a blanket surety bond need not be bonded individually for the purpose of qualifying for office.  
Sec. 4.9 - Giving of surety by officers forbidden. 
No officer shall give or furnish any bail or recognizance in connection with any complaint or warrant charging the violation of a city ordinance, give or become surety, or be the agent of any surety or insurer in connection with any license granted by the city or with respect to which the approval of the council or any officer of the city is required. A violation of this section shall be a violation of this charter.  
Sec. 4.10 - Vacancies of office. 
A city office shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any of the following events: expiration of the term of office; death of the incumbent; resignation; removal from office; ceasing to be an inhabitant of the city; conviction of an infamous crime or of an offense involving a violation of oath of office, default to the city, unless such default is eliminated within thirty days after written notice thereof by the clerk upon the direction of the council, or, unless the officer, in good faith, contests his liability for the default; a decision of a competent tribunal declaring the officer's election or appointment void; failure to take the oath or file the bond required for the office within ten days from the date of election or appointment or within such other time as the council may fix; in the case of councilmen, absence from four consecutive regular meetings of the council unless such absences be excused by the council at the time they occur, or from ten regular meetings in any calendar year; in the case of other elective officers, absence from the city or failure to perform the duties of such office for ninety days, unless such absence from the city or failure to perform the duties of office shall be excused by the council prior to the expiration of such ninety day period; or any other event which, by law, creates a vacancy. In any case, absence from council meetings or from the city on city business at the direction or with the approval of the council shall not be included in the number of meetings or duration of absence set herein for creating a vacancy.  
Sec. 4.11 - Resignations. 
A resignation from office shall become effective immediately upon the acceptance thereof by the appointing authority in the case of appointive officers, and by the council in the case of elective officers. Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer. The appointing officer or the clerk, as the case may be[,] shall announce the resignation of any officer to the council at its next meeting.  
Sec. 4.12 - Removal of officers. 
(a)  With the consent of the council, the mayor may remove any appointive officer whose appointment was required to be approved by the council. He may suspend any such officer pending an investigation of any complaint or charge against him. 
(b)  Officers appointed by the mayor not requiring council confirmation, may be suspended or removed by him at any time.  
Sec. 4.13 - Recall. 
An elective officer may be recalled, and the vacancy thereby created shall be filled, in the manner prescribed by law. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for recall of its officers, MCL 117.4i(6); recall generally, MCL 168.951 et seq. See also Mich. Const. 1963, Art. 11, § 8.  
Sec. 4.14 - Filling vacancies. 
(a)  If a vacancy occurs in the office of city clerk, city treasurer, or one of the five city council districts, other than by recall, the council shall, within thirty days thereafter fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term thereof. 
(b)  If a vacancy occurs in the membership of council at-large district, the unexpired term of such member shall be filled by the person receiving the highest number of votes of those who did not finish in the top two at the last council election. If for any reason said person would not then qualify for said office, the unexpired term would pass to the next highest eligible vote recipient of said election. However, if the vacancy occurs in the membership of any council position within forty days prior to a regular city election, it shall not be filled. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, if a vacancy occurs in an appointive office, such vacancy shall be filled within thirty days thereafter in the manner provided for making the original appointment: provided that such time may be extended, for not to exceed sixty days[,] by council resolution setting forth the reasons therefor. (Amended by electors on 11-8-77; amended by electors on 11-2-10)  
Sec. 4.15 - Delivery of office to successor. 
Whenever an officer or employee resigns, or is removed from office, or his tenure in office expires, he shall deliver, forthwith, to his successor in the office or to the mayor all books, records, papers, moneys, and effects in his custody which were necessary to or were obtained as a part of the performance of his duties. A violation of this section shall be a violation of this charter.  
CHAPTER 5. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 5.1 - The city council. 
(a)  The council shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be the mayor pro-tem. There shall be five council districts and one at-large district established in the city. One member shall be elected from each of the five (5) council districts and two members shall be elected at-large. Each candidate for a city council district shall be a resident of the council district he or she seeks to represent. A city council member's office is vacated if the member moves his or her residence outside of the council district that the member represents. 
(b)  Within 60 days after voter approval of the charter amendment herein, the redistricting commission shall meet and adopt an apportionment plan for the five (5) council districts. The redistricting commission shall consist of five (5) members, which shall be the three (3) members of the election commission and 2 citizen representatives appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The redistricting commission shall thereafter meet within 30 days after publication of the latest official figures of the federal decennial census to reapportion the city. The city redistricting commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure. Three (3) members constitute a quorum and all actions shall be by majority vote. The redistricting commission shall provide for equal representation for each single-member council district, and each single-member council district shall be as nearly equal in population and compact as is practicable based on the latest federal decennial census. In subsequent reapportionments, the apportionment plan shall make only incremental changes to the single-member election district boundaries that are necessary to accommodate population change requirements. Each single-member election district shall be designated by number. 
(c)  Candidates seeking nomination for the office of city council shall continue to follow section 13.6 of this charter. However, a candidate for city council district member may submit a petition signed by a number of voters of the district equal in number to not less than one per cent nor more than four per cent of the number of votes cast in the district for the office of secretary of state at the last preceding November election. In lieu of a petition, all candidates may submit a $100 filing fee pursuant to the provisions in section 13.6 of this charter. 
(d)  Any charter provision which requires the affirmative majority vote of five (5) members of the council is hereby superseded and shall hereafter require the affirmative vote of four (4) members of council. Any charter provision which requires a supermajority vote of six (6) members of the council is hereby superseded and shall hereafter require the affirmative vote of five (5) members of council. Four (4) members of city council shall constitute a quorum. 
(Amended by electors on 11-2-10) 
Editor's note— Compensation of the council has been superseded by Code of Ordinances Section 2-181 et seq., which created the Local Officers Compensation Commission pursuant to MCL 117.5c. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for election of a body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a).  
Sec. 5.2 - Organization of the council. 
The council shall meet and organize on the first Monday following each regular city election. At such meeting, or within two weeks thereafter, the council shall appoint such standing committees as it shall deem fit and do such other acts as may be required for its organization and the conduct of its business. The council shall appoint a secretary of the council who shall attend all its meetings and keep a permanent journal, in [the] English language, of its proceedings, which journal shall become official when approved by the council and filed with the clerk. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal of every session, MCL 117.3(m).  
Sec. 5.3 - Meetings of the council. 
(a)  The council shall meet in the established council chambers or such other place as may be established by ordinance and shall hold at least two regular meetings in each month. All regular meetings of the council shall be held in the evening at the time and on the days established by ordinance. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the council shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next secular day which is not a holiday. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council shall be held at the regular meeting place of the council. Special meetings shall be called by the secretary of the council on the written request of the mayor or any three members of the council, on at least six hours written notice to each member of the council, designating the time and purpose of such meeting, and served personally on each member of the council, or left at his usual place of residence by the secretary of the council or by someone designated by him. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements for the calling of special meetings, any special meeting of the council shall be a legal special meeting if all members are present thereat, or in the event that any member or members be absent, if all absent members have, in writing, waived the requirement that notice be given: provided, that a quorum be present. At the time of sending out or the delivery of notices for any special meeting, a copy of the notice of such meeting shall be also sent out or delivered to the offices of the newspaper or newspapers published in the city. Proof of the service of notices required by this section or of the waiver thereof shall be entered in the journal of such meeting. (Amended by electors on 4-3-61) 
(c)  No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the council, except that stated in the notice of the meeting. 
(d)  All regular and special meetings of the council shall be public meetings and the public shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(e)  Five members of the council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all of its meetings. In the absence of a quorum, any number less than a quorum may adjourn any meeting to a later date. 
(f)  The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal, in the English language, or all its proceedings. The journal of each meeting of the council shall be signed by the secretary of the council. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be taken by "yes" or "no" votes and shall be entered upon the record, except that, where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. The public shall have access to the minutes and records of all regular and special meetings of the council. 
(g)  The secretary of the council shall prepare an agenda of business to be considered at each regular council meeting, and, except when this rule is waived by the affirmative vote of five members of the council, no item of business shall be placed on the agenda for a council meeting, unless notice thereof was filed in the office of the secretary of the council by 5:00 o'clock, p.m., on the third secular day preceding such meeting. The council shall prescribe by rule the items of routine business which shall be placed on each agenda without the necessity of giving notice thereof to the secretary of the council. The council may consider any matter not on the agenda by the vote of five members. 
(h)  Each member of the council shall attend all council meetings. The council may compel the attendance of its own members and of all other officers and department heads of the city at its meetings, and may enforce fines for nonattendance in such amount and manner as it may, by ordinance, prescribe. Any member of the council, or other officer of the city, who refuses to attend such meetings, for reasons other than confining illness, or to conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter. The police chief, or such other person as the council shall designate, shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms of the council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section to maintain order at council meetings. 
(i)  Each member of the council shall vote on each question before the council for a determination, unless excused therefrom by the affirmative vote of at least five of the members, but no member of the council shall vote on any question upon which he has a private interest or a financial interest other than as a citizen of the city. If a question is raised under this section at any council meeting, such question shall be determined before the main question shall be voted on, but the council member affected shall not vote on such determination. 
(j)  Except in those cases where a large majority is required by law or the provisions of this charter, no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or passed, nor shall any other official action be taken, except by the affirmative vote of at least five members. 
Editor's note— The Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.) supersedes all local Charter provisions which relate to requirements for meetings of local public bodies to be open to the public. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that all meetings of the council shall be open to the public, MCL 117.3(l); mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal of every session, MCL 117.3(m).  
Sec. 5.4 - Health functions of council. 
To the extent and for the time that the health functions of the city are joined with or absorbed by the health department of the county of Macomb, as provided or permitted by law, the powers normally exercised by boards of health in cities shall be exercised for the city by such health department. In the event that the health department of Macomb county shall cease to exist or to exercise and perform any of the health functions of cities which are normally exercised by the boards of health thereof, the council shall constitute the board of health of the city and shall exercise and perform such functions.  
Sec. 5.5 - Restrictions of power of the council. 
The council shall not have the power to make any contract with or give any official position to any person who is in default to the city. Except in the course of an investigation, neither the council, nor any of its committees shall deal directly with any appointive administrative officer or department of the city, but shall conduct its affairs with such officers and departments through the mayor. Further, the council shall not have the power to sell any park, cemetery, or any part thereof, except where such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, or any property bordering on a water front, or to engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of ten cents per capita, unless approved by three-fifths of the electors of the city, voting thereon at any general or special election.  
CHAPTER 6. - CITY LEGISLATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 
 
Sec. 6.1 - Legislative power. 
The legislative power of the city is vested exclusively in the council, except as otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a).  
Sec. 6.2 - Prior legislation preserved. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the Charter Township of Warren and of each administrative agency of the township, to the extent that they are consistent with the provisions of this charter, which are in force on the effective date of this charter, shall continue in full force as ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the city, until repealed or amended.  
Sec. 6.3 - Introduction, consideration, and style of ordinances. 
(a)  Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. The style of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, "The City of Warren Ordains:". 
(b)  Each ordinance, after adoption, shall be identified by a number. 
(c)  An ordinance may be repealed or amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner provided in this section. An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number only. 
(d)  If a section of an ordinance is amended it shall be re-enacted and published at length: provided, that this requirement shall not apply to the schedules of one-way streets and of parking limitations contained in any traffic ordinance. 
(e)  Each ordinance shall be recorded by the clerk, forthwith, in the ordinance book, and the enactment of such ordinance shall be certified by him therein.  
Sec. 6.4 - Publication of ordinances. 
(a)  Before an ordinance may become effective, it shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. The effective date of an ordinance shall be stated therein, but shall not be less than twenty days from the date of its adoption, unless it is declared by the affirmative vote of not less than six members of the council to be an emergency ordinance. 
(b)  In the event of the codification of the ordinances, the deposit of two hundred printed copies in the office of the clerk, available for public inspection and sale at cost, shall constitute publication thereof. 
(c)  All codes and other ordinance subject matter, which are or may be permitted by law to be adopted by reference, shall be published in the manner permitted and required by law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k); codification authority, MCL 117.5b; authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k).  
Sec. 6.5 - Penalties. 
The council shall provide in the ordinance code for the punishment of violations thereof. Such punishment may be by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety days or both, in the discretion of the court. Such punishment may be provided specifically for any specific part or portion of an ordinance code, where a limitation upon or a greater punishment is desired by the council than that prescribed in the code for the violation of other portions thereof, but such punishment shall not exceed the limitations provided herein, unless otherwise provided or permitted by law. Imprisonment for violations of ordinances may be in the city or the county jail, or in any work house of the state which is authorized by law to receive prisoners of the city. 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i(10).  
Sec. 6.6 - Time limit for prosecution of ordinance violations. 
No prosecution for the violation of an ordinance shall be commenced more than two years after the commission of the offense.  
Sec. 6.7 - Proceedings for prosecution of ordinance violations. 
Except as may be inconsistent with or otherwise provided in chapter 12 of this charter, all proceedings relative to the arrest, custody, and trial of persons accused of the violation of ordinance shall be governed by and conform, as nearly as may be, with the provisions of law relating to proceedings in criminal cases cognizable by justices of the peace. 
State Law reference— Criminal procedure for ordinance violations, MCL 764.9a et seq.  
Sec. 6.8 - Veto of council action. 
No ordinance or resolution of the council, except a resolution disapproving an appointment of the mayor, shall have any force or effect if, within ninety-six hours after the adoption thereof, the mayor, or the mayor pro-tem when acting in his stead, shall file in the office of the clerk a notice, in writing, suspending the operation of such ordinance or resolution and setting forth his reasons therefor. In each case where the mayor shall file such notice, such ordinance, or resolution shall not go into effect, unless the council shall, at one of the next two regular meetings of the council thereafter vote to adopt such ordinance or resolution by the affirmative vote of not less than six of its members. If any such ordinance or resolution shall be passed, it shall become effective according to the terms thereof as originally adopted, except that it shall not be effective prior to ten days after the time of its last adoption as required herein. (Amended by electors on 4-3-61)  
Sec. 6.9 - Initiative or referendary petition. 
An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than fifteen per cent of the registered electors of the city. Before being circulated for signatures, such petitions may be approved as to form by the city attorney. Such petition may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was signed in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the clerk who shall, within ten days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. Any signatures obtained more than ninety days before the filing of such petition with the clerk shall not be counted. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this section, the clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition and ten days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the clerk shall present the petition to the council at its next regular meeting. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g).  
Sec. 6.10 - Same; council procedure. 
Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the clerk, the council shall, within thirty days either: 
(a)  If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition or determine to submit the proposal to the electors; or 
(b)  if it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors.  
Sec. 6.11 - Same; submission to electors. 
Should the council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any purpose, or, in the discretion of the council, at a special election. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by law.  
Sec. 6.12 - Same; status of ordinances adopted. 
An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the council for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Should two or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions.  
Sec. 6.13 - Same; ordinance suspended. 
The certification by the clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance to which such petition refers shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the council or final determination by the electors.  
CHAPTER 7. - CITY ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 7.1 - Administrative responsibility. 
The executive or administrative powers of the city, except as herein otherwise provided, are hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the mayor and the administrative officers, boards, and commissions prescribed or permitted to be created by this charter.  
Sec. 7.2 - Election and term of office. 
A mayor, a clerk, and a treasurer shall be elected at each regular city election. The mayor shall be a person who has been a resident of the city for at least three years immediately prior to the filing of his nominating petition or declaration of candidacy, and who possesses the further qualifications prescribed in chapter 4 of this charter. 
Editor's note— Three-year residency requirement for mayor held violative of equal protection by Bolanowski v. Raich, 330 FS 725 (U.S. E.D. Mich. 1971). 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for election of a mayor, and election or appointment of a clerk and a treasurer, MCL 117.3(a).  
Sec. 7.3 - Duties of the mayor. 
Under the provisions of this charter, insofar as is required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the mayor shall be the administrative and executive head of this city. He shall be a conservator of the peace and may exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder. He shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances and regulations of the council, and the authority of the city government. The powers and duties of the mayor shall include the following duties and functions: 
(1)  Keep an office in a convenient place to be provided by the council; 
(2)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced within the city; 
(3)  Except as in this charter otherwise provided, have power of appointment and removal over officers, departmental directors, and the members of commissions and boards; 
(4)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(5)  Authenticate by his signature such instruments and proceedings as are required to be authenticated by him by law or by the council; 
(6)  Prepare the annual budget proposal and present it to the council with an explanation thereof at the time and in the manner required by this charter; 
(7)  Keep the council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the city; 
(8)  On or before the first day of September in each year, prepare and submit to the council and the public, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the city during the prior fiscal year; 
(9)  Recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(10)  Be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments of the city government; 
(11)  Approve the administrative rules and regulations of the several directors, commissions, or boards in charge of the departments of the city government, before such rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk; 
(12)  Require and receive monthly reports relative to the activities of each department from the respective department heads; 
(13)  Act as and be the sole spokesman for the administrative service and officers of the city, except for the clerk, the treasurer, and the assessor insofar as their duties are provided by law; 
(14)  Exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city which are not imposed by law or ordinance on some other city officer or agency; 
(15)  Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, or as may be required of him by ordinance or by direction of the council; 
(16)  Keep himself informed and report to the council, either of his own accord or in answer to questions put by the council, concerning the work of the several administrative officers and departments of the city and, to that end, secure from the officers and the heads of all administrative departments such information and periodical or special reports as he or the council may deem necessary; 
(17)  Perform all acts required by law, whether herein specifically enumerated or not. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the qualifications and duties of its officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Sec. 7.4 - Mayor pro-tem. 
The person who receives the highest number of votes for election to the council in the at-large district shall be mayor pro-tem during his or her term of office. In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, or his inability to perform the duties of the office by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, the mayor pro-tem shall be the acting mayor. In case there shall be a vacancy in the office of the mayor pro-tem or he or she shall be unable to perform the duties of his office by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, the order of succession to fill the vacancy, either temporarily or permanently, shall be according to the number of votes received by the several members of the council, in descending order. In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall succeed to the office of mayor for the balance of the mayor's term, and shall receive the compensation of the mayor for that time. In the event that the mayor pro-tem shall succeed to the office of mayor, a vacancy shall be deemed to exist on the council, which shall be filled by appointment in the manner provided in this charter. If any mayor pro-tem shall refuse to succeed to the office of mayor, the order of succession to succeed to such office shall be as herein provided for succeeding to the office of mayor pro-tem. 
(Amended by electors on 11-2-10)  
Sec. 7.5 - Salary. 
The mayor shall be paid a salary of $14,000 per annum. Such salary shall be payable monthly and, except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid for his services to the city. 
Editor's note— Compensation of the mayor has been superseded by Code of Ordinances Section 2-181 et seq., which created the Local Officers Compensation Commission pursuant to MCL 117.5c. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of its officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Sec. 7.6 - Administrative appointments. 
(a)  With the exception of the board of trustees of the City of Warren Employees Retirement System which shall be filled pursuant to section 16.3 of this charter, the mayor shall appoint the appointive officers of the city, the directors of the departments of the city, and members of the commissions and boards of the city, whether the same be established by this charter, or by ordinance: Provided, however, that appointments to the offices of city attorney and assessor shall not be effective, until confirmed by the council. In any case where the council shall not act upon the mayor's appointment of a person as city attorney or assessor at the regular council meeting at which it is announced or at the next subsequent regular council meeting, such appointment shall be deemed to have been confirmed by virtue of such failure to act. The mayor shall certify to the clerk, in writing, the names of each appointee to an appointive office within five days after such appointment is made and shall announce such appointment to the council at the next regular council meeting following the date of such appointment. The term of office of each appointee may be terminated forthwith, if the council, at such meeting or at its next subsequent regular council meeting[,] shall disapprove such appointment by a resolution which shall state the reasons for such disapproval. In the event of such a disapproval, the mayor may reappoint the person disapproved. If such appointee be again disapproved by the council, the mayor may not again make such appointment in the calendar year in which disapproval occurred. (Amended by electors on 11-8-77) 
(b)  The appointive administrative officers, the director of any department or member of any commission or board of the city government, and such directors and members as are appointed by the mayor shall hold office at the discretion of the mayor; provided, that, if a definite term of office is specified in this charter, the person holding that office shall hold his office for the full term so specified, unless a vacancy is created in such office as in this charter provided.  
Sec. 7.7 - Member of certain boards. 
The mayor shall be a non-voting member of all boards and commissions of the city.  
Sec. 7.8 - Salaries. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the salaries of the directors of the city departments shall be set in the annual city budget. The salaries and remuneration of the personnel of the departments of the city government shall be subject to budget appropriations.  
Sec. 7.9 - Departmental rules; appointing authority. 
Subject to the provisions of this charter, the director, commission, or board in charge of each department of the city government shall formulate all rules and regulations required for the organization and conduct of his or its department and of the divisions under his or its jurisdiction which shall be approved by the mayor and shall thereupon become effective when filed in the office of the clerk. Unless otherwise provided in this charter, each such director, commission, or board shall be the appointing authority for his or its department and, as such, shall be responsible for the appointment of all division heads, and personnel of his or its department.  
Sec. 7.10 - Department of law. 
(a)  The administrative head of the department of law shall be the city attorney, who shall be directly responsible to the council. The duties of the department shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Acting as legal advisor to the council and shall attend its meetings, unless excused therefrom; 
(2)  Advising officers and boards in writing, in matters relating to their official duties, when so requested by them; 
(3)  Prosecuting charter and ordinance violations and conducting such cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals as the council may direct; 
(4)  Preparing or reviewing all ordinances, contracts, bonds, and other written instruments which are submitted by the council or by the officers and boards in matters of legal nature relating to the affairs of the city. 
(b)  No board or officer shall employ or retain special counsel in any matter relating to the affairs of the city without first securing the approval of such employment or retainer by the council.  
Sec. 7.11 - Department of the city clerk. 
The administrative head of the department of the city clerk shall be the city clerk, in this charter called "clerk". The compensation of the clerk shall be $9,500.00 per year, payable monthly. Such compensation shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid for his services to the city. [5] His duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  He shall certify, by his signature, all ordinances, resolutions, and other actions of the council and shall keep a record thereof, which shall be public; 
(2)  He shall, upon request, administer any oath required for municipal purposes by law and the ordinances of the city; 
(3)  He shall be custodian of all papers, documents, surety bonds, and records which pertain to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided; 
(4)  He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall attest such documents and instruments; 
(5)  He shall give ample notice to the council of the expiration or termination of any franchise, contract, or agreement to which the city is a party, and to officers, personally, of any official bonds required of them also expiration of terms; 
(6)  He shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this charter [or] any ordinance of the city; 
(7)  He shall be the chief elections officer of the city; 
(8)  He shall be the custodian of the records of each board, except as otherwise provided for in this charter, but may act in such capacity by designated deputies or representatives; 
(9)  He shall perform all duties required of him by law and the ordinances of the city. 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Compensation of the city clerk has been superseded by Code of Ordinances Section 2-181 et seq., which created the Local Affairs Compensation Commission pursuant to MCL 117.5c. 
 
Sec. 7.12 - Department of the treasury. 
(a)  The head of the department of the treasury shall be the treasurer. The compensation of the treasurer shall be $9,500.00 per year, payable monthly. Such compensation shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid for his services to the city. [6] 
(b)  He shall receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the city, that may be collected by any official or employee, including license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges belonging to and payable to the city and also moneys available to the city from the state, county, or federal government, or any court, and shall have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city. He shall deposit all such funds in such depositories as may be designated by the council in accordance with law and shall pay no money out of the treasury, except pursuant to authority of the council signed by the secretary of the council and countersigned by the controller. 
(c)  He shall have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity and shall have and be responsible for the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and for the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration, or exchange. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Compensation of the city treasurer has been superseded by Code of Ordinances Section 2-181 et seq., which created the Local Officers Compensation Commission pursuant to MCL 117.5c. 
 
Sec. 7.13 - Deputies. 
The clerk and the treasurer, and such other administrative officers as the council shall permit to have deputies, shall appoint and remove their own deputies.  
Sec. 7.14 - Department of assessment. 
(a)  The head of the department of assessment shall be the assessor. He shall possess all the powers vested in, and is charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by law. 
(b)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by the ordinances and directives of the council, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter.  
Sec. 7.15 - Department of accounting. 
The head of the department of accounting shall be the controller. He shall prescribe the organization of his department, subject to the provisions of this charter, and shall provide for the duties, authorities, and responsibilities of the division heads, insofar as the same does not interfere with the performance of any duty or act which is required of a division head by law, to the end that the financial affairs of the city may be systematic and shall accurately reflect the financial status of the city's government at all times. He shall: 
(1)  Collect for the mayor operating expense estimates and the capital estimates for each annual budget; 
(2)  Submit to the council at any meeting during the next following month, monthly financial statements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; 
(3)  Prepare for submission to the mayor and council, at the end of each fiscal year, a complete statement and report of the city's financial status: provided, that such statement shall not constitute or stand in lieu of the annual audit required in Chapter 8 of this charter; 
(4)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city and each of its offices, departments, and boards, and, supervise the disbursement of all city moneys and have control over all expenditures thereof, so as to insure that the budget appropriations are not exceeded: provided, that such accounting system shall be in conformance with any uniform system of accounts as may be required by law; 
(5)  Check all proposed expenditures and, before any contract which requires the expenditure of public money shall be effective, certify to the availability of appropriated funds therefor. The appropriation under which it is made shall be charged with the amount of the expenditure proposed to be made under such contract. If any such contract shall not be entered into, the amount so charged against such appropriation shall be reinstated and shall be available for other purposes within the intent of the appropriation; 
(6)  Create and be responsible for a division of purchasing which shall serve all departments of the city.  
Sec. 7.16 - Public safety. 
For the purpose of maintaining peace and order in the city and for protecting persons and property, both a police department and a fire department shall be maintained. Such departments shall not be combined.  
Sec. 7.17 - Department heads of the police and fire departments. 
The executive head of the police department shall be the police commissioner and the executive head of the fire department shall be the fire commissioner. Subject to the provisions of section 7.6 of this charter, both of these department heads shall be appointed by the mayor and shall be under his supervision and control, and shall be responsible to him in all respects. Each of the said executive heads shall, subject to the approval of the mayor, organize and conduct the department under him in a manner consistent with good practices for cities comparable to the City of Warren.  
Sec. 7.18 - Police and fire department personnel. 
(a)  Each member of the police and fire department shall, before entering upon the duties of his office or employment, take an oath similar to that required of officers of the city and shall file a copy thereof which is subscribed by him with the clerk. 
(b)  The plan of civil service for policemen and firemen as established by Act No. 78 of the Public Acts of 1933[1935], [7] as amended, is hereby continued under this charter and incorporated therein by reference, and nothing is hereby added to or deleted from such act, as amended heretofore or hereafter, by such incorporation. (Amended by electors on 4-3-61) 
[(c)]  Full time policemen and volunteer firemen of the Village of Warren on the effective date of this charter shall be deemed to have been covered by the civil service plan of the Charter Township of Warren as though they had been policemen and firemen of the township, and shall have seniority in service as though they had been policemen and firemen of the township, but shall not have seniority in rank: provided, that to be so eligible for employment by the city, a volunteer fireman of the village shall declare his intention to become a full time fireman of the city and shall qualify for and assume such position on or before July 1, 1957. The civil service commission shall provide a plan for restoring any rank lost by policemen and firemen of the Village of Warren, by reason of their inclusion in the police department and the fire department of the city under authority of this section, at the earliest reasonable time. 
(d)  No officer or employee of the city shall require any officer or employee of the police department to be on duty in such employment for more than eight consecutive hours out of any twenty-four hour period or more than forty hours out of each week: provided, that this requirement shall not apply: 
(1)  To the head of the police department, or 
(2)  To any of said employees when required to remain on duty by the head of his department or proper subordinate officers or employees in case of public necessity arising out of riot or emergency, or for disciplinary reasons. 
(e)  No officer or employee of the city shall require any person in the fire department who is employed in fire fighting or subject to the hazards thereof to be on duty in such employment more than twenty-four hours, or to be off duty less than twenty-four consecutive hours out of any forty-eight hour period. Each employee shall be entitled to an additional twenty-four hours off duty in every eight day period, thereby requiring firemen to work not more than an average of sixty-three hours per week: provided, that this requirement shall not apply: 
(1)  To the chief officer or to his chief assistant; 
(2)  To the employees of the department who are subject to call; or 
(3)  To employees when required to remain on duty by the chief officer of the fire department or his aides and assistants in cases of public necessity arising from great conflagration, riot, flood, epidemic of pestilence or disease, necessary absence of regularly employed men due to military service, or for disciplinary reasons. 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— See MCL 39.501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7.19 - Functions of the police department. 
(a)  The police force shall have and exercise all the immunities, privileges, and powers of peace officers and sheriffs granted by law, for the preservation of quiet, good order in the city, and for the safety of persons and property therein. The officers and employees of the department shall possess and exercise the powers of arrest granted to peace officers by law and shall promptly take any person who is arrested before the proper magistrate or court to be dealt with according to law. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the police force of the city to see that all ordinances and regulations of the council made for the preservation of peace and good order and for the safety and protection of the inhabitants of the city are promptly enforced. 
(c)  For the preservation of peace and good order, and as a peace officer, each policeman shall be and is hereby vested, within the territorial limits of the city, with all the powers conferred by law upon sheriffs, and shall have and is hereby vested with all the powers given by law to constables for such purposes. 
(d)  Members of the police department shall have power to serve and execute all processes directed or delivered to them, in all proceedings for violations of the ordinances of the city. Such process may be served by such police officers anywhere within the county of Macomb. 
(e)  When any person has committed or is suspected of having committed any crime or misdemeanor within the city or has escaped from the city jail, the members of the police department of the city shall have the same right, and immunities within respect thereto, to pursue, arrest, and detain such person outside the city limits as the sheriff of the county. Violations of city ordinances shall be deemed to be misdemeanors for the purpose of establishing the power of police officers in making arrests therefor. 
(f)  The council shall have authority to vest the police department with such further powers as may be necessary for the preservation of peace and good order within the city.  
Sec. 7.20 - Functions of the fire fighting and preventing force. 
(a)  The fire fighting and prevention forces shall be responsible for the use, care, and management of the city's fire fighting apparatus and property. They shall conduct such supervisory and educational programs within the city and with its inhabitants and industrial and business interests as will diminish the risk of fire. The fire commissioner, or any person lawfully acting in his stead or under his authority may command any person present at a fire to aid in the extinguishment thereof and to assist in the protection of property thereat. If any person shall wilfully disobey any such lawful requirement or other lawful order of any such officer, he shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter. 
(b)  Whenever any building in the city shall be on fire the fire commissioner may, with the consent of the mayor or any two councilmen, order the building, or any building which they may deem likely to communicate fire to other buildings, or any part of such building, to be pulled down and destroyed. No action shall be maintained against any person, or against the city therefor. Any person having an interest in a building or the contents thereof, so destroyed or injured may, within three months thereafter, apply to the council, in writing, to estimate and pay the damages he has sustained, provided he has no other recourse for the value thereof. If any such application shall have been made, the council shall either pay to the applicant such sum as shall be agreed upon by them and the applicant for such damages, or if no agreement shall be effected, shall proceed to ascertain the amount of such damages, and shall provide for the appraisal, assessment, collection, and payment thereof, in such manner as may be prescribed by the council. 
(c)  In appraising and assessing the damages incurred by an applicant, on account of the pulling down or destroying of any building, as above provided, there shall be taken into account the probability of the same having been destroyed or injured by fire, if it had not been so pulled down or destroyed. Whenever the proceedings for appraising and assessing such damages have been completed, and have been finally confirmed, in accordance with the methods prescribed by the council, the tender by the council of payment of the value as so appraised or assessed, shall be deemed as full satisfaction of all of said damages of the claimant.  
Sec. 7.21 - Department of public service. 
(a)  The department of public service shall be charged with and responsible for the creation, maintenance, and lighting of all streets, alleys, public buildings, the city's water supply system, sewers, sewage disposal facilities, drains, public places, and parks; with the operation and maintenance of the motor transportation facilities of the city; refuse disposal; and shall make all required inspections of buildings, excavations, or any type of structural work in the city and shall issue all permits therefor which are required by law and the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The department of public service shall be under the general management and control of the director of public service, who, with the consent of the mayor, shall establish such divisions within his department, in addition to those herein prescribed, as shall be required to efficiently and adequately carry on the functions and duties of the department. Each division head of the department shall be under the direction of and directly responsible to the director of public service. 
(c)  The division of water supply shall be responsible for the construction, maintenance, and management of the water works and water supply of the city, and the distribution of the same to consumers. The administrative head of the division of water supply shall be the superintendent of water supply, who shall perform such duties as are required of him by law, the ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations of the director of public service. 
(d)  The division of engineering shall be responsible for all engineering work and building inspection required in the administration of the functions of the city government. The division shall be charged with the preparation of all necessary plats, plans, blue prints, maps, surveys, diagrams, and estimates of costs required by the council or the administrative service of the city relating to the buildings, grounds, streets, parks, and public improvements of the city. The administrative head of the division of engineering shall be the city engineer, who shall be a registered engineer of the state of Michigan. He shall have and exercise within the city the powers and duties that are conferred by law upon county surveyors and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by law, the ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations of the director of public service. No member of this division shall do any private work in the city which requires the approval of any city officer or department.  
Sec. 7.22 - Planning department. 
(a)  There is hereby created a planning department, the administrative head of which shall be the planning commission. The voting members of the planning commission shall be nine in number and shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the council. The term of office of such members of the planning commission shall be for three years and the terms of the members first appointed shall be such that, thereafter, the terms of three members will expire in each year. The membership of the commission shall represent different professions and occupations having an interest in the growth and development of the city. Two members of the council, to be selected by the council annually in the month of April, shall serve as non-voting members of the planning commission, for terms of one year each, beginning on the first day of May following their appointment. 
(b)  The planning commission shall possess and exercise all of the powers and functions of planning commissions under the provisions of Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931 [8], and such amendments and superseding acts as may be enacted. Commencing with the year 1958, the department shall, in collaboration with the other officers and boards, prepare its recommendations for a program for capital improvement expenditures for public structures and improvements during the ensuing six years and submit the same to the mayor and council not later than the first day of February of each year. Proposed improvements listed in such program shall be set forth for each year in the general order of their priority and recommendations shall be made for the financing thereof. 
(c)  The master plan of the township of Warren, as in effect on the effective date of this charter shall constitute the master plan of the city, subject to the provisions of Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of 1931*. 
(d)  The commission may appoint a planning director who may be the executive officer and secretary of the department and directly responsible to the planning commission. 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— See MCL 125.31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7.23 - Library commission. 
(a)  There shall be a library commission (consisting of seven) qualified electors having the qualifications required of city officers, one of whom shall be the treasurer. The members of the library commission shall be appointed by the mayor. The terms of members of the library commission shall be for three years and the terms of the members first appointed shall be such that the term of two members will expire in each year. 
(b)  Members of the library commission shall not receive any compensation for their services on, or in connection with, the affairs of the commission. 
(c)  The library commission shall have the power and authority to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the control of the Warren Public Library, and shall approve and appoint the city librarian. 
(d)  The library commission shall have the power to authorize expenditures for the operation of the library; provided that such expenditures do not exceed the allowances or appropriations made therefor by the council. For the purpose of such appropriations, the council shall appropriate and levy such tax as is required for participation in state or other library aid which is available by law, but not to exceed 1.35 mills for such purposes. 
(e)  On or before the first day of February of each year, the library commission shall submit to the controller an estimate in detail of the expenditures of said commission for the ensuing year, to be included in the yearly budget. 
(Amended by electors on 8-3-10) 
State Law reference— Libraries generally, MCL 397.201 et seq.  
Sec. 7.24 - Department of parks and recreation. 
The administrative head of the department of parks and recreation shall be the director of recreation. The director of recreation shall be responsible to the mayor for the conduct of the administration of the affairs of its [his] department and shall organize and conduct the affairs of the recreation facilities and programs of the city in a manner consistent with the best practices therefor. 
State Law reference— Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.  
Sec. 7.25 - Additional administrative powers and duties. 
From time to time, the council may, by ordinance prescribe additional powers and duties, not inconsistent with this charter, to be exercised by appropriate administrative officers, departments, and boards or commissions.  
Sec. 7.26 - Additional departments and agencies. 
The council may create and maintain such additional administrative agencies and boards or commissions as it shall deem necessary for the conduct of the administrative affairs of the city: provided, that no such board or commission or agency shall be given any powers and duties which overlap or interfere with the powers and duties imposed upon any office or department created by this charter. Each such board or agency shall be created by ordinance[,] which ordinance shall conform to the provisions of this charter relating thereto and shall clearly set forth the powers and duties thereof and the standards for the acts to be performed. Each such administrative agency, board, or commission shall be responsible to the mayor for the conduct of the affairs of the city entrusted to it and to the council for the carrying out of its general policies pertaining thereto.  
Sec. 7.27 - Nepotism. 
Except and unless relatives by blood or marriage of any officer of the city, within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city at the time of the election or appointment of such officers, such relatives shall be disqualified from holding any appointive office or from being employed by the city, during the term for which such officer was elected or appointed. If the status of relationship between any officer or employee of the city and any other officer of the city changes to a relationship prohibited hereby after one year following the employment of such person or election or appointment of such officer, the provisions of this section shall not apply. No two or more persons who are within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity shall be employed within the same department of the city.  
Sec. 7.28 - Civil service. 
Within one year after the effective date of this charter, the council shall establish, by ordinance, and shall thereafter maintain a civil service plan of personnel management for the city. Such ordinance, when adopted, shall provide a professional and impartial approach to municipal personnel problems, based solely on the fitness, training, and experience of employees and expectant employees of the city, with no discrimination on account of racial, political, or religious backgrounds or opinions.  
Sec. 7.29 - Employees' group benefits. 
The council shall have power to make available to the elective and appointive officers and employees of the city, Federal Social Security, and recognized standard plans of group life, hospital, medical and surgical, health, accident, and other forms of group insurance and this shall not constitute or be considered as additional compensation. (Amended by electors on 9-1-64) 
State Law reference— Permissible for Charter to provide for a system of civil service for employees, MCL 117.4i(7); permissible for Charter to provide for a system of compensation for its employees and their dependents in the case of disability, injury or death of such employees, MCL 117.4i(8).  
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8.1 - Fiscal year. 
Beginning with the calendar year, 1957, the fiscal and budget year of the city, and of all its agencies, shall begin on the first day of July of each year.  
Sec. 8.2 - Budget procedure. 
Not later than the first Monday of February of each year, each officer, department, board and commission of the city shall submit to the controller an itemized estimate of its expected income and expenditures during the next fiscal year for the department or activities under its control. The controller shall compile and submit to the mayor, not later than the second Monday in March of each year, a budget form setting forth in a simple column the budget requests of each officer and department of the city. The mayor shall review such budget form and budget requests and in a column parallel to and adjacent to that containing such budget requests shall enter his budgetary recommendations for each item requested by the several officers and departments with such additions thereto and deletions therefrom as he shall deem proper and, not later than the second Monday in April of each year he shall submit to the council a recommended budget for the next fiscal year which is within the tax limit and other revenue sources of the city. Such recommended budget shall include therein, at least the following information: 
(1)  The estimates of the several officers and departments as received by the controller; 
(2)  The detailed estimates of the mayor, with supporting explanations of proposed expenditures of each office and department of the city, with a comparison of the actual appropriations and expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year, in full, and the appropriations for the current fiscal year, together with the expenditures for such year to January first, and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(3)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized, and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(4)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of the amounts estimated for and actually received from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year, in full, for the current fiscal year to January first, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(5)  A statement of the estimated accumulated cash and unencumbered balances, or deficits, at the end of the current fiscal year; 
(6)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.  
Sec. 8.3 - Further budget procedure. 
The recommended budget of the mayor together with his supporting schedules, information, and messages, shall be reviewed by the council. The budget proposal of the mayor, together with his recommendations and its supporting schedules and information shall become a public record, a copy of which shall be available for public inspection in the office of the clerk, on and after the fourth Monday of April of each year.  
Sec. 8.4 - Budget hearing. 
A public hearing on the budget shall be held not less than one week before its final adoption at such time as the council shall direct. Notice of the public hearing shall be published by the clerk at least one week in advance thereof.  
Sec. 8.5 - Adoption of budget. 
(a)  Not later than the third Monday in May of each year, the council shall, by resolution, adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and make an appropriation of the money needed therefor. Such resolution shall designate the sum to be raised by taxation for the general purposes of the city and for the payments of principal and interest on its indebtedness. Failure to adopt such resolution within the time herein set shall not invalidate either the budget or the tax levy therefor. 
(b)  A copy of the appropriations for each fiscal year, certified by the clerk, shall be furnished to the controller within ten days after the date of the adoption of the budget resolution. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h).  
Sec. 8.6 - Budget control. 
(a)  Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, except in accordance with an appropriation for such purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation during the fiscal year. The council only, by resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than six of its members, may appropriate funds in the hands of the treasurer or transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, including the contingent account of the general fund of the city or any portion thereof from any account, department, or agency to another. 
(b)  Expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingent account. Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation from such account shall be transferred to the appropriate account and the expenditure then charged thereto. 
(c)  During each month, the controller shall submit to the council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to the end of the preceding month; and, if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the council may, by resolution, reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
(d)  Within thirty days following the end of each fiscal year, the mayor shall file with the council a schedule of all encumbrances upon the budget appropriations existing at the end of the fiscal year, with his recommendations as to whether such encumbrances shall be paid from such budget appropriations or from the budget of the next fiscal year. The council shall determine from which appropriations such encumbrances shall be paid. The remaining balance in any budget appropriation, at the end of each fiscal year, except for the payment of indebtedness evidenced by bonds or notes of the city and interest thereon, shall revert to the contingent account of the general fund.  
Sec. 8.7 - Special accounts. 
(a)  The council may, by ordinance, establish, and maintain accounts for accumulating moneys to be used for acquiring, extending, altering, constructing, or repairing public improvements of any type and for the purchase of equipment of any type, in each case either for a specific item or items or for future unspecified public improvements or equipment, or both. 
(b)  Appropriations to such accounts may be made by the council either in the annual appropriation resolution or, from time to time during the fiscal year, from available funds, from whatever source derived which are not required for other appropriations or obligations of the city. Such accounts shall be continuing accounts and the balances therein at the end of each fiscal year shall remain a part thereof. 
(c)  Moneys which are accumulated for the purpose of public improvements, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall be used only at the direction of the council and only for the purpose provided in the original ordinance establishing each account, unless their use for some other municipal purpose be authorized by a majority vote of the electors of the city who vote on the propositions to amend such ordinance to provide for a change of the use of the moneys in such account. After the purpose of any such account has been fulfilled, any balance remaining therein may be transferred by the council to any other special account or to the general fund of the city. 
(d)  Moneys which are accumulated for the purpose of purchasing equipment, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall be expended only for the purposes provided in the ordinance establishing any such account, or as such ordinance may be amended from time to time, and, when no longer required for such purposes such moneys or any part thereof may be transferred to the general fund by a resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than six members of the council.  
Sec. 8.8 - Withdrawal of funds. 
Unless otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, all funds drawn from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to the authority and appropriation of the council. The controller, where necessary to expedite operating procedures, may authorize in writing, other officers and employees of the city to make minor disbursements from petty cash accounts.  
Sec. 8.9 - Notice to city of claim for injuries. 
The city shall not be liable in damages for injury to person or property by reason of negligence of the city, its officers, or employees, or by reason of any defective highway, public work, public service improvement, or facility of the city, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow, or other encumbrance thereon, unless, within sixty days after such injury occurred, the person damaged or his representative causes to be served upon the clerk a written notice, stating that such person intends to hold the city liable for such damages. Such notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of the injury, the manner in which it occurred, the nature of the act or defect complained of, the extent of the injury so far as known, and the names and addresses of witnesses known to the claimant. No person shall bring action against the city for damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless brought within the period prescribed by law, nor unless he has first presented to the clerk a claim in writing and under oath, setting forth specifically the nature and extent of the injury and the amount of damages claimed. Such claim shall be presented to the council for action. It shall be a sufficient bar to any action upon any such claim that the notice of injury and the claim in writing under oath, required by this section, were not filed within the time and in the manner herein provided. 
State Law reference— City liability for injury on public ways, MCL 691.1401 et seq.  
Sec. 8.10 - Municipal borrowing power. 
(a)  Subject to the applicable provisions of law, the city may borrow money for any purpose within the scope of its powers and permitted by law, and may issue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include, but not be limited to, the following types[:] 
(1)  General obligation bonds, the principal and interest of which are payable from taxes levied upon the taxable real and personal property in the city and for the payment of which the full faith and credit of the city are pledged, when authorized by a three-fifths vote of the electors having the constitutional qualifications for voting on the issuance of general obligation bonds, voting thereon at any general or special election; 
(2)  Special assessment bonds which are issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments for the purpose of defraying the cost of any one or more public improvements, which bonds shall be either solely an obligation of the special assessment district, or both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of the city; 
(3)  Revenue bonds, as authorized by law, which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement and do not constitute a general obligation of the city; 
(4)  Mortgage bonds, as authorized by law, for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility which the city is authorized by law to finance in this manner; 
(5)  Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the motor vehicle highway fund or any other fund of the state which the city may be permitted by law to pledge for the payment of the principal and interest thereof; 
(6)  Water main extension bonds, in an amount not to exceed two hundred thousand dollars, for the payment of which the full faith and credit of the city are pledged, for the refunding from time to time of moneys advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions as buildings are connected with such water main extensions, which bonds shall be payable in not more than thirty years; 
(7)  Tax anticipation notes, which may be issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes in or during the current or next succeeding fiscal years of the city or any other years permitted by law, in the manner and subject to any limitations provided by law; 
(8)  Calamity bonds, issued in case of fire, flood or other calamity for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property, in a sum not to exceed three-eighths of one per cent of the assessed value of the real and personal property in the city and shall become due in not more than five years. 
(b)  All collections on special assessment rolls or combination of rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund and shall be used for the purpose for which levied and for the payment of the principal and interest of bonds issued in anticipation of such special assessments. As to such of said bonds as are also a general obligation of the city, if there is any deficiency in a special assessment fund to meet the payment of the principal or interest to be paid therefrom moneys shall be advanced from the general funds of the city to meet such deficiency and shall be replaced in the general funds when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor. 
(c)  Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and the proceeds thereof shall not be used for any other purpose, except that, whenever the proceeds of any bond issue, or a part thereof, remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the council may, by the concurring vote of not less than six members, authorize the use of such unexpended and unencumbered funds; 
(1)  For the retirement of such bond issue, or 
(2)  If such bond issue has been fully retired or if any of such funds remain after such retirement, then for the retirement of other bonds or obligations of the city, or 
(3)  If there is no other indebtedness, then for such other purpose or purposes as may be permitted by law. 
(d)  No bond or other evidence of indebtedness, regardless of type or purpose, shall bear interest at a rate exceeding six per cent per annum. [10] 
(e)  All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be kept by the controller. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "cancelled." 
(f)  Any officer who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter. 
State Law reference— City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1); city authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(2); municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq. 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— MCL 133.1a, permits higher interest on obligations, notwithstanding Charter provisions. 
 
Sec. 8.11 - Limitations upon borrowing power. 
(a)  The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city; provided, that, in computing such net bonded indebtedness, there shall be excluded money borrowed under the provisions of section 8.10(a), clauses (2) to (8), inclusive, of this chapter. The resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness. 
(b)  No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and, if any such bonds are not sold within three years after authorization, such authorization shall be null and void. 
State Law reference— Limitation on net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL 117.4a(1).  
Sec. 8.12 - Depositories. 
The council shall designate depositories for city funds in accordance with law and shall provide by ordinance for the regular deposit of all city moneys. 
State Law reference— Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b.  
Sec. 8.13 - Independent audit. 
An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government at the close of each fiscal year, and shall be completed within ninety days thereafter. Special independent audits may be made at any time that the council may designate. All such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant designated by the council. The results of each such audit shall be made public in the manner that the council determines and copies thereof shall be placed in the office of the clerk, and of the controller.  
Sec. 8.14 - Annual report. 
The mayor shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city, after the completion of the annual audit. The report shall include condensed financial statements showing the results of all city operations, including statements for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Copies of such report shall be made available for public inspection and distribution at the office of the clerk and by such other method as the council and the mayor may determine.  
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9.1 - Power to tax; tax limit. 
The city shall have the power to assess taxes and to lay and collect rents, tolls and excises. The annual general ad valorem tax levy for municipal purposes shall not exceed nine-tenths (0.9) of one (1) percent of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city: Provided that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to levy three-tenths (0.3) of one (1) mill of the assessed valuation as equalized, of all property in the city for the purpose of additional fire department life support units: Provided further that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to levy 0.9798 of one (1) mill each year for police protection for a period of twenty (20) years: Provided further that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to levy 0.9798 of one (1) mill each year for fire and emergency medical rescue services for a period of twenty (20) years: Provided further that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to levy one (1) mill for Parks and Recreation and Forestry effective August 4, 1992: Provided further that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to levy two and one-tenth (2.1) mills for the repair and replacement of local streets and roadways for a period of five (5) years (authorized on November 2011): Provided further that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to continue to levy two and one-tenth (2.1) mills for the repair and replacement of local streets and roadways for an additional five (5) years, upon expiration of the tax levy of two and one-tenth (2.1) mills for local streets and roadways (authorized on November 2011), and beginning with the December 2016 tax levy and continuing through the December 2020 tax levy: Provided further that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to levy an additional four and nine-tenths (4.9) mills each year for police protection and fire safety protection for a period of five (5) years, effective August 7, 2012: Provided further that in addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the power to continue to levy an additional four and nine-tenths (4.9) mills each year for police and fire safety protection for five (5) years, after the expiration of the tax levy of the additional four and nine-tenths (4.9) mills authorized on August 7, 2012, and beginning with the July 2017 tax levy and continuing through the December 2021 tax levy. 
(Amended by electors on 11-6-79; amended by electors on 4-28-98; Amended by electors on 8-9-11; Amended by electors on 8-7-12; Amended by electors on 8-2-16) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(g).  
Sec. 9.2 - Subjects of taxation; tax procedure. 
(a)  The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, city taxes shall be levied and collected in the manner provided by law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq.  
Sec. 9.3 - Exemptions. 
The power of taxation shall never be surrendered or suspended by any grant or contract to which the city shall be a party. No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.7 et seq.  
Sec. 9.4 - Tax day. 
Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by law the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the first day of January, or such other date as may subsequently be required by law, which shall be deemed the tax day. Values on the assessment roll shall be determined according to the facts existing on the tax day for the year for which such roll is made and no change of the status or of the location of any such property after that day shall be considered by the assessor or the board of review. 
State Law reference— Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2; time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq.  
Sec. 9.5 - Personal property; jeopardy assessment. 
If the treasurer finds or reasonably believes that any person, who is, or may be, liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in the city on tax day, intends to depart from the city; or to remove therefrom personal property, which is, or may be, liable for taxation; or to conceal himself or his property; or to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partly ineffectual the proceedings to collect such tax, unless proceedings therefor be brought without delay, he shall proceed to collect the same as a jeopardy assessment in the manner provided by law. 
State Law reference— Jeopardy assessment of personal property taxes, MCL 211.691 et seq.  
Sec. 9.6 - Preparation of the assessment roll. 
Prior to the third Monday in March in each year, or such other date as may subsequently be required by law, the assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city. Such roll shall be prepared in accordance with law and may be divided into volumes, which shall be identified by the assessor, for purposes of convenience in handling the assessment roll and for locating properties assessed therein. The attachment of any certificate or warrant required by this chapter to any volume of the roll, either as an assessment roll or as a tax roll, shall constitute the attachment thereof to the entire roll, provided the several volumes are identified in such certificate or warrant. Values of property set forth on the assessment roll shall be determined according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq.  
Sec. 9.7 - Board of review. 
(a)  A board of review is hereby created, composed of five members who shall be registered electors of the city who have the qualifications for holding office in the city, as set forth in section 4.2 of this charter, and who are owners of property assessed for taxation in the city. The members of the board of review shall be appointed on the basis of their knowledge and experience in property valuation. 
(b)  The members of the board of review shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the council. The first members shall be appointed during the month of January, 1957, for terms expiring on July 1, 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961, and 1962. Thereafter, one member shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council in the month of May of each year, for a term of five years, commencing on the following July first. 
(c)  The board shall, annually, on the first day of its meeting, select one of its members chairman for the ensuing year. The assessor shall be clerk of the board, and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote on any proposition or question before the board. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a).  
Sec. 9.8 - Duties and functions of board of review. 
For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the board of review shall have the same powers and perform like duties, in all respects, as are, by law, conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this charter. At the time, and in the manner, provided in the following section, it shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments. If it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person other than the board of review shall authorize any change upon, or addition or correction to, the assessment roll. The assessor shall keep a permanent record of all proceedings of the board and enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the board. Such record shall be filed with the clerk on or before the first day of October following the meeting of the board of review.  
Sec. 9.9 - Meeting of board of review. 
(a)  The board of review shall convene on the third Monday in March in each year, or on such date as may subsequently be required by law for the meeting of boards of review in cities, at such places as shall be designated by the council at its first regular meeting in February and shall sit for not less than three calendar days: provided, that, if the council does not so designate a place for the meeting of the board of review, it shall meet in the council chamber. 
(b)  The board of review may examine on oath any person appearing before it respecting the assessment of property on the assessment roll. Any member of the board may administer such oath. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i).  
Sec. 9.10 - Notice of meetings. 
Notice of the time and place of the meetings of the board of review shall be published by the assessor not less than one week prior to the first meeting thereof.  
Sec. 9.11 - Endorsement of roll. 
After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the Tuesday following the fourth Monday in March, or such other date as may subsequently be required by law, the majority of its members shall sign a certificate to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared, as approved by the board of review, which certificate, when attached to any volume of the roll shall constitute a conclusive presumption of the validity of the entire roll, as provided in section 9.6 of this chapter. Any copy of such roll, when so certified shall be equally valid as the original roll. The omission of such certificate shall not affect the validity of such roll. 
State Law reference— Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a.  
Sec. 9.12 - Validity of assessment roll. 
Upon the completion of the roll, and from and after midnight ending the last day of the meeting of the board of review, it shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school, and city taxes, and for other taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law. It shall be presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid, and shall not be set aside, except for cause set forth by law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i).  
Sec. 9.13 - Clerk to certify levy. 
Within three days after the council has made the appropriations for the ensuing year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax, together with such other assessments and lawful charges and amounts which the council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon the property and persons appearing upon such roll.  
Sec. 9.14 - City tax roll. 
After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the assessor shall prepare a tax roll, or a combined assessment and tax roll, to be known as the "city tax roll." Upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, assessed, and charged upon the city tax roll, as provided in the preceding section, the assessor shall proceed forthwith, (1) to spread the amounts of the general ad valorem tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll, and (2) to place other assessments and charges upon the roll as are required and authorized by the council. To avoid fractions in computations on any tax roll, the assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by law, which added amount, when collected, shall belong to the city.  
Sec. 9.15 - Tax roll certified for collection. 
After spreading the taxes and placing other assessments and charges upon the roll, the assessor shall certify the tax roll, and annex his warrant thereto directing and requiring the treasurer to collect, prior to March first of the following year, from the several persons named in the roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and granting to and vesting in the treasurer, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such roll all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes: provided, that taxes and other lawful assessments and charges on any city tax roll which remain unpaid on the fifteenth day of October, may be transferred, together with any collection fees or charges which have been added thereto, to the December tax roll to be collected thereon. The city tax roll shall be delivered to the treasurer on or before the third Monday in June. 
State Law reference— Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq.  
Sec. 9.16 - Tax lien on property. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 9.5 of this charter, such taxes shall be due on July first of each year and, on that day, the taxes assessed to the owners of personal property shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon. 
(b)  All personal property taxes shall be a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, on all the personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens, to the extent provided by law, and shall continue until such taxes, interest, and charges are paid.  
Sec. 9.17 - Taxes due; notification thereof. 
The treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but, upon receipt of the city tax roll by him, he shall forthwith mail a tax statement to each person named in the tax roll and shall give notice of the date upon which city taxes are due by publication in a newspaper of the city, which notice shall be sufficient demand for the payment of all taxes assessed. Neither the failure on the part of any person to receive the notice or the tax statement, shall invalidate the taxes on the tax roll or release any person or property assessed from the penalty provided in this chapter in case of nonpayment.  
Sec. 9.18 - Tax payment schedule. 
(1)  Taxes, charges and assessments on each city tax roll shall be due and payable on the first day of July of the fiscal year in which levied. Provided, that at the election of the taxpayer he may pay one-half of said city tax, charge and assessment on or before the thirty-first of August of such year to the treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for collection thereof, and provided that the balance of said tax, if one-half was paid on or before the thirty-first day of August, shall be due and payable on December 1st of such year, provided further that the taxpayer may pay the balance of the tax, charge and assessment by January 31st of the following year to the treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for collection thereof, and provided further that if the taxpayer fails to pay the first one-half by the specified date, the half payment option is void, payment thereafter must be made on the full amount subject to a collection fee on the tax, charge and assessment of one per cent during the month of September and an additional one-half of one per cent per month during each and every month or fraction of a month which shall elapse thereafter before the payment of such taxes, charges and assessments is made, until the last day of February next following the date that such taxes, charges and assessments become due and payable; and provided further, that if the taxpayer fails to pay the second half payment by January 31, payment thereafter will be subject to the above fees on the amount due. Upon all city taxes, charges and assessments returned to the county treasurer upon any delinquent tax roll, a charge of three and one-half per cent shall be added and the same shall be collected by the county treasurer in like manner as and together with the taxes, charges and assessments so returned. 
(2)  All charter provisions, or parts thereof, and all ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. 
(3)  This amendment is declared to be severable and should any word, phrase, sentence, provision or subsection hereof be hereafter declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, or be disapproved by referendum, the remainder of this amendment shall not thereby be affected, but shall remain valid and in full force and effect for all intents and purposes. 
(4)  This amendment shall take effect on December 1, 1971. 
(Amended by electors on 11-2-71)  
Sec. 9.19 - Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax. 
If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax on personal property assessed to him, the treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such person, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees, and charges, wherever the same may be found in the state. No property shall be exempt from such seizure. He may sell the property seized, to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges, fees, penalties, and interest, in accordance with law. The treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue the person to whom it is assessed, in accordance with the powers granted to him by law. 
State Law reference— Failure or refusal to pay tax, MCL 211.47.  
Sec. 9.20 - State, county, and school taxes. 
For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township and all provisions of law relative to the collection of, and accounting for, such taxes and the penalties and interest thereon shall apply. For the purpose of collecting state, county, and school taxes, the treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under state law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i); state law relative to the assessment, levy and collection of taxes, MCL 211.1 et seq.  
Sec. 9.21 - Protection of city lien. 
The city shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not conflict with or contravene the provisions of law, to acquire such an interest in any premises within the city, by purchase at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from or negotiation with the State of Michigan or the fee owner, as may be necessary to assure to the city the collection of its taxes, special assessments, or charges which are levied against any lot or parcel of real property or to protect the lien of the city therefor, and may hold, lease, or sell the same. Any such procedure exercised by the city to assure the collection of its taxes or the protection of its tax or other liens shall be deemed to be for a public purpose. The council may adopt any ordinance which may be necessary to make this section effective.  
Sec. 9.22 - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
All taxes and charges, together with fees, penalties, and interest upon real property on the tax roll, remaining uncollected by the treasurer on the first day of March following the date when the roll was received by him shall be subject to one of the following procedures: 
(1)  The real property against which such taxes and charges are assessed shall be subject to disposition, sale, and redemption for the enforcement and collection of the tax lien against the same in the method and manner which may be provided by ordinance. The council may provide by ordinance for the sale of real property for such unpaid taxes and charges, together with fees, penalties, and interest, by judicial sale on petition filed in behalf of the city. 
(2)  If no ordinance is in effect pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, such taxes shall be returned to the county treasurer, to the extent and in the same manner and with like effect as provided by law for returns by township treasurers of township and county taxes. Such returns shall include all additional assessments, charges, fees, penalties, and interest hereinbefore provided, which shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected, in accordance with law, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid.  
Sec. 9.23 - Disposition of real property held by city. 
The council shall pass an ordinance providing for the care, custody, and disposition of real property, or any interest therein, which it shall hereafter acquire by reason of any action taken to protect the city's tax lien thereon. Unless action is taken by the council as provided and permitted in this section, the owner of any interest therein, by fee title, as mortgagee, or as vendor or vendee under a land contract shall be given the right to purchase the city's interest therein, upon payment to the city of the amount of money which the city has invested therein in the form of unpaid taxes, special assessments, charges, fees, penalties, interest, and costs. After the lapse of ninety days after the date that the city acquires title to any such property, the council may remove the same from the market by determining that such property is needed for and should be devoted to public purposes, naming such purposes, or may sell the same at a price which shall be not less than its market value, as determined and certified to the council by the assessor.  
Sec. 9.24 - Treasurer to report delinquent property to the council. 
At least two weeks before the date of sale of any real estate, upon which the city has any claim, the treasurer shall report to the council a list of the parcels of such real estate and the amount of the city's claims, together with all fees, penalties, and interest which have accumulated thereon or accrued thereto.  
CHAPTER 10. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5. 
 
Sec. 10.1 - General power relative to special assessments. 
(a)  The council shall have the power to make public improvements within the city and, as to public improvements which are of such a nature as to especially benefit any property or properties within a district, the council shall have the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or any part of the expense of any such public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment, in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
(b)  In addition to the other improvements which the city may make and finance, in whole or in part, by special assessments, the city may: 
(1)  Install a boulevard lighting system on any street and finance the same, in whole or in part, by special assessments upon land abutting thereon; 
(2)  Install and connect sewers and waterworks on and to property within the city. 
(c)  If, prior to the adoption of a resolution finally authorizing the making of a public improvement to be financed by special assessments, written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district, which according to estimates will be required to bear more than fifty per cent of the amount of such special assessments, or by more than fifty per cent of the owners of land to be assessed for such improvement, no resolution finally determined to proceed with such improvement shall be adopted, except by the affirmative vote of six members of the council. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for assessing costs of public improvements, MCL 117.4d.  
Sec. 10.2 - Detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance. 
The council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of special assessment districts, notices and hearings, making and confirming of special assessment rolls, correction of errors in such rolls, the number of installments in which special assessments may be paid, collection of special assessments, refunds, and any other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by the special assessment method. 
Note— Code reference—See Code of Ordinances, Ch. 33.  
Sec. 10.3 - Additional assessments and correction of invalid special assessments. 
(a)  Additional pro rata assessments may be made by the council, when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incidental thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll: provided, that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five per cent of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(b)  Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new and legally made assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for an original assessment, except for such changes in procedure as are required to make such reassessment a legal assessment and, whenever any sum or part thereof, levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment, or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made.  
Sec. 10.4 - Limitation on suits and actions. 
No suits or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment, (1) unless, within sixty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (2) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within ninety days after confirmation of the roll. 
Editor's note— This section was held invalid as in conflict with the general property tax law (MCL 211.53) and the statute of limitations for personal actions (MCL 600.5813).  
Sec. 10.5 - Lien and collection of special assessments. 
(a)  Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessments thereon shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and, until paid, shall be a lien upon the property assessed, for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this charter for city taxes. 
(b)  The council may provide by ordinance, for fees, penalties, and interest for late payment or non-payment of special assessments, which fees, penalties, and interest shall be a lien and shall be collectible as are similar charges upon city taxes. The council may provide that delinquent special assessments be placed upon the tax roll, together with any accrued fees, penalties, and interest thereon, to be collected in all respects as are city taxes on such roll, or may make other provisions for the enforcement of the lien created by such special assessments. 
State Law reference— Specific authority to institute an action in assumpsit to recover unpaid assessments, MCL 211.501.  
Sec. 10.6 - Special assessment accounts. 
Moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvements for which the assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments.  
Sec. 10.7 - Certain postponements of payments. 
The council may provide that persons who, in the opinion of the assessor and council, by reason of poverty are unable to contribute toward the cost of the making of a public improvement may execute to the city an instrument creating a lien for the benefit of the city on all or any part of the real property owned by them and benefited by any public improvement, which lien will mature and be effective from and after the execution of such instrument and shall be enforceable in the event that title to such property is thereafter transferred in any manner whatsoever. The council shall establish the procedure for making this section effective by ordinance.  
Sec. 10.8 - All property liable for special assessments. 
The owners of all real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, or exempted by the board of review, and with or without valuation placed thereon, shall be liable for the cost of public improvements benefiting such property, unless exempted from special assessments by law, the same as other property, as provided in section 10.2 of this chapter, and such special assessments shall be levied, collected, and returned, and the said premises may be sold or forfeited in the same manner as for non-payment of city taxes.  
CHAPTER 11. - COUNTY SUPERVISORS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is non obsolete. The election of supervisors is governed by MCL 46.401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11.1 - Number of supervisors. 
The city of Warren shall be entitled to such number of representatives on the board of supervisors of Macomb County as shall be provided by law.  
Sec. 11.2 - Selection of supervisors. 
(a)  The representatives of the city on the board of supervisors of Macomb County shall be the assessor, the city attorney, the controller, the city engineer, the mayor, and such number of electors of the city, including members of the council, who possess the qualifications set forth in this charter for holding city office, as shall be required to complete the number of representatives on such board of supervisors to which the city is entitled. Such electors shall be elected by the council at its first regular meeting following each regular city election and their term of office shall commence forthwith following their election and shall continue for two years. 
(b)  If a supervisor who is the assessor, the city attorney, the controller, the mayor, the city engineer, or a member of the council ceases to hold such office, his office as a supervisor shall thereupon be terminated and a vacancy shall exist. If a member of the council shall be appointed as a representative of the city on the board of supervisors[,] such appointment shall terminate at the end of his then term of office as a councilman.  
Sec. 11.3 - Temporary absences and vacancies. 
In cases of temporary absence or of the inability of any city representative on the board of supervisors, to serve or perform the duties of his office for a full day or more, the mayor shall appoint a qualified person to serve during the absence or inability. If the representative whose place is so filled appears at the meeting of the board of supervisors or committee meeting for which the temporary appointment was made, such temporary appointment shall terminate forthwith. All vacancies in the office of supervisors, shall be filled within thirty days after such vacancy occurs in the manner provided in this charter for filling the position vacated.  
Sec. 11.4 - Compensation of supervisors. 
Each supervisor shall be entitled to retain any compensation and mileage paid to him by the county.  
CHAPTER 12. - JUSTICE COURT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is non obsolete. The justice court was abolished by MCL 600.9921. 
 
Sec. 12.1 - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Until July 1, 1958, the justices of the peace of the city of Warren shall have and exercise therein and within the county, the same jurisdiction and powers in all civil and criminal matters, causes, suits, and proceedings, and shall perform the same duties in all respects, so far as occasion may require, as are of may be conferred upon or required of justices of the peace by law. They shall have exclusive authority to hear, try, and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery or enforcing of fines, penalties, and forfeitures imposed by this charter and the ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders for violations of the charter and ordinances, as therein prescribed and directed, subject only to the limitations prescribed and directed in section 2.6 and section 6.5 of this charter, and shall hear and decide all cases filed in the justice court of the city, except as the same may be transferred to another court, as permitted in section 12.2(b) of this chapter. 
(b)  The justices of the peace shall also have: 
(1)  Jurisdiction to the amount of five hundred dollars in all civil matters ex contractu and ex delicto, with such exceptions and restrictions as are or may be provided by law; 
(2)  The same power and authority as the circuit courts of the state possess to set aside, upon legal cause shown therefor, the verdict or judgment in any civil cause, and grant a new trial therein, whenever a motion in writing is made and filed with the justice of the peace within ten days after the rendition of the verdict or judgment in said case. Such motion shall briefly and plainly set forth the reasons and grounds upon which it is made and shall be supported by an affidavit or affidavits setting forth the facts relied upon and filed at the time of filing of said motion. A notice of the hearing of such motion with a copy of the motion and affidavits filed as aforesaid, shall be served upon the adverse party or his attorney at least two days before the hearing thereof. Such motion shall be determined within two days after the same shall have been heard and submitted and such motion shall be submitted and heard within one week after the same shall have been filed. The time for taking an appeal from judgment in case such motion be not granted shall begin to run from the time when such motion shall be overruled. In no case shall the pendency of such motion stay the issuing and levy of an execution in such case, but in case of levy under execution pending such motion, no sale of the property so levied on shall be advertised or made until final determination of such motion; 
(3)  Such additional powers and authorities as may be conferred upon justices of the peace by law, it being the intent of this section that the justices of the peace in the city of Warren shall have and exercise all powers and authority which justices of the peace in cities may now or hereafter be permitted to exercise under law. 
(c)  On July 4, 1958, the justice court of the city shall become a municipal court, under the provisions of Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of 1956 with concurrent jurisdiction in all civil actions wherein the debt or damages claimed do not exceed one thousand dollars and concurrent jurisdiction in all actions of replevin wherein the value of the property involved does not exceed the sum of one thousand dollars. The council shall fix the compensation of the judges of such court not later than thirty days prior to the last date for filing nomination petitions for election at a special city election held on the first Monday in April in the year 1958, with a primary election therefor held on the third Monday in February preceding such election, if necessary, under the provisions of this charter.  
Sec. 12.2 - Proceedings in justice court. 
(a)  The proceedings in all suits and actions before the justices of the peace or municipal judges, and in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of them shall, except as otherwise provided in this charter, be according to and governed by the provisions of law, which are applicable to justice courts and to the proceedings before such courts. 
(b)  The justices of the peace or municipal judges shall take judicial notice of all ordinances of the city and it shall not be necessary to prove such ordinances or the adoption thereof in any case before them. 
(c)  Any cause pending before a justice of the peace may, whenever he is unable to act in such cause at the time the matter comes before him, be transferred upon his order or, in case of his absence, by the clerk of the court to the other justice of the peace of the city or to a justice of the peace of a city or township in Macomb county, without notice to any of the parties in the cause, but a note of such transfer shall be entered upon the docket of the case. In such case, the docket shall be signed in the time and manner provided by law by the justice who gave final judgment in such cause. The council shall set the compensation to be paid to any justices of the peace of any other city or of a township to which any case or cases commenced in the justice court of the city may be transferred. Until July 4, 1958, the city clerk shall be the clerk of the court for the purposes of this subsection. 
(d)  Beginning July 4, 1958, the city shall furnish the court room and other facilities required by the municipal court of the city.  
Sec. 12.3 - Compensation of municipal judges. 
Until the fourth day of July, 1958, the justices shall receive as their sole compensation for the performance of the duties of their office the usual fees provided by law for the compensation of justices of the peace in townships. Beginning July 4, 1958, the municipal judges of the city shall be paid a salary in lieu of all fees, costs, and charges to which said judges would otherwise be entitled, except fees for the performance of marriage ceremonies, and for administering oaths in matters not connected with suits or proceedings in the city.  
Sec. 12.4 - Disposition of fines. 
(a)  All fines, penalties, and forfeitures collected or received by the justices of the peace or municipal judges for, or on account of, violations of the penal laws of the state, and all fines, penalties, forfeitures, and moneys collected or received by such justices or judges, for, or on account of violations of any ordinances of the city, shall be paid over by such justice or judge to the city treasurer on or before the 10th day of the month next after the collection or receipt thereof, and the justice or judges shall take the receipt of the city treasurer therefor and file the same with the controller. 
[b](2)  Each such justice or judge shall report, on oath, to the treasurer, at the time of making the payments herein provided for, the name of every person against whom a prosecution has been commenced, or judgment rendered for any of such fines, penalties, or forfeitures, and the amount of all moneys received by him on account thereof, or on account of any such suit or prosecution. All fines recovered for the violation of the penal laws of the state when collected and paid into the city treasury shall be disposed of as provided by law.  
Sec. 12.5 - Bond required. 
Each justice of the peace or municipal judge, in addition to any other security required by law to be given for the performance of his official duties, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give a corporate surety bond to the city, in a penal sum of ten thousand dollars, to be approved by the mayor, which approval shall be endorsed upon the bond, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of justice of the peace or municipal judges within and for the city.  
Sec. 12.6 - Rules of court. 
Subject to the approval of the council, the justices of the peace or municipal judges may, by court rule, regulate the office hours and make other necessary and proper rules for the regulation and conduct of the office hours and make other necessary and proper rules for the regulation and conduct of the city's court, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this charter and the general laws of the state.  
Sec. 12.7 - Court room and supplies. 
The city shall furnish the municipal judges with all necessary dockets, books, forms, and stationery which may be required for the proper conduct of their office. All such books and forms shall be and remain the property of the city.  
Sec. 12.8 - Violations bureau. 
The council shall pass an ordinance establishing a violations bureau within the court of the city. Such ordinance shall not be effective until July 4, 1958. The creation of such a bureau by the council shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court, should such person so choose.  
Sec. 12.9 - Court officer; constable. 
With the advice and subject to the confirmation of the municipal judges or justices of the peace, as the case may be, the mayor may appoint two members of the police force of the city of Warren or any persons having the qualifications of elective officers of the city to act as court officers in the municipal court. Such officers shall be charged with the duty of and shall be responsible for maintaining order in the court room under the direction of the judge, and shall be responsible for the safety and custody of persons charged with the commission of crime while such persons are in the court room. Such officers shall be the constables of the city and shall have like powers, authorities, and immunities in matters of civil and criminal nature and in relation to the service of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships. They shall have power to serve all processes issued for violations of the ordinances of the city. The compensation of any court officer who is a police officer, shall be that to which he is entitled as a police officer, based upon the grade and seniority held by him. If a court officer shall be other than a police officer, he shall be compensated as provided in the city budget, or, if not so provided, as the council shall determine. Salaried compensation shall be in addition to the fees received by a court officer in the performance of his duties as constable.  
CHAPTER 13. - ELECTIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c). 
 
Sec. 13.1 - Non-partisan elections. 
The nomination and election of all city officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the nomination of elective officers by partisan or nonpartisan primary or by petition, MCL 117.3(b).  
Sec. 13.2 - Qualifications of electors. 
Each person who has the constitutional qualifications of an elector in the state of Michigan or who will have such qualifications at the next primary or regular or special election to be held in the city, shall be entitled to register as an elector of the city of Warren in the election precinct in which he resides. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); registration of electors generally, MCL 168.491 et seq.  
Sec. 13.3 - State laws to govern; party procedure not to apply. 
The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control all procedure relating to registration of electors in the city and to the conduct of primary, regular, and special city elections therein, except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure, and except as otherwise provided by this charter. Subject to the provisions of this charter relative to political parties and partisan procedure, and until and except as otherwise provided by the council, the ballots or votes cast at all elections held in the city shall be cast, registered, recorded, and counted as provided by law. 
State Law reference— Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq.  
Sec. 13.4 - Informalities in conducting elections. 
No informalities in conducting any city primary or election shall invalidate the same, if they have been conducted fairly, in substantial conformity with the requirements of this charter and the general law of the state, and no elector can be said to have been misled or deceived by such informalities.  
Sec. 13.5 - Primary elections. 
A primary election for the nomination of candidates for all elective municipal offices to be filled at the succeeding regular municipal election shall be held on the date prescribed by law for the holding of the general primary election for the biennial spring election. If upon the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for any elective city office, it appears that petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of positions in such office to be filled at the next city election, then no primary election shall be held with respect to that office. 
Editor's note— The city has opted for an odd-year primary election on the Tuesday following the second Monday in September in each odd-numbered year pursuant to MCL 168.644b. See Code of Ordinances Section 2-61.  
Sec. 13.6 - Nominating petitions. 
No candidate's name shall be placed upon primary election ballots for nomination for any city office, unless there shall be filed with the clerk a nominating petition therefor, containing signatures of registered electors of the city equal in number to not less than one per cent nor more than four per cent of the number of votes cast in the city for the office of secretary of state at the last preceding November election. In lieu of such a petition there may be deposited with the clerk a declaration of candidacy and a filing fee in the sum of one hundred dollars. Such declaration of candidacy shall contain the same information as is required to be set forth on nominating petitions. Such nominating petitions and declarations shall be received by the clerk up to the hour of five o'clock in the afternoon of the seventh Monday preceding such primary election. A nominating petition or declaration of candidacy may be accepted by the clerk only when signed by the candidate or accompanied by his written consent to the filing thereof. Filing fees so deposited with the clerk shall be deposited by him with the treasurer not later than the day following his receipt thereof and shall not be refunded, except as provided in this chapter. No person shall seek more than one city office at any primary or election and, if petitions are filed for two or more offices by any candidate, or on his behalf, he shall withdraw all or all but one of the petitions or declarations of candidacy for office filed by him or on his behalf, subject to the provisions of section 13.7 and 13.8 of this chapter. If there be no such withdrawal, such a person shall be deemed to be a candidate for the office for which a petition or declaration of candidacy was first filed with the clerk. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); non-partisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a.  
Sec. 13.7 - Withdrawal of candidates. 
After the filing of a nominating petition or declaration of candidacy by or on behalf of any candidate for any elective city office, such candidate shall not be permitted to withdraw, unless written notice is served on the clerk not later than three days after the last day for filing such petition. A candidate who so withdraws and a person who files a declaration of candidacy on behalf of a candidate shall not be entitled to a refund of any filing fee deposited with the clerk.  
Sec. 13.8 - Return of certain filing fees. 
Within three days subsequent to the final certification of the results of any primary election by the board of city canvassers, on account of which such deposits were made, the clerk shall file with the treasurer a certificate, showing the total number of votes cast at such primary election for each candidate for the various city offices and the address as shown on the nominating petition or declaration of candidacy. If a candidate, at any such primary election, shall have received a number of votes sufficient to nominate him for election or to place him among the persons receiving the next three highest number of votes received by persons who were not so nominated, the treasurer shall refund to such candidate or to the person filing a declaration of candidacy on his behalf, the sum deposited with the declaration. Any candidate who receives a number of votes less than as above set forth shall be notified by the treasurer that any fee deposited by him or on his behalf has been forfeited. Deposits forfeited under this section shall be paid into and credited to the general fund of the city.  
Sec. 13.9 - Form of nominating petition. 
The form of nominating petition shall be substantially the same as that designated by law or the secretary of state for the nomination of nonpartisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition and declaration forms shall be provided and maintained by the clerk. 
State Law reference— Non-partisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a.  
Sec. 13.10 - Notification of candidates. 
Within three days after the last date for filing petitions, the clerk shall make his final determination as to the validity of each nominating petition and shall write the date of his determination thereof on the face of the petition. Immediately, after making such determination, the clerk shall give written notice to each candidate whose petitions are invalid.  
Sec. 13.11 - Election commission and duties. 
A city election commission, consisting of the clerk, city attorney, and assessor is hereby created.  
Sec. 13.12 - Meeting and quorum. 
The meetings of the city election commission shall be held in the council chambers or in the office of the clerk and shall be public. At all meetings a majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present the commission or commissioners present shall appoint one or more administrative officers of the city to make a quorum. Such officers shall take the oath of office and their acts shall be valid as members of the commission. The commission shall be in continuous session on all election days and on such other days as its duties may require. The clerk shall serve as chairman of the commission.  
Sec. 13.13 - Appointments by election commission. 
The commission shall have authority to employ and appoint such inspectors of election and other assistants as may be necessary to carry out the duties herein prescribed and those required of it by law.  
Sec. 13.14 - Compensation. 
The inspectors of election and other assistants of the commission engaged in the conduct of an election shall receive such compensation for their services as the council may direct.  
Sec. 13.15 - General powers and duties. 
The elections commission shall have power and it shall be its duty: 
(1)  To provide places for voting which shall, insofar as possible, be located in school houses, or in police and fire stations and other buildings owned by the city, and in cases where voting places cannot be so provided, to build or otherwise provide places for use at elections; 
(2)  To prepare and print election ballots (or ballot labels or slips to be placed on voting machines if used) for all city officers for whom the electors are entitled to vote and for all questions to be submitted to the electors of the city; 
(3)  To have general supervision of all elections in the city, including power to prevent any and all manner of fraud and corruption in the registration, voting, or counting of votes thereat; 
(4)  To select and appoint registered electors of the city, who shall be qualified to discharge the duties of election officers, for each election precinct thereof, which qualifications shall be determined in such manner as shall be provided by the commission. No precinct election officer so appointed shall hold any city employment or office, or be a relative within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity of a candidate for any city office; 
(5)  To provide, when necessary, for the examination of any applicant for appointment as a precinct election officer, to be appointed by the commission and the passage of a qualifying examination prior to the applicant's employment; 
(6)  To remove any precinct election officer, for cause, at any time and to appoint some suitable and qualified person to act in his place; 
(7)  To make complaint and to prosecute any person whom the commission shall have good cause to believe has been guilty of violation of the election laws; and 
(8)  To adopt, prescribe, and publish rules of procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of law.  
Sec. 13.16 - Election notice; contents, how published and posted. 
The clerk shall give notice of each primary, regular, or special city election as required by law. Proof of publication and posting such notices shall be made by proper affidavits filed in the office of the clerk.  
Sec. 13.17 - Time of regular city elections. 
Regular city elections shall be held biennially in the odd numbered years on the first Monday in April. 
Editor's note— The city now has an odd-year general election held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year pursuant to MCL 168.644a.  
Sec. 13.18 - Names on ballot. 
(a)  The printing and numbering of the ballots used in any city primary or election or the preparation of voting machines therefor shall conform to that prescribed by the general laws of the state, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear upon any city ballot. 
(b)  The order of offices on any primary or election ballot shall be mayor, council, and municipal judges. [16] Names of candidates shall be placed on the primary ballot for only such offices as shall have more than twice the number of candidates to be elected seeking such office to be filed at the following regular city election. Where a primary election is required to be held with respect to any office or offices, the two candidates at the primary election receiving the highest number of votes cast, for mayor, and the four such candidates receiving the highest number of votes for the office of municipal judge, and eighteen persons receiving the highest number of votes cast for candidates for councilman, together with the names of candidates not required to be placed on the primary election ballot shall be printed on the ballot for the regular city election. 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Municipal courts were abolished by MCL 600.9921. 
 
Sec. 13.19 - Special city elections. 
Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the council passed at least sixty days in advance of such election, or when required by law. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more than two special city elections shall be held in any calendar year. 
State Law reference— Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639.  
Sec. 13.20 - Voting hours. 
The voting hours for all city elections shall be those established by law for state and county elections. 
State Law reference— Opening and closing of polls, MCL 168.720.  
Sec. 13.21 - Canvass of elections. 
At two o'clock in the afternoon on the day next succeeding any city primary or election the election commission shall convene in the office of the clerk, or other public place which has been publicly announced, and shall determine the results of the election upon each question and proposition voted upon and which persons were duly nominated or elected at the primary or election. Thereupon the clerk shall make triplicate certificates showing what persons were declared nominated for or elected to each of the several offices respectively. He shall forward one copy of each such certificate to the county clerk, file one of each of such certificates in his office, and forward the other by certified mail to each person nominated for or elected to a city office, addressed to him at the address given in his nomination petition or declaration, which certificate shall constitute a notice of nomination or election. 
Editor's note— Canvassing in cities having more than five (5) precincts is governed by MCL 168.30a et seq.  
Sec. 13.22 - Election by lot, in case of tie vote. 
If there be no choice for any office by reason of two or more candidates having received an equal number of votes, the election commission shall name a date for the appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining the tie by lot, as provided by law. Should any person or persons fail or refuse to appear, in person or by representative, to determine the result of any tie election at the time and place named by the election commission, such determination shall be made by lot in his or their absence, at the direction and under the supervision of the election commission. Such determination shall, in any event, be final. 
State Law reference— Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851, 168.852.  
Sec. 13.23 - Election expenses. 
A duplicate copy of the detailed account of election expenses required by law to be filed with the county clerk by candidates for city offices shall be filed with the clerk within the time limited by law for filing the same with the county clerk. The holding of the city office to which a candidate has been elected and the payment of the remuneration provided for such office shall be subject to the provisions of law relating to the filing of such accounts with the county clerk.  
Sec. 13.24 - Employee political activity prohibited. 
No employee of the city shall make any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate for nomination for or election to public office of the city, other than himself, but such employee may take part in the political campaign of any such candidate outside of his working hours. 
State Law reference— Political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq.  
Sec. 13.25 - Acts to influence electors prohibited. 
No person shall give, offer to give, or promise any money or other consideration to any elector or to any person for the purpose of influencing the vote of any elector at any election provided for in this charter, or to or for any elector for the purpose of securing support for any candidate at such election. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 168.931(1)(a).  
Sec. 13.26 - Recount. 
A recount of the votes cast at any city primary or election for any office, or upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
State Law reference— Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq.  
CHAPTER 14. - CONTRACTS 
 
Sec. 14.1 - Authority of council. 
(a)  The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the city is vested in the council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(b)  All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of section 14.2 hereof, shall be authorized by the council and shall be signed on behalf of the city by the mayor and the clerk.  
Sec. 14.2 - Purchase and sale of personal property. 
The council shall establish, by ordinance, the procedures for the purchase and sale of personal property, under the direction of the division of purchasing. The ordinance shall provide the dollar limit within which purchases of personal property may be made without the necessity of securing competitive bids, and the dollar limit within which purchases may be made without the necessity of council approval. No purchase of personal property shall be made, unless a sufficient appropriation is available therefor.  
Sec. 14.3 - Limitations on contractual power. 
(a)  The city shall not purchase, sell, or lease any real estate or any interest therein except by resolution concurred in by at least five members of the council. 
(b)  The city shall not enter into a contract which will not be fully executed within a period of ten years, without the approval of a majority of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special election, unless such contract is with a public utility or one or more governmental units. 
(c)  The city shall not have power to sell, lease, or dispose of any real estate owned by it, without the approving vote of a majority of the electors of the city voting on the proposition to sell, lease, or dispose of such real estate at a regular or special election, unless: 
(1)  The council resolution to sell such real estate shall be completed in the manner in which it is finally passed and has remained on file with the clerk for public inspection for thirty days before the final adoption or passage thereof, and 
(2)  Such resolution is approved by the affirmative roll call vote of five or more members of the council. 
(d)  Except as provided by ordinance authorized by section 14.2 of this chapter, each contract for public improvements or personal property shall be let after opportunity for competitive bidding. All bids shall be opened in public in the council room by a committee comprised of secretary of the council, the clerk, and the controller, at the time designated in the notice of letting and shall be reported by the committee to the council at its next meeting. The council may reject any or all bids if deemed advisable. If all bids are rejected, or if no bids are received, the council may obtain new bids or authorize the division of purchasing to negotiate in the open market for a contract. 
(e)  No contract shall be made with any person who is in default to the city. 
(f)  No extra compensation shall be paid to any agent, employee, or contractor after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. 
State Law reference— Restriction on making contracts with persons in default to city, MCL 117.5(f).  
Sec. 14.4 - Business dealings with city. 
An officer, who intends to have business dealings with the city, whereby he may derive any income or benefits, other than such as are provided as remuneration for his official duties, shall file with the clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of such business dealings, and his interest therein. The statement shall be filed with the clerk not less than ten days before the date when action may be taken by the council or any other agency of the city upon the matter involved. The statement shall be spread upon the proceedings of the council and published in full therewith. Approval of any such business dealings shall require a concurring vote of at least five members of the council, not including any member who is disqualified under section 5.5(i) of this charter. Any business dealing made in violation of this section shall be void. 
Editor's note— This section has been preempted by MCL 15.321 et seq., on conflicts of interest as to contracts.  
CHAPTER 15. - PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference— Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Coast. 1963, Art. VII, §§ 24, 25; permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f. 
 
Sec. 15.1 - General powers respecting municipal utilities. 
The city shall have all the powers granted by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain public utilities, either within or without its corporate limits and either within or without the corporate limits of Macomb County, including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water and water treatment, sewage disposal and treatment, electric light and power, gas, steam, heat, public transportation, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell water, electricity, gas, steam, heat, transportation, and other utility services beyond its corporate limits as authorized by law.  
Sec. 15.2 - City's water supply system. 
The water supply system of the city shall be under the general control of the council. Where any ordinance of the former Charter Township of Warren or the Village of Warren shall provide for the administration of the township or village water supply system by a board or commission, the council shall be the successor of such board or commission and shall exercise the powers and duties thereof. The receipts and funds of the system shall be used exclusively for the purpose of defraying the operating and capital expenses of the system, including the payment of the principal of [or] any interest on any debt of the system, and for no other purpose or purposes. For the purposes of this section, the water system of the city shall include the city's water supply and distribution system and the sewers and sewage disposal system as a single system.  
Sec. 15.3 - Rates. 
(a)  The council shall fix just and reasonable rates and such other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying water and other municipal utility services to the inhabitants of the city and others. No discrimination in rates, within any classification of users, shall be permitted, nor shall free service be permitted. Increased rates may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The rates and charges for each municipal utility shall be fixed by the council on a basis at least adequate to compensate the city for the cost of such service and to make reasonable provisions for the extension thereof according to the needs of the city. Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation of each such municipal utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts, which shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices. The superintendent or other person in charge of each utility of the city shall file with the mayor and council a report of the financial and physical status of such utility within thirty days following the months of March, June, September, and December of each year, covering the preceding three months period. An annual report shall be prepared to show the financial position of each utility and the results of its operation. A copy of such report shall be available for inspection at the office of the clerk.  
Sec. 15.4 - Collection of municipal utility rates and charges. 
(a)  The council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of rates and charges for public utility services furnished by the city. When any person fails or refuses to pay to the city any sums due on utility bills, the service upon which delinquency exists may be discontinued and suit may be brought for the collection thereof. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the city shall have as security for the collection of all charges for utility services furnished by it a lien upon the premises to which utility services were supplied and, for such purposes, shall have all the powers granted to cities by law. The lien shall become effective immediately on the distribution or supplying of utility services to such premises. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law, all unpaid charges for utility services furnished to any such premises, which, on the thirty-first day of March of each year, have remained unpaid for a period of three months or more, shall be reported to the council by the controller at the second meeting thereof in the month of April. The council thereupon shall order the publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of notice that all such unpaid utility charges not paid by the thirtieth day of April will be assessed upon the city's tax roll against the premises to which such utility services were supplied or furnished and such charges shall then be spread upon the city's tax roll and shall be collected in the same manner as the city taxes.  
Sec. 15.5 - Disposal of municipal utility plants and property. 
Unless approved by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special city election, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way dispose of any property, easement, equipment, privilege, or asset, needed to continue the operation of any municipal public utility. All contracts, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of articles of machinery or equipment of any municipally owned public utility, which are no longer useful or which are replaced by new machinery or equipment, or to the leasing of property not necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property or easements for other needed property.  
Sec. 15.6 - Public utility franchises. 
The city may grant a franchise to any person for the use of the streets; alleys, bridges, and other public places of the city for the furnishing of any public utility service to the city and its inhabitants. Franchises and renewals, amendments, and extensions thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. Public utility franchises shall include provisions for fixing rates and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The city may, with respect to any public utility franchise granted after the effective date of this charter, whether or not so provided in the granting ordinance: 
(1)  Revoke the same for the violation of any of its provisions, for the misuse or non-use thereof, or for failure to comply with any provision thereof, or for failure to comply with any regulation imposed under authority of this section; 
(2)  Require proper and adequate extension of plant and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standards of efficiency; 
(3)  Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  Require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  Impose other regulations determined by the council to be conducive to the health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the public; 
(6)  Require the public utility to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city, by the city and other utilities, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor, and, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the public utility, provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor; 
(7)  Require the public utility to pay any part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city, that arises from its use thereof, and to protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from such use; 
(8)  Require the public utility to file with the clerk such reports concerning the public utility and its financial operation and status as the council may request.  
Sec. 15.7 - Limitations on the granting of franchises. 
No franchise shall be granted by the city for a term exceeding thirty years and no exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. Each franchise shall include a provision requiring the franchise to take effect within one year after the adoption of the ordinance granting it, except in the case of grants to take effect at the end of an existing franchise. An irrevocable franchise and any extension or amendment of such franchise may not be granted by the city, unless it has first received the affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of the electors of the city voting thereon at a regular or special city election. A franchise ordinance may be approved by the council, for referral to the electorate, only after a public hearing has been held thereon and after the grantee named therein has filed with the clerk his unconditional acceptance of all the terms of the franchise. No special election for such purpose may be ordered by the council, unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the council, has first been paid to the treasurer by the grantee. 
State Law reference— Franchises limited to thirty (30) years, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 30; submittal to electors if irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 25; expenses of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i).  
Sec. 15.8 - Procedure for granting franchises. 
Every ordinance granting a franchise, license, or right to occupy or use the streets, alleys, bridges, or public places in the city shall remain on file with the clerk for public inspection in its final form for at least thirty days before the final adoption thereof, or the approval thereof for referral to the electorate.  
Sec. 15.9 - Sale or assignment of franchises. 
The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow another to use the same, unless the council gives its consent: provided that, nothing in this section shall limit the right of the grantee of any public utility franchise to mortgage its property or franchise, nor shall restrict the rights of the purchaser, upon foreclosure sale, to operate the same, except that such mortgagee or purchaser shall be subject to the terms of the franchise and provisions of this chapter.  
CHAPTER 16. - MUNICIPAL PENSION PLANS 
 
Sec. 16.1 - Policemen and firemen. 
(a)  The pension plan of the Charter Township of Warren for policemen and firemen, as established under the provisions of Act No. 345 of the Public Acts of 1937, [18] as amended, is hereby continued and constituted [constitutes] the pension plan for policemen and firemen of the city under this charter, and, for that purpose, Act No. 345 of the Public Acts of 1937, [19] as amended, heretofore or hereafter, is hereby incorporated into this charter by reference. (Amended by electors on 4-3-61) 
(b)  Each officer and employee of the police department and the fire department of the city shall continue in the status held by him under the said pension plan, as though no change had been made in the government of the territory comprising the territory of the city. 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— See MCL 38.551 et seq. 

--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— See MCL 38.551 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16.2 - Police and fire employees of the village of Warren. 
Within sixty days after the effective date of this charter, the policemen and firemen employees of the village of Warren who become policemen and firemen of the city shall be included within the pension plan of the city for policemen and firemen on the same basis as though they had been policemen and firemen of the charter township of Warren. The city shall assume and amortize the city's obligation for the prior service of such policemen and firemen. Each such policeman and fireman may pay into the pension plan the amount that he would have contributed, had he been employed by the charter township of Warren, instead of the village of Warren, and the retirement board shall provide a plan for doing so in monthly payments to be completed within ten years after such employees are placed under the city's pension plan for policemen and firemen.  
Sec. 16.3 - Pensions of general city employees. 
Within one year after the effective date of this charter, the council shall provide a pension plan for the general employees of the city, other than policemen and firemen, and city officers. Such a plan shall be based upon actuarially sound principles pertaining to pension plans. Further, there is hereby created a board of trustees in which is vested the power and authority to administer, manage and operate the retirement system, and to construe and make effective the provisions of the applicable city ordinance. The board shall consist of five trustees as follows: 
(a)  The mayor, or a citizen of the city designated by him as his alternate[,] to serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  A councilman to be selected by the council[,] to serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(c)  A citizen, who is an elector of the city and who is not eligible to participate in the retirement system as a member, retirant, or beneficiary, to be appointed by the mayor. 
(d)  Two members to be selected from and elected by the general membership of the retirement system. (Amended by electors on 11-8-77)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Citing code. 
This Code shall be cited as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Warren, Michigan." 
(Code 1967, § 1-108) 
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117.5b.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Blight violation means a violation of a provision of the Code of Ordinances, including appendices, that is designated as a blight violation. 
Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Warren. 
City. The word "city" means the City of Warren, Michigan. 
City council. The word "council" or the words "city council" mean the legislative body of the City of Warren, Michigan. 
Code. The words "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Warren, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed as prescribed by state statute. 
County. The word "county" means the County of Macomb. 
Gender. Words importing masculine gender shall apply to firms, associations, partnerships and corporations, and may apply to females if the intent of the ordinance or Code provision so requires. 
Health officer. The phrase "health officer" shall mean the director of the county health department or his or her authorized representative, or any person hereinafter appointed to such position by the city council, under the direction of the city director of public service. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the provision granting the authority. 
MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" shall mean the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
Misdemeanor. Violation of an ordinance that constitutes a crime, as opposed to a civil infraction. An ordinance violation is a misdemeanor if it defines itself as a misdemeanor, specifies a punishment of jail time, or does not specify that it is a blight violation, civil infraction, or municipal civil infraction. 
Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
MSA. The abbreviation "MSA" shall mean the Michigan Statutes Annotated, as amended. 
Municipal civil infraction means an act or omission that is prohibited by an ordinance, is not a crime under that ordinance, and for which a court may order civil sanctions. A municipal civil infraction does not include blight violations or violations excluded from municipal civil infractions by MCL 600.113(1)(c) as amended, including but not limited to violations of the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., violations of the Uniform Traffic Code, MCL 257.951 et seq., violations of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, MCL 436.1101 et seq., and violations of any ordinance enacted pursuant to MCL 257.942 regulating traffic in parking areas. 
Number. Words in either the singular or plural numbers shall include either or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a particular person or persons. 
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The word "oath" shall be construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, divisions, boards, commissions, employees or agencies. The several titles of any officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency shall mean such officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency of the city. The designation of any officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency, or any other agency means such officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency, or other agency of the city; or any authorized subordinate or designee. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part-owner, land contract vendee, joint-owner, tenant-in-common, tenant-in-partnership, joint tenant, or tenant-by-the-entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint adventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, however operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following," when used by way of reference to any title, chapter or section of any ordinance of the city, shall be construed to mean the title, chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which such reference is made, unless when some other title, chapter or section is expressly designated in such reference. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The words "public place" mean any street, alley, park, cemetery, public building, or any place of business or assembly, parking lot, parking area, or any other premises open to the public or frequented by the public. 
References, history notes. The charter references, cross references, state law references, editor's notes and history notes are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code. 
Seal. In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall be required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the word "seal" shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such paper alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means of a wafer or wax. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" means imperative or mandatory; the word "may" means permissive. 
Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" means the State of Michigan. 
Sundays, legal holidays. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance or Code section falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed as including the future as well as the present or past. 
Time. Whenever time is referred to, it means eastern standard time or the time officially in force in the city. 
Titles, headings and catchlines. The key words used in the Code as headings, titles or catchlines for chapters, sections and subsections are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" may include any form of reproduction or expression of language. 
Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year," alone, shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
All ordinances of the city shall be interpreted and construed in accordance with the above provisions, unless such interpretation and construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
(Code 1967, §§ 1-101—1-104; Ord. No. 80-722, § 1, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 80-748, § 1, 1-24-17) 
Charter reference— Definitions and interpretations for Charter, § 2.2. 
State Law reference— Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Whenever an ordinance, or any part thereof, is repealed by a subsequent ordinance, such ordinance or any part thereof so repealed shall not be revived by the repeal of such subsequent repealing ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever an ordinance is adopted, all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith, shall to the extent of such conflict, be repealed. 
(c)  The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof shall not release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such ordinance or any part thereof, unless the repealing act shall so expressly provide, and such ordinance and part thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
(Code 1967, §§ 1-105—1-107) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 8.4, 8.4a.  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Warren, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows …" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Warren, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which shall read as follows: …" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.  
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______ (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise; 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(4)  Making any appropriation; 
(5)  Levying or imposing taxes; 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(9)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(10)  Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees; 
(11)  Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(12)  Affecting any urban renewal project; 
(13)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(14)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. The ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 1-7. - Severability. 
If any part of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by any court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts or applications of this Code which can be given effect without the invalid part or application, provided such remaining parts are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end all provisions of this Code are declared to be severable. 
(Code 1967, § 1-109)  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  The district court shall punish a person found guilty of a misdemeanor ordinance violation, as follows: 
(1)  If the ordinance specifies a punishment: 
a.  The stated punishment; and/or 
b.  Reasonable court costs of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), irrespective of any reference to court costs in the ordinance; 
(2)  If the ordinance does not specify a punishment: 
a.  By a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
b.  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days; and/or 
c.  Reasonable court costs of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), irrespective of any reference to court costs in the ordinance. 
(b)  The district court shall punish a person found responsible of a municipal civil infraction ordinance violation, as follows: 
(1)  A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation; and/or 
(2)  Costs; assessments; and damages and expenses, as provided by MCL 600.8727(3). 
(c)  The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(d)  Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years who is charged with: 
(1)  A misdemeanor shall be referred to the juvenile division of the probate court, or as otherwise prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(2)  A municipal civil infraction is within the jurisdiction of the district court. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition a person causes or permits to exist in violation of an ordinance: 
(1)  Is a new and separate offense each day that the condition continues to exist; and 
(2)  May be abated by the city as a nuisance. 
(Code 1967, §§ 1-110, 1-111; Ord. No. 80-527, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-722, § 2, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 80-731, § 2, 8-11-15) 
Charter reference— Penalties, § 6.5. 
Cross reference— Civil infraction penalties, § 1-16. 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i; juveniles and juvenile division, MCL 712A.1 et seq.  
DIVISION 2. - APPEARANCE TICKETS 
 
Sec. 1-9. - Authorization. 
(a)  Statement of purpose and authority. The city hereby authorizes the issuance and service of appearance tickets by police officers and specifically authorized city personnel for violations of this Code. An appearance ticket is defined by Section 9f of Act No. 175 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1927, MCL 764.9f, as amended, a complaint or written notice issued and subscribed by a police officer or other city personnel authorized by law or ordinance to issue an appearance ticket directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with his or her alleged commission of a designated violation or violations of local ordinance for which the maximum permissible penalty does not exceed ninety-three (93) days in jail or a fine, or both. 
(b)  Issuance of appearance tickets. All police officers are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any alleged violation of the Code of Ordinances for which the maximum permissible penalty does not exceed ninety-three (93) days in jail or a fine, or both. 
(c)  Issuance of appearance tickets . The following city personnel are authorized to issue appearance tickets for an alleged violation of the ordinances listed: 
(1)  A city chief building inspector, a building inspector or a plan examiner shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Mobile homes and trailers, Chapter 20. 
b.  Property maintenance ordinance, Chapter 28. 
(2)  A city chief plumbing inspector, a plumbing inspector, a division of water supply superintendent, deputy superintendent, assistant superintendent, or water systems monitor, shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Water and sewers, Chapter 41. 
b.  Property maintenance ordinance, Chapter 28. 
(3)  A city zoning administrator, chief zoning inspector or a zoning inspector shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Mobile homes and trailers, Chapter 20. 
b.  Zoning ordinance, Appendix A. 
c.  Nuisances, Chapter 21. 
d.  Medical marihuana, Chapter 19.5. 
(4)  An animal control officer shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Animals, Chapter 7. 
(5)  A city fire marshal, deputy fire marshal or a fire inspector shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Fire prevention and protection, Chapter 13. 
b.  International property maintenance code, Article I of Chapter 28. 
(6)  A city health officer, and code enforcement officers and inspectors within the department of property maintenance inspection shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Mobile homes and trailers, Chapter 20. 
b.  Property maintenance ordinance, Chapter 28. 
(7)  The waste water treatment plant sanitary engineer, facility engineer, laboratory director, industrial services manager, industrial waste specialist or industrial waste technician shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Water and sewers, Chapter 41. 
(d)  Savings. All proceedings pending, and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred, on February 1, 1998, are hereby saved. Such proceedings may be consummated under and according to the chapter in force at the time such proceedings were commenced. This section shall not be construed to alter, affect or abate any pending prosecution, or prevent prosecution hereafter instituted under any ordinance specifically or impliedly repealed or amended by this section adopting this penal regulation. For offenses committed prior to February 2, 1998, new prosecutions may be instituted under and in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance in force at the time of the commission of such offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-317, § 1, 4-22-86; Ord. No. 80-435, § 1, 7-27-93; Ord. No. 80-527, § 2, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-696, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 80-748, § 2, 1-24-17; Ord. No. 80-762, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 80-769 , § 1, 12-11-18; Ord. No. 80-772 , § 1, 1-22-19)  
DIVISION 3. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-648, §1, adopted May 8, 2007, amended Div. 3, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 1-10. - Definitions. 
As used in this Code: 
Act means the Municipal Civil Infractions Act, Public Act No. 12 of 1994, as amended, found in the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.101 et seq. 
Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this or any other ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations. 
Blight violation means a violation of a provision of the Code of Ordinances, including appendices, that is designated as a blight violation. 
Code enforcement officer shall include every inspection position of the city that has the duty of enforcing the various regulations of this Code of Ordinances. 
Finding of responsible shall include the entry of judgment, entry of a default judgment, payment of a fine, or a plea of responsible on a citation. 
Municipal civil infraction means an act or omission that is prohibited by an ordinance, is not a crime under that ordinance, and for which a court may order civil sanctions. A municipal civil infraction does not include blight violations or violations excluded from municipal civil infractions by MCL 600.113(1)(c) as amended, including but not limited to violations of the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., violations of the Uniform Traffic Code, MCL 257.951 et seq., violations of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, MCL 436.1101 et seq., and violations of any ordinance enacted pursuant to MCL 257.942 regulating traffic in parking areas. 
Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction by the person cited. 
Respondent means the person whom a municipal civil infraction citation has been issued to and who is responsible for the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-722, § 3, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 80-748, § 3, 1-24-17)  
Sec. 1-11. - Municipal civil infraction; authorization to issue. 
(a)  Issuance of municipal civil infraction citation. All police officers are authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations for any alleged infraction of the Code of Ordinances designated a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Issuance of municipal civil infraction citation. The following city personnel are authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations for an alleged infraction of the ordinances listed: 
(1)  A city chief building inspector, a building inspector or a plan examiner shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Building Code, Chapter 9, Article II; 
b.  International Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 28, Article I. 
(2)  A city chief electrical inspector or an electrical inspector shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Building Code, Chapter 9, Article II; 
b.  Electrical Code, Chapter 9, Article III; 
c.  International Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 28, Article I. 
(3)  A city chief heating, refrigeration, and air quality control inspector or a heating, refrigeration and air quality control inspector shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Mechanical Code, Chapter 9, Article V; 
b.  International Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 28, Article I. 
(4)  A city chief plumbing inspector, a plumbing inspector, a division of water supply superintendent, deputy superintendent, assistant superintendent, or water systems monitor, shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Plumbing Code, Chapter 9, Article IV; 
b.  Water and sewers, Chapter 41; 
c.  International Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 28, Article I. 
(5)  A city zoning administrator, chief zoning inspector or a zoning inspector shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Zoning ordinance, Appendix A; 
b.  Property maintenance ordinance, Chapter 28; 
c.  Sign erectors and sign permit fees, Chapter 31; 
d.  Garbage and rubbish, Chapter 16; 
e.  Nuisances, Chapter 21. 
(6)  The city clerk, a deputy city clerk, an election technician and license officer shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Licensing, Chapter 18; 
b.  Amusements and entertainment, Chapter 6; 
c.  Vending machines, Chapter 40; 
(7)  The city director of the division of buildings and safety engineering or an assistant director shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Any provision of Chapter 9, Buildings and Building Regulations; 
b.  Sign erectors and sign permit fees, Chapter 31; 
c.  Zoning, Appendix A; 
d.  Property maintenance ordinance, Chapter 28; 
e.  Nuisances, Chapter 21. 
(8)  A city fire marshal, deputy fire marshal or a fire inspector shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Fire prevention and protection, Chapter 13; 
b.  International Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 28, Article I. 
(9)  A city health officer shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Property maintenance ordinance, Chapter 28. 
b.  Nuisances, Chapter 21. 
(10)  The waste water treatment plant sanitary engineer, facility engineer, laboratory director, industrial services manager, industrial waste specialist or industrial waste technician shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Water and sewers, Chapter 41. 
(11)  A city engineer, environmental compliance engineer, senior engineering field supervisor, engineering technician, or a construction specialist shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Soil removal, dumping and re-grading, Chapter 32; 
b.  Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Chapter 34; 
c.  Subdivision regulations, Chapter 35. 
(12)  Code enforcement officers and inspectors within the department of property maintenance inspection shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Garbage and rubbish, Chapter 16; 
b.  Property maintenance ordinance, Chapter 28; 
c.  Nuisances, Chapter 21; 
d.  Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Chapter 34; 
(13)  The planning director, an assistant planner or other planner within the planning department shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person a municipal civil infraction citation upon reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of any of the following provisions of this Code: 
a.  Zoning ordinance, Appendix A, Articles 21 and 22; 
b.  Subdivision regulations, Chapter 35. 
(c)  Issuance of blight violations. Police officers, building inspectors, electrical inspectors, heating, refrigeration, and air quality control inspectors, plumbing inspectors, zoning inspectors, director of the division of buildings and safety engineering, fire inspectors, health officers, various waste water management employees, property maintenance inspectors, and certain planning department staff are authorized to issue blight violations. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-696, § 2, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 80-748, § 4, 1-24-17)  
Sec. 1-12. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced by an authorized city official upon the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 1-13. - Municipal civil infraction citation; issuance. 
Municipal civil infraction citation shall be issued and served by an authorized city official as follows: 
(1)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the respondent as provided by MCL 600.8705 of the Revised Judicature Act. 
(2)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(3)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(4)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
(a)  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
(b)  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 1-14. - Service of municipal civil infraction citations. 
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
(1)  An authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the respondent; or 
(2)  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the respondent, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting a copy of the citation on the land or attaching a copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(3)  In cases where an infraction occurs on school property, the authorized city official may designate a school official to serve the citation on students enrolled in their school. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 1-15. - Municipal civil infraction citations; contents. 
(a)  A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the respondent, the municipal civil infraction alleged, that the respondent shall appear at the 37th District Court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within ten (10) days after the citation is issued. 
(c)  The citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with explanation by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by either: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall also inform the respondent of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the respondent desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the respondent must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the respondent desires to deny responsibility, the respondent must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the respondent or the city. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the respondent must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at a formal hearing the respondent must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(e)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the respondent to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing will result in entry of a default judgment against the respondent on the municipal civil infraction. 
(f)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the respondent to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-696, § 3, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 1-16. - Penalties. 
A finding of responsibility of a municipal civil infraction shall result in the assessment of a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions as provided by the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, as amended, found at MCL 600.8727. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-696, § 4, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 1-17. - Imposition of costs. 
If a person, firm or corporation is ordered to pay a civil fine, the court shall also order payment of the costs as required by the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, as amended, MCL 600.8727. Costs of not more than $500.00 shall be ordered and except as otherwise provided by law, costs collected shall be returned to the general fund of the city or if it was a violation of Chapter 41, Water and Sewers, the costs collected shall be returned to the city's water and sewer system fund. The order to pay costs shall include the cost of the action to the city, covering all direct and indirect expenses to the city in connection with the municipal civil infraction including administrative costs for issuance of warning letters, inspection time, civil infraction issuance, additional inspections and attendance at court proceedings up to and including entry of judgment. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-696, § 5, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 1-18. - Collection of fines and costs. 
In addition to collection procedures implemented by the 37th District Court, the city attorney is authorized to institute any and all legal means for the collection of fines and costs imposed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 80-648, § 1, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 1-19. - Issuance of writ or order. 
In addition to ordering the payment of a civil fine, costs, a justice system assessment, damages and expenses, the court may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce the applicable ordinance as provided by the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, as amended, MCL 600.8302. 
(Ord. No. 80-696, § 6, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 1-20. - Failure to appear. 
(a)  A respondent, who was served as required by law, fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for a municipal civil infraction is guilty of a misdemeanor, which upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. 
(b)  Failure to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance shall result in entry of a default judgment against the respondent on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-696, § 7, 1-24-12)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers and liabilities, Ch. 3; city administration, Ch. 7. 
Cross reference— Builder's registration commission, § 9-319; house moving board, § 9-361 et seq.; emergency preparedness, Ch. 11; licensing, Ch. 18; administration and enforcement of mobile homes and trailers, § 20-16 et seq.; offenses against public administration, § 22-21 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 23-31 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 25; police, Ch. 26; zoning board of appeals, App. A, Art. XX; city planning commission, App. A, Art. XXI; administration of zoning provisions, App. A, Art. XXII. 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; Freedom of Information Act, MCL et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Seal. 
The seal provided and authorized for the city shall be an obverse side with a diameter of two (2) inches, the impression of which is a representation of a hand holding a sheaf of wheat at the bottom (representing the agricultural heritage of the community); with a residential dwelling on the lower right hand side (representing the residential character of the community); a factory on the left side (representing commerce and industry); a hand holding a rocket on the upper right (representing national defense technology); the heads of a young man and young woman in center at the top (representing the youth of the city); with the inscription "City of Warren, Michigan—Seal—" within a ring around the outer edge of the seal which seal shall have a gold background with all figures, lines and inscriptions thereon being in black. This seal, represented as aforesaid and used with or without colors, shall be and is hereby corrected, established, declared to have been, and now be, the seal of the city. For general use, the plain impression in white or on gold containing the figures as given above, as shown herewith, shall be sufficient. 
 
City Seal
(Code 1967, § 2-1101) 
Charter reference— City clerk is custodian of city seal, § 7.11(4). 
State Law reference— Forgery of records and instruments, MCL 750.248.  
Sec. 2-2. - Municipal flag. 
(a)  The forms, symbols and colors described and set forth in this section are hereby adopted for the municipal flag. 
(b)  The municipal flag shall be royal blue, with an enlarged seal of the city centered thereon in gold and black, except that the word "Seal" shall be excluded. The motto "Urbs Progressionis" shall appear above the seal motif in black on white flowing ribbon. Below the seal motif shall appear the word "Warren" in black on white flowing ribbon. The proportions of the municipal flag shall be in any of the dimensions officially prescribed for the national ensign by the government of the United States. 
(c)  The municipal flag shall be displayed at the City Hall, or other place later designated to be the seat of city government, on days when the national flag is displayed; provided, always, however, that such municipal flag shall never be displayed in any position that shall indicate superiority to or precedence over the flag of the United States. The mayor shall have control and authority over the use of the municipal flag and may cause it to be displayed on special occasions at other buildings and places in such a manner as the mayor may direct. 
(d)  The director of public services shall have custody of the municipal flag and cause to be made, in accordance with the design fixed in this section, such number of flags as the director may deem proper and necessary and of suitable size for use at the City Hall and other buildings and structures owned by the city. 
(e)  Any person may display a reproduction of the municipal flag in any manner not inconsistent with the laws governing the use and display of the United States flag; provided, however, in no event may a reproduction of the municipal flag be used for private advertising purposes. Private or individual use or manufacture of reproductions of the municipal flag is hereby encouraged for the usual and customary purposes of decoration and display. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-1102—2-1105, 2-1107) 
State Law reference— Flag and coat-of-arms, MCL 750.244 et seq.  
Sec. 2-3. - Deceptive use of a term or symbol representing the city. 
(a)  Matters otherwise legally acceptable in the mails which constitutes a solicitation by a nongovernmental entity for information or the dissemination of information, or the contribution of funds or membership fees, or the purchase of or payment for a product or service and which reasonably could be interpreted or construed as implying any City of Warren connection, approval or endorsement through the use of a seal, insignia, reference to the City of Warren, citation to a city ordinance, name of a city agency, department, commission, or program, trade or brand name, or any other term or symbol, unless: 
(1)  Such nongovernmental entity has such expressed connection, approval or endorsement; 
(2)  a.  Such matter bears on its face, in conspicuous and legible type in contrast by typography, layout, or color with other printing on its face, the following notice: "THIS ORGANIZATION HAS NOT BEEN APPROVED OR ENDORSED BY THE CITY OF WARREN, AND THIS OFFER IS NOT BEING MADE BY AN AGENCY OF THE CITY OF WARREN," or a notice to the same effect in words which the City of Warren shall prescribe; 
b.  The envelope or outside cover or wrapper in which such matter is mailed bears on its face in capital letters and in conspicuous and legible type, the following notice: "THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL DOCUMENT OF THE CITY OF WARREN," or a notice to the same effect in words which the City of Warren may prescribe; and 
c.  Such matter does not contain a false representation stating or implying that City of Warren benefits or services will be affected by any contribution or noncontribution; or 
(3)  Such matter is contained in a publication for which the addressee has paid or promised to pay a consideration or which he has otherwise indicated he desires to receive, except that this paragraph shall not apply if the solicitation is on behalf of the publisher of the publication. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 80-555, § 1, 4-25-00)  
Secs. 2-4—2-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, Ch. 5; city legislation, Ch. 6; elections, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-16. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays in every month at 7:00 p.m.; provided, however, that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, or a national, state or city election, such meeting shall be held within seven (7) calendar days at 7:00 p.m. 
(b)  All regular meetings of the city council shall be held in the council chambers located in the auditorium at the Warren Community Center, located at 5460 Arden, Warren, Michigan 48092. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-1001, 2-1002; Ord. No. 80-601, § 1, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 80-699, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Charter reference— Meetings of the council, § 5.3. 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.  
Secs. 2-17—2-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUBPOENAS TO APPEAR BEFORE COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of council to compel attendance of its members and of all other officers and department heads, § 5.3(h). 
 
Sec. 2-41. - Authority of council secretary to issue subpoenas. 
Upon an affirmative vote of the majority of the city council, the secretary of the council may issue subpoenas under the secretary's hand and the corporate seal of the city, directed to any council member and all other officers and department heads of the city, ordering such persons to appear before council at a certain time and place to be designated in such subpoena, to testify concerning such matters or things or to produce before council at such time and place such books, records, contracts, or other papers as shall be designated in such subpoenas. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1003)  
Sec. 2-42. - Service of subpoenas. 
Subpoenas issued under section 2-41 may be served by any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, and shall be served the same as subpoenas issued for the circuit court of the county. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1004)  
Sec. 2-43. - Refusal to appear, testify, etc.; aid by circuit court of county. 
If any council member, officer or department head subpoenaed, as provided in this division, shall fail to appear at such time and place, on due proof by affidavit of personal service upon the person subpoenaed, filed with the city clerk, or if any councilmember, officer or department head appearing shall refuse to testify or to answer any question relative to the matter under inquiry or produce any books, records, contracts or other papers required to be produced by the subpoena and under the control of such councilmember, officer or department head, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or if any councilmember, officer or department head so subpoenaed as provided in this division shall fail to appear at such time and place or, appearing, shall refuse to testify or to answer any question or to produce any books, records, contracts or papers which he or she has been directed to produce; council may, by petition, invoke the aid of the circuit court for the county in requiring the attendance and testimony of any councilmember, officer or department head and the production of all books, papers and documents. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1005)  
Sec. 2-44. - Designation of council secretary; issuance of process. 
In the absence of the council secretary, the assistant secretary to the council may issue all process provided for in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1006)  
Sec. 2-45. - Transcript of testimony. 
The testimony of all councilmembers, officers and department heads taken before council, as provided in this division, shall, in all cases, be taken under oath and reduced to writing by a stenographer employed for that purpose and be filed and preserved in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1007)  
Secs. 2-46—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Officers, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Application of odd-year election. 
(a)  The city shall hold its regular elections pursuant to the provisions of the state election law, MCL 168.644 et seq., regulating the odd-year general and primary elections. 
(b)  The odd-year primary election shall be held on the Tuesday following the second Monday in September and the odd-year general election shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year as provided by MCL 168.644. 
(c)  Nominating petitions for offices to be filled at the odd-year general election shall be filed pursuant to state election law, MCL 168.644(f). 
(d)  The nominating petition filing deadline contained in section 13.6 of the city charter shall only continue to apply for purposes of the election sign erection date contained in section 4A-13. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2201; Ord. No. 80-542, § 2, 4-13-99) 
Charter reference— Primary elections, § 13.5. 
State Law reference— Odd-year primary election, MCL 168.644b.  
Sec. 2-62. - Terms of elected officers. 
(a)  Pursuant to Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979 (MCL 117.3), as amended, the terms of office of all elected officers shall be four (4) years, the Charter to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(b)  This ordinance shall take effect sixty (60) days after it is enacted unless within the sixty (60) days a petition is submitted to the city clerk signed by not less than ten (10) percent of the registered electors of the city, requesting that the question of approval of the ordinance be submitted to the electors at the next regular election or a special election called for the purpose of approving or disapproving the ordinance. 
(c)  The four-year term of office shall apply to the 1987 municipal elections and thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 80-316, § 1, 4-8-86)  
Secs. 2-63—2-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Department of personnel management, § 25-166 et seq.; department of labor relations, § 25-181 et seq. 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Information systems department. 
(a)  There is hereby established an information systems department which shall be under the direction and control of the city controller in the department of accounting. The head of the information systems department shall be the information systems manager who shall be subject to the direction of the city controller. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the information systems manager to analyze as far as possible municipal problems, procedures and information for application to various computer systems. The information systems department shall be organized and operated in conformity with sound principles of computer analysis and operation. The services of the information systems department shall be available to all city departments. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-511, 2-512; Ord. No. 80-340, § 50, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-556, § 1, 5-9-00)  
Secs. 2-77—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Quorum of boards, § 2.4; officers, Ch. 4; mayor member of certain boards, § 7.7; authority to create boards and commissions, § 7.26. 
Cross reference— Builder's registration commission, § 9-319; house moving board, § 9-361 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 23-31 et seq.; civil service board, § 25-36 et seq.; defined benefit board of trustees, § 25-246 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, App. A, Art. XX; city planning commission, App. A, Art. XXI. 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - COUNCIL OF COMMISSIONS 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the city a commission hereafter to known as the Council of Commissions. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-92. - Purpose and function. 
The purpose and function of the Council of Commissions is to unite the city commissions into a representative council with the concept of sharing ideas, concerns, plans for improvement, and enrichment of the community. By promoting and encouraging public interest in its endeavors, the Council intends to strengthen the purpose and function of the individual city commissions. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-93. - Composition, appointment. 
The Council of Commissions shall consist of one member from each city commission interested in participating. The representative shall be appointed annually to the Council of Commissions by each individual commission. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-94. - Officers. 
The Council of Commissions shall elect each June one of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-95. - Meetings. 
The Council of Commissions shall meet at least four (4) times in one (1) year, and shall designate the time and place thereof. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-96. - Procedure, records. 
The Council of Commissions shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-97. - General powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Council of Commissions shall be as follows: 
(1)  To act as an advisory commission to the mayor, council, and the individual city commissions. 
(2)  To consider, study, and recommend ideas or plans to enhance the purpose and function of each individual city commission. 
(3)  To facilitate communications between each individual city commission in order to effectively and efficiently advance each commission's interest and to promote the best interests of the public. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers and duties of the individual city commissions. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-98. - Expenditures. 
Neither the Council of Commissions or any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-487, § 1, 10-10-95)  
Secs. 2-99, 2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the city a commission hereafter to be known as the city beautification commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-901)  
Sec. 2-102. - Composition, appointment. 
The city beautification commission shall consist of fifteen (15) members to be appointed by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-902)  
Sec. 2-103. - Officers. 
The city beautification commission shall each year elect one of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-903)  
Sec. 2-104. - Procedure; records. 
The city beautification commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings.  
Sec. 2-105. - Duties. 
The city beautification commission shall be charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To study, conceive, formulate, promulgate and develop plans for the beautification of streets, highways, alleys, parks, streams, playgrounds, yards, lots and buildings; 
(2)  To study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety and cleanliness of the city; 
(3)  To foster the prevention of fires, diseases and other public hazards; 
(4)  To encourage and recommend the placing, planting and preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of ornamentation in the city; 
(5)  To collect, study and evaluate information on community improvements and to make recommendations thereon; 
(6)  To sponsor, plan, promote, coordinate and carry out campaign activities for the restoration, preservation and enhancement of the beauty of the city; 
(7)  To otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of the appearance of the city; 
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers and duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-904)  
Sec. 2.106. - Expenditures. 
Neither the city beautification commission, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council.  
Sec. 2-107. - Advisory body. 
The following city officials or their designated representatives shall together act as a nonvoting advisory body to the city beautification commission, making recommendations and suggestions and aiding and cooperating in carrying out all of the duties of the commission as set forth in section 2-105: three (3) members of the city council, the director of public services, the police commissioner, the fire commissioner, the planning director, the director of parks and recreation, and one (1) member of the parks and recreation advisory commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-905)  
DIVISION 2.5. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, adopted March 26, 2002, amended Div. 2.5, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 2-180—2-119. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2.5 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Special assessments, Ch. 33; zoning, App. A. 
 
Sec. 2-108. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the "Downtown Development Authority Ordinance" of the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-109. - Determination of necessity; purpose. 
The city council hereby finds that the downtown district as described in section 2-112, is comprised of the principal business district within the City of Warren. The city council further determines that it is in the best interests of the public to adopt the 2005 Downtown District Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan and to create and authorize a public body corporate named the downtown development authority to implement the plan within the downtown district. The authority shall operate to halt property value deterioration, eliminate the causes of deterioration, promote development in accordance with the amended plan, increase property tax valuation and promote economic growth where possible in the downtown district of the city, pursuant to Michigan Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, MCLA 125.1651. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 80-633, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 2-110. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this division shall have the same meaning as given to them in Public Act 197 of 1975 as amended, MCLA 125.1651, or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this division: 
Authority means the downtown development authority created by this division. 
Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as amended, entitled the Downtown Development Authority Act, found at MCLA 125.1651. 
Board or board of directors means the board of directors of the downtown development authority. 
Chief executive officer means the mayor of the city. 
City means the City of Warren, Michigan. 
Council or city council means the City Council of the City of Warren. 
Development plan means the plan prepared in compliance with section 17 of Public Act 197 of 1975; MCLA 125.1667 designating the boundaries of the downtown district development area and proposed development, construction, renovation, rehabilitation, land acquisition and improvement. 
Downtown district or district means the business district designated by this division in section 2-112, as now existing or hereafter amended, and within which the authority shall exercise its powers. 
Downtown district development plan means the tax increment financing plan together with the development plan approved by the downtown development authority and adopted by the city council. Such plan may be amended as provided by Public Act 197 of 1975; MCLA 125.1651. 
Tax increment financing plan means the financing plan for the activities of the downtown development authority prepared in compliance with sections 14 to 16 of Public Act 197 of 1975; MCLA 125.1664 to 125.1666, submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-111. - Creation of authority; powers. 
There is hereby created pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, MCLA 125.1651, the downtown development authority for the City of Warren. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under title of the "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Warren". The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purposes of its incorporation as provided by this division and Public Act 197 of 1975, MCLA 125.1651. The enumeration of a power in this division or in Public Act 197 of 1975 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-112. - Description of downtown district. 
The downtown district shall consist of the area described below and as depicted on the map, attached to Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances, adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, and a copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk and the downtown development authority: 
Legal Description 
Land in Sections 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, and 17, T. 1 N., R. 12 E., City of Warren, Macomb County, Michigan; including but not limited to Sidwell Parcels Numbers: 13-03-101-001, 13-03-101-007, 13-03-101-008, 13-03-101-009, 13-03-101-010, 13-03-101-011, 13-03-101-016, 13-03-101-017, 13-03-101-018, 13-03-101-019, 13-03-101-044, 13-03-101-045, 13-03-101-046, 13-03-106-004, 13-03-106-005, 13-03-106-006, 13-03-106-012, 13-03-106-013, 13-03-106-014, 13-03-106-015, 13-03-106-016, 13-03-106-017, 13-03-106-018, 13-03-106-019, 13-03-106-020, 13-03-106-021, 13-03-106-022, 13-03-106-023, 13-03-106-024, 13-03-106-036, 13-03-106-037, 13-03-106-038, 13-03-106-039, 13-03-107-001, 13-03-107-002, 13-03-107-003, 13-03-107-004, 13-03-107-005, 13-03-107-006, 13-03-107-007, 13-03-107-008, 13-03-107-009, 13-03-107-010, 13-03-107-011, 13-03-107-012, 13-03-107-025, 13-03-107-026, 13-03-107-027, 13-03-107-028, 13-03-107-029, 13-03-107-030, 13-03-107-031, 13-03-108-001, 13-03-108-002, 13-03-108-003, 13-03-108-004, 13-03-151-011, 13-03-151-016, 13-03-151-017, 13-03-151-018, 13-03-151-021, 13-03-151-043, 13-03-151-044, 13-03-151-045, 13-03-151-046, 13-03-153-038, 13-03-301-001, 13-03-301-002, 13-03-351-001, 13-03-351-002, 13-03-351-003, 13-03-351-004, 13-03-351-005, 13-03-351-007, 13-03-351-009, 13-03-351-010, 13-03-351-011, 13-03-351-012, 13-03-351-013, 13-03-351-014, 13-03-351-015, 13-03-352-002, 13-03-352-003, 13-03-352-005, 13-03-352-007, 13-03-352-008, 13-03-352-009, 13-03-377-003, 13-03-377-008, 13-03-377-009, 13-03-377-010, 13-04-101-002, 13-04-101-003, 13-04-101-048, 13-04-101-049, 13-04-102-001, 13-04-102-002, 13-04-102-003, 13-04-102-004, 13-04-102-005, 13-04-102-006, 13-04-102-007, 13-04-103-056, 13-04-103-057, 13-04-126-015, 13-04-126-016, 13-04-126-018, 13-04-151-002, 13-04-151-003, 13-04-151-004, 13-04-151-005, 13-04-152-001, 13-04-152-002, 13-04-152-003, 13-04-153-022, 13-04-176-001, 13-04-201-002, 13-04-201-006, 13-04-201-008, 13-04-201-010, 13-04-201-011, 13-04-201-012, 13-04-201-013, 13-04-201-015, 13-04-201-018, 13-04-201-019, 13-04-201-020, 13-04-201-021, 13-04-201-022, 13-04-201-024, 13-04-201-025, 13-04-226-001, 13-04-226-002, 13-04-226-005, 13-04-226-006, 13-04-226-008, 13-04-226-009, 13-04-226-010, 13-04-226-012, 13-04-226-014, 13-04-226-016, 13-04-226-019, 13-04-226-021, 13-04-226-022, 13-04-226-023, 13-04-276-003, 13-04-276-006, 13-04-276-009, 13-04-276-010, 13-04-276-013, 13-04-276-014, 13-04-276-015, 13-04-276-017, 13-04-276-018, 13-04-276-019, 13-04-276-020, 13-04-277-001, 13-04-277-007, 13-04-278-001, 13-04-278-002, 13-04-278-003, 13-04-278-004, 13-04-278-007, 13-04-278-008, 13-04-301-001, 13-04-301-002, 13-04-301-008, 13-04-301-021, 13-04-302-001, 13-04-302-002, 13-04-302-003, 13-04-302-004, 13-04-302-005, 13-04-302-006, 13-04-302-007, 13-04-302-008, 13-04-302-009, 13-04-302-010, 13-04-302-011, 13-04-302-012, 13-04-302-013, 13-04-302-014, 13-04-302-025, 13-04-304-001, 13-04-304-002, 13-04-304-003, 13-04-304-010, 13-04-326-001, 13-04-326-002, 13-04-326-003, 13-04-351-009, 13-04-351-011, 13-04-351-013, 13-04-351-015, 13-04-351-016, 13-04-351-017, 13-04-376-002, 13-04-401-002, 13-04-401-004, 13-04-401-005, 13-04-401-010, 13-04-401-011, 13-04-401-012, 13-04-402-002, 13-04-402-005, 13-04-402-006, 13-04-402-007, 13-04-402-008, 13-04-402-009, 13-04-403-001, 13-04-403-005, 13-04-426-002, 13-04-427-007, 13-04-427-008, 13-04-427-009, 13-04-428-005, 13-04-428-008, 13-04-428-009, 13-04-428-010, 13-04-428-011, 13-04-451-008, 13-04-451-010, 13-04-476-001, 13-04-476-004, 13-04-476-008, 13-04-476-009, 13-04-476-010, 13-04-476-011, 13-04-476-012, 13-04-476-013, 13-04-476-018, 13-04-476-023, 13-04-476-024, 13-04-476-025, 13-04-476-026, 13-04-477-003, 13-05-227-009, 13-05-227-019, 13-05-229-018, 13-05-231-019, 13-05-231-020, 13-05-231-021, 13-05-231-022, 13-05-231-023, 13-05-231-024, 13-05-231-043, 13-05-251-004, 13-05-252-007, 13-05-252-016, 13-05-276-006, 13-05-276-007, 13-05-276-014, 13-05-276-015, 13-05-276-016, 13-05-276-017, 13-05-276-018, 13-05-277-005, 13-05-277-006, 13-05-278-003, 13-05-278-008, 13-05-430-010, 13-05-430-011, 13-05-430-012, 13-05-430-013, 13-05-430-017, 13-05-430-019, 13-05-431-004, 13-05-431-019, 13-05-432-008, 13-05-432-009, 13-05-476-002, 13-05-476-003, 13-05-476-004, 13-05-476-005, 13-05-476-006, 13-08-126-002, 13-08-126-005, 13-08-126-006, 13-08-203-001, 13-08-226-001, 13-08-401-001, 13-08-451-001, 13-08-451-002, 13-08-451-003, 13-08-451-004, 13-08-452-001, 13-08-452-002, 13-08-452-003, 13-08-452-004, 13-08-452-005, 13-08-452-006, 13-08-452-007, 13-08-452-010, 13-08-452-011, 13-08-452-012, 13-08-452-013, 13-08-452-014, 13-08-452-015, 13-08-452-016, 13-08-452-017, 13-08-453-001, 13-08-453-002, 13-08-453-003, 13-08-453-004, 13-08-453-005, 13-08-453-006, 13-08-453-010, 13-08-453-011, 13-08-476-001, 13-08-476-002, 13-08-476-003, 13-08-476-004, 13-08-476-005, 13-08-476-006, 13-08-476-007, 13-08-476-008, 13-08-476-009, 13-09-100-002, 13-09-200-001, 13-09-300-001, 13-09-400-002, 13-10-101-001, 13-10-101-002, 13-10-101-003, 13-10-101-005, 13-10-101-006, 13-10-101-011, 13-10-101-015, 13-10-101-016, 13-10-101-017, 13-10-102-002, 13-10-102-007, 13-10-102-008, 13-10-151-001, 13-10-151-007, 13-10-151-009, 13-10-151-010, 13-10-151-011, 13-10-151-015, 13-10-151-016, 13-10-151-017, 13-10-151-020, 13-10-151-022, 13-10-151-024, 13-10-151-025, 13-10-151-027, 13-10-151-029, 13-10-151-031, 13-10-152-006, 13-10-152-009, 13-10-152-014, 13-10-152-016, 13-10-152-018, 13-10-152-019, 13-10-180-001, 13-10-183-001, 13-10-183-002, 13-10-183-005, 13-10-301-003, 13-10-301-004, 13-10-301-005, 13-10-301-006, 13-10-301-007, 13-10-301-008, 13-10-301-010, 13-10-301-012, 13-10-301-013, 13-10-301-014, 13-10-301-015, 13-10-326-001, 13-10-326-002, 13-10-327-002, 13-10-327-003, 13-10-351-001, 13-10-352-001, 13-10-353-004, 13-10-353-007, 13-10-376-003, 13-10-376-004, 13-15-101-001, 13-15-101-002, 13-15-101-003, 13-15-101-004, 13-15-101-005, 13-15-101-006, 13-15-101-007, 13-15-101-008, 13-15-102-001, 13-15-102-012, 13-15-103-001, 13-15-104-031, 13-15-104-032, 13-15-105-001, 13-15-105-002, 13-15-105-003, 13-15-105-004, 13-15-105-005, 13-15-105-006, 13-15-105-007, 13-15-151-033, 13-15-155-003, 13-15-301-001, 13-15-301-003, 13-15-301-005, 13-15-304-001, 13-15-304-002, 13-15-304-003, 13-15-304-004, 13-15-304-005, 13-15-304-006, 13-15-351-001, 13-15-351-002, 13-15-351-003, 13-15-352-001, 13-15-352-002, 13-15-352-003, 13-15-352-004, 13-15-352-005, 13-15-352-006, 13-16-101-001, 13-16-101-002, 13-16-101-003, 13-16-101-004, 13-16-101-005, 13-16-101-008, 13-16-101-009, 13-16-101-010, 13-16-101-011, 13-16-101-013, 13-16-101-014, 13-16-101-017, 13-16-101-018, 13-16-101-019, 13-16-101-020, 13-16-101-021, 13-16-101-022, 13-16-126-001, 13-16-151-001, 13-16-151-002, 13-16-151-004, 13-16-151-005, 13-16-151-007, 13-16-151-008, 13-16-151-009, 13-16-176-001, 13-16-201-015, 13-16-201-020, 13-16-201-021, 13-16-202-006, 13-16-202-009, 13-16-202-013, 13-16-202-014, 13-16-202-017, 13-16-202-018, 13-16-202-019, 13-16-202-021, 13-16-202-022, 13-16-202-023, 13-16-202-024, 13-16-226-017, 13-16-226-018, 13-16-226-019, 13-16-226-020, 13-16-226-021, 13-16-226-022, 13-16-226-026, 13-16-226-055, 13-16-226-056, 13-16-226-057, 13-16-226-058, 13-16-226-059, 13-16-226-060, 13-16-226-061, 13-16-227-047, 13-16-227-048, 13-16-227-049, 13-16-227-050, 13-16-227-055, 13-16-228-022, 13-16-228-046, 13-16-228-047, 13-16-229-043, 13-16-230-023, 13-16-230-024, 13-16-230-025, 13-16-230-026, 13-16-230-027, 13-16-230-028, 13-16-251-002, 13-16-251-003, 13-16-251-004, 13-16-276-003, 13-16-301-001, 13-16-301-002, 13-16-301-007, 13-16-301-010, 13-16-301-011, 13-16-301-012, 13-16-301-013, 13-16-301-014, 13-16-301-015, 13-16-301-016, 13-16-301-017, 13-16-301-018, 13-16-301-019, 13-16-301-020, 13-16-301-021, 13-16-301-022, 13-16-301-023, 13-16-326-001, 13-16-326-002, 13-16-326-003, 13-16-326-004, 13-16-326-005, 13-16-326-006, 13-16-326-007, 13-16-351-011, 13-16-351-012, 13-16-351-013, 13-16-351-014, 13-16-351-016, 13-16-351-017, 13-16-351-018, 13-16-351-019, 13-16-351-020, 13-16-351-021, 13-16-351-022, 13-16-351-023, 13-16-351-024, 13-16-351-025, 13-16-351-026, 13-16-351-027, 13-16-351-028, 13-16-351-029, 13-16-351-031, 13-16-351-035, 13-16-351-036, 13-16-351-037, 13-16-401-004, 13-16-401-005, 13-16-401-006, 13-16-401-007, 13-16-426-009, 13-16-426-011, 13-16-426-012, 13-16-426-013, 13-16-426-016, 13-16-426-017, 13-16-426-018, 13-16-426-019, 13-16-426-020, 13-16-426-021, 13-16-426-022, 13-16-426-023, 13-16-426-024, 13-16-451-003, 13-16-451-009, 13-16-451-026, 13-16-451-027, 13-16-451-028, 13-16-452-003, 13-16-452-004, 13-16-452-009, 13-16-452-020, 13-16-480-020, 13-16-480-021, 13-16-480-023, 13-16-485-020, 13-16-485-021, 13-16-485-023, 13-16-485-034, 13-16-485-035, 13-17-226-029, 13-17-226-030, 13-17-226-031, 13-17-226-032, 13-17-226-035, 13-17-226-038, 13-17-226-039, 13-17-226-040, 13-17-226-041, 13-17-226-043, 13-17-226-044, 13-17-226-045, 13-17-227-015, 13-17-227-016, 13-17-227-017, 13-17-227-018, 13-17-228-007, 13-17-229-011, 13-17-277-001, 13-17-277-002, 13-17-277-003, 13-17-278-014, 13-17-278-015, 13-17-278-016, 13-17-279-026, 13-17-279-027, 13-17-426-017, 13-17-426-018, 13-17-426-019, 13-17-426-020, 13-17-426-021, 13-17-426-037, 13-17-427-012, 13-17-427-023, 13-17-427-024, 13-17-476-003, 13-17-476-026, 13-17-476-028, 13-17-476-030, 13-17-476-032; 
And being approximately described as beginning at a point on the north line of Section 5, said point being, the extension of the west line of Lot 16 of Assessor's Addition to the Village of Warren as recorded in Liber 4, Pages 58 through 62 of Plats, Macomb County Records, to the north line of Section 5, thence N.87°02'48?E., a distance of 817.37 feet; thence S.01°37'45?E., a distance of 165.40 feet; thence S.88°17'19?W., a distance of 101.07 feet; thence S.01°44'21?E., a distance of 468.61 feet; thence N.87°48'05?E., a distance of 61.15 feet; thence S.01°45'29?E., a distance of 150.26 feet; thence S.87°52'56?W., a distance of 158.30 feet; thence S.01°13'58?E., a distance of 565.64 feet; thence N.87°10'12?E., a distance of 207.75 feet; thence S.02°00'34?E., a distance of 125.89 feet; thence S.87°10'05?W., a distance of 209.46 feet; thence S.01°13'55?E., a distance of 249.29 feet; thence S.12°41'03?E., a distance of 60.75 feet; thence S.01°46'18?E., a distance of 382.96 feet; thence N.87°13'44?E., a distance of 540.49 feet; thence S.01°47'59?E., a distance of 489.71 feet; thence S.58°41'17?E., a distance of 479.07 feet; thence S.22°23'19?E., a distance of 108.01 feet; thence S.86°38'54?W., a distance of 35.85 feet; thence S.87°31'39?W., a distance of 493.35 feet; thence S.44°10'33?W., a distance of 326.91 feet; thence S.45°59'00?E., a distance of 156.17 feet; thence S.06°48'08?E., a distance of 74.34 feet; thence S.88°03'12?W., a distance of 147.30 feet; thence S.01°51'20?E., a distance of 611.46 feet; thence N.87°37'16?E., a distance of 145.52 feet; thence S.02°03'56?E., a distance of 122.36 feet; thence S.86°47'50?W., a distance of 145.52 feet; thence S.01°44'08?E., a distance of 379.01 feet; thence N.87°17'36?E., a distance of 606.71 feet; thence N.36°46'10?E., a distance of 183.85 feet; thence N.51°23'56?E., a distance of 175.62 feet; thence N.56°54'33?E., a distance of 140.77 feet; thence N.86°01'47?W., a distance of 92.02 feet; thence N.46°31'07?W., a distance of 31.89 feet; thence N.05°38'09?E., a distance of 75.89 feet; thence S.36°24'39?E., a distance of 13.73 feet; thence S.86°02'44?E., a distance of 538.36 feet; thence S.02°09'50?W., a distance of 18.78 feet; thence S.86°02'11?E., a distance of 805.31 feet; thence N.00°56'26?W., a distance of 680.83 feet; thence WEST, a distance of 215.23 feet; thence N.72°09'08?W., a distance of 260.43 feet; thence WEST, a distance of 90.88 feet; thence S.01°19'02?E., a distance of 26.54 feet; thence S.81°19'23?W., a distance of 742.56 feet; thence S.05°38'09?W., a distance of 501.82 feet; thence CONTINUEING S.05°38'09?W. ALONG SAID LINE, a distance of 75.89 feet; thence N.46°31'07?W., a distance of 266.36 feet; thence N.48°06'51?E., a distance of 116.78 feet; thence N.01°30'43?E., a distance of 69.73 feet; thence N.44°59'37?W., a distance of 188.96 feet; thence N.47°20'22?E., a distance of 129.92 feet; thence N.45°03'31?W., a distance of 427.69 feet; thence N.43°52'13?E., a distance of 432.83 feet; thence N.86°38'54?E., a distance of 35.85 feet; thence N.87°41'26?E., a distance of 210.94 feet; thence N.01°42'46?W., a distance of 2,262.76 feet; thence N.87°49'53?E., a distance of 311.01 feet; N.00°06'36?W., a distance of 289.99 feet; thence S.87°38'57?W., a distance of 102.26 feet; thence N.01°17'26?W., a distance of 17.70 feet; thence S.87°39'03?W., a distance of 217.00 feet; thence N.01°42'46?W., a distance of 460.33 feet; thence N.87°02'48?E., a distance of 3,975.44 feet; thence S.02°29'27?E., a distance of 160.45 feet; thence S.87°04'04?W., a distance of 128.27 feet; thence S.02°06'12?E., a distance of 21.52 feet; thence S.86°53'25?W., a distance of 9.95 feet; thence S.02°02'43?E., a distance of 655.68 feet; thence N.86°39'58?E., a distance of 10.32 feet; thence S.02°10'58?E., a distance of 210.84 feet; thence N.86°45'31?E., a distance of 616.33 feet; thence S.01°36'29?E., a distance of 158.21 feet; thence S.87°06'18?W., a distance of 135.82 feet; thence S.28°01'54?W., a distance of 99.07 feet; thence S.01°42'55?E., a distance of 40.76 feet; thence S.86°51'43?W., a distance of 118.01 feet; thence S.11°01'03?W., a distance of 79.95 feet; thence S.01°37'31?E., a distance of 119.52 feet; thence S.86°49'02?W., a distance of 117.43 feet; thence S.47°48'52?W., a distance of 64.66 feet; thence S.86°53'06?W., a distance of 135.99 feet; thence S.01°53'03?E., a distance of 120.44 feet; thence N.86°44'03?E., a distance of 136.04 feet; thence S.01°52'13?E., a distance of 118.27 feet; thence S.87°40'18?W., a distance of 139.59 feet; thence S.02°17'36?E., a distance of 1,009.75 feet; thence N.86°59'52?E., a distance of 135.75 feet; thence S.02°17'35?E., a distance of 128.97 feet; thence N.86°50'54?E., a distance of 479.07 feet; thence S.03°01'34?E., a distance of 120.86 feet; thence N.86°58'20?E., a distance of 124.19 feet; thence S.32°48'19?W., a distance of 227.73 feet; thence S.13°10'27?W., a distance of 392.52 feet; thence S.48°23'46?W., a distance of 197.79 feet; thence S.55°29'14?W., a distance of 359.08 feet; thence S.64°22'06?W., a distance of 145.52 feet; thence S.21°47'57?E., a distance of 142.53 feet; thence S.43°10'37?E., a distance of 603.69 feet; thence N.01°41'08?W., a distance of 240.71 feet; thence N.88°06'57?E., a distance of 670.97 feet; thence S.02°40'22?E., a distance of 449.28 feet; thence S.84°59'23?E., a distance of 177.82 feet; thence S.45°53'24?W., a distance of 154.57 feet; thence S.84°29'31?E., a distance of 397.60 feet; thence S.65°33'08?E., a distance of 150.10 feet; thence S.42°59'44?E., a distance of 748.38 feet; thence S.88°24'09?W., a distance of 883.80 feet; thence S.03°06'48?E., a distance of 396.78 feet; thence S.88°10'03?W., a distance of 374.95 feet; thence N.02°15'52?W., a distance of 78.71 feet; thence S.87°41'23?W., a distance of 505.05 feet; thence S.02°18'54?E., a distance of 654.30 feet; thence N.83°42'44?E., a distance of 6.03 feet; thence S.03°16'03?E., a distance of 44.56 feet; thence N.86°24'25?E., a distance of 263.13 feet; thence S.01°49'08?E., a distance of 440.78 feet; thence N.87°43'17?E., a distance of 456.70 feet; thence S.69°05'06?E., a distance of 98.06 feet; thence S.20°54'54?W., a distance of 395.75 feet thence 119.81 feet along a curve to the left having a radius of 80.00 feet and a central angle of 85°48'25?; chord bearing S.22°00'51?E., chord length 108.92 feet; thence 221.02 feet along a curve to the right having a radius of 205.00 feet and a central angle of 61°46'19?; chord bearing S.34°01'54?E., chord length 210.47 feet; thence S.03°08'54?E., a distance of 335.23 feet; thence N.87°47'16?E., a distance of 488.15 feet; thence N.01°48'33?W., a distance of 92.25 feet; thence N.86°58'16?E., a distance of 555.82 feet; thence S.02°13'35?E., a distance of 73.11 feet; thence N.87°11'08?E., a distance of 275.76 feet; thence S.01°20'29?E., a distance of 312.20 feet; thence S.86°08'09?W., a distance of 830.03 feet; thence S.01°09'13?E., a distance of 560.82 feet thence 660.04 feet along a curve to the right having a radius of 722.80 feet and a central angle of 52°19'14?; chord bearing S.24°30'30?W., chord length 637.34 feet; thence S.38°15'01?E., a distance of 163.23 feet; thence S.83°58'18?W., a distance of 199.97 feet; thence S.87°27'48?W., a distance of 1,257.55 feet; thence S.02°09'25?E., a distance of 304.58 feet; thence N.87°20'11?E., a distance of 1,256.66 feet; thence N.01°59'03?W., a distance of 301.80 feet; thence N.83°58'18?E., a distance of 199.97 feet; thence N.85°30'39?E., a distance of 1,168.47 feet; thence S.01°31'11?E., a distance of 565.58 feet; thence S.86°03'58?W., a distance of 1,114.17 feet; thence S.01°24'06?E., a distance of 55.19 feet; thence S.86°20'08?W., a distance of 248.16 feet; thence S.02°00'18?E., a distance of 599.56 feet; thence S.87°16'08?W., a distance of 122.36 feet; thence S.04°06'12?E., a distance of 230.69 feet; thence S.87°27'15?W., a distance of 1,083.07 feet; thence S.85°26'49?W., a distance of 402.86 feet; thence S.88°44'39?W., a distance of 959.46 feet; thence S.01°32'16?E., a distance of 108.26 feet; thence S.88°43'20?W., a distance of 44.79 feet; thence S.00°36'35?E., a distance of 1,094.96 feet; thence N.88°27'44?E., a distance of 975.20 feet; thence N.00°30'37?W., a distance of 198.76 feet; thence S.88°43'25?W., a distance of 38.61 feet; thence N.02°06'57?W., a distance of 146.78 feet; thence S.89°15'17?W., a distance of 40.58 feet; thence N.02°08'27?W., a distance of 144.23 feet; thence N.88°31'28?E., a distance of 163.49 feet; thence N.02°05'55?W., a distance of 194.99 feet; thence S.89°15'53?W., a distance of 24.93 feet; thence N.02°47'50?W., a distance of 512.67 feet; thence N.85°26'49?E., a distance of 402.86 feet; thence S.03°22'52?E., a distance of 122.59 feet; thence S.87°38'55?W., a distance of 53.13 feet; thence S.03°07'07?E., a distance of 660.42 feet; thence N.87°44'59?E., a distance of 53.48 feet; thence S.02°13'03?E., a distance of 123.80 feet; thence S.87°47'41?W., a distance of 51.20 feet; thence S.02°35'03?E., a distance of 177.67 feet; thence N.87°33'09?E., a distance of 147.27 feet; thence S.03°32'32?E., a distance of 639.49 feet; thence S.86°45'56?W., a distance of 262.66 feet; thence S.03°06'40?E., a distance of 724.49 feet; thence N.86°33'20?E., a distance of 267.80 feet; thence S.03°24'56?E., a distance of 188.04 feet; thence N.86°48'42?E., a distance of 229.96 feet; thence S.03°41'07?E., a distance of 836.82 feet; thence S.86°53'46?W., a distance of 206.77 feet; thence S.02°36'12?E., a distance of 236.88 feet; thence S.86°30'29?W., a distance of 107.70 feet; thence S.01°55'57?E., a distance of 863.49 feet; thence N.86°42'40?E., a distance of 1,243.74 feet; thence S.03°26'21?E., a distance of 502.95 feet; thence S.86°51'56?W., a distance of 1,553.91 feet; thence S.02°50'34?E., a distance of 16.17 feet; thence S.88°05'25?W., a distance of 214.39 feet; thence N.03°03'33?W., a distance of 99.47 feet; thence N.30°49'51?W., a distance of 22.91 feet; thence N.02°51'39?W., a distance of 154.68 feet; thence N.88°18'36?E., a distance of 119.26 feet; thence N.02°58'14?W., a distance of 902.41 feet; thence S.87°44'25?W., a distance of 1,130.83 feet; thence S.01°14'30?E., a distance of 1,190.08 feet; thence S.86°50'07?W., a distance of 3,798.77 feet; thence N.03°13'57?W., a distance of 572.97 feet; thence N.87°16'25?E., a distance of 8.41 feet; thence N.02°09'20?W., a distance of 1,159.74 feet; thence S.87°04'17?W., a distance of 267.96 feet; thence N.03°24'41?W., a distance of 300.48 feet; thence N.87°09'36?E., a distance of 85.17 feet; thence N.03°18'27?W., a distance of 341.44 feet; thence N.87°22'14?E., a distance of 47.30 feet; thence N.03°19'53?W., a distance of 170.54 feet; thence N.08°16'45?W., a distance of 92.36 feet; thence N.01°35'16?W., a distance of 206.07 feet; thence S.87°09'23?W., a distance of 47.37 feet; thence N.01°29'03?W., a distance of 206.54 feet; thence N.87°15'29?E., a distance of 99.50 feet; thence N.02°02'23?E., a distance of 59.85 feet; thence N.01°32'24?W., a distance of 206.89 feet; thence S.87°20'33?W., a distance of 1,006.33 feet; thence N.01°34'33?W., a distance of 634.90 feet; thence N.87°51'22?E., a distance of 952.19 feet; thence N.00°54'28?W., a distance of 321.02 feet; thence S.87°44'07?W., a distance of 382.27 feet; thence N.01°43'50?W., a distance of 347.37 feet; thence N.87°34'31?E., a distance of 398.76 feet; thence N.02°17'25?W., a distance of 336.56 feet; thence S.87°50'42?W., a distance of 1,074.90 feet; thence N.02°34'55?W., a distance of 133.20 feet; thence S.87°01'19?W., a distance of 115.68 feet; thence N.02°58'31?W., a distance of 270.48 feet; thence S.87°03'33?W., a distance of 1,300.10 feet; thence N.03°18'35?W., a distance of 2,526.65 feet; thence N.86°14'54?E., a distance of 116.00 feet; thence N.00°36'12?W., a distance of 2,674.51 feet; thence S.88°07'01?W., a distance of 786.36 feet; thence S.00°14'38?E., a distance of 199.78 feet; thence S.88°42'31?W., a distance of 252.47 feet; thence N.10°00'56?W., a distance of 74.58 feet; thence S.84°25'16?E., a distance of 89.08 feet; thence N.00°05'20?E., a distance of 257.54 feet; thence N.87°50'31?E., a distance of 2,201.86 feet; thence N.02°25'02?W., a distance of 610.31 feet; thence N.88°25'11?E., a distance of 579.49 feet; thence N.02°17'40?W., a distance of 309.50 feet; thence N.88°26'54?E., a distance of 625.63 feet; thence N.01°57'48?W., a distance of 441.60 feet; thence S.88°28'20?W., a distance of 283.54 feet; thence N.02°08'12?W., a distance of 133.30 feet; thence N.88°44'07?E., a distance of 68.64 feet; thence N.02°05'23?W., a distance of 282.56 feet; thence N.88°39'37?E., a distance of 50.35 feet; thence N.01°53'11?W., a distance of 165.44 feet; thence N.88°01'55?E., a distance of 42.92 feet; thence N.01°58'08?W., a distance of 185.72 feet; thence S.88°02'02?W., a distance of 130.00 feet; thence N.01°56'09?W., a distance of 135.89 feet; thence N.88°04'22?E., a distance of 165.91 feet; thence N.01°57'52?W., a distance of 284.55 feet; thence N.87°40'38?E., a distance of 40.06 feet; thence N.02°46'14?W., a distance of 146.89 feet; thence S.87°28'35?W., a distance of 296.63 feet; thence N.25°36'37?W., a distance of 203.45 feet; thence S.86°42'04?W., a distance of 666.42 feet; thence N.03°09'02?W., a distance of 76.05 feet; thence S.85°46'00?W., a distance of 550.35 feet; thence S.03°22'11?E., a distance of 91.26 feet; thence N.78°25'04?W., a distance of 113.13 feet; thence S.02°21'30?E., a distance of 322.42 feet; thence S.86°52'56?W., a distance of 895.78 feet; thence N.02°31'14?W., a distance of 420.91 feet; thence S.88°38'06?W., a distance of 149.02 feet; thence N.02°03'57?W., a distance of 766.45 feet; thence N.86°40'32?E., a distance of 2,346.86 feet; thence S.03°20'56?E., a distance of 387.73 feet; thence N.87°18'05?E., a distance of 255.72 feet; thence N.02°14'27?W., a distance of 249.32 feet; thence N.86°48'36?E., a distance of 54.45 feet; thence N.02°06'54?W., a distance of 205.58 feet; thence N.87°00'16?E., a distance of 47.45 feet; thence N.02°28'38?W., a distance of 142.51 feet; thence S.86°36'17?W., a distance of 115.83 feet; thence N.01°53'29?W., a distance of 482.59 feet; thence N.86°32'43?E., a distance of 203.93 feet; thence N.02°12'20?W., a distance of 118.75 feet; thence S.86°36'34?W., a distance of 411.90 feet; thence N.01°28'28?W., a distance of 968.03 feet to the point of beginning. 
Containing 2,488 acres, more or less. 
and: 
Lands within the municipal limits of the City of Warren, Macomb County, Michigan, beginning at the northwest corner of the Southwest ¼ of Section 27 T.1N, R.12E, thence east along the centerline of Stephens Road 153 feet, thence south to the northwest corner of Lot 65 of "Chapp Highland Subdivision"; thence east along the north line of said Lot 65 to the northeast corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of said Lot 65 to the southeast corner of Lot 69 of said "Chapp Highland Subdivision"; thence west along the south line of said Lot 69 to the southwest corner of said lot; thence south along the west line of Lot 13 of said "Chapp Highland Subdivision" to the northeast corner of Lot 1 of "Leo A. Temrowski's Greater Van Dyke Subdivision" Also being the south right-of-way line of Jewett Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the south right-of-way line of said Jewett Avenue to the northeast corner of Lot 7 of said "Leo A. Temrowski's Greater Van Dyke Subdivision"; thence south along the east line of Lot 7 and 78 of "Leo A. Temrowski's Greater Van Dyke Subdivision" to the south right-of-way line of Essex Ave. (50 feet wide) also being the northwest corner of Lot 92 of said "Leo A. Temrowski's Greater Van Dyke Subdivision"; thence along the south right-of-way line of said Essex Avenue also being the north line of Lots 92 and 93 of said "Leo A. Temrowski's Greater Van Dyke Subdivision" to the northeast corner of said Lot 93; thence south along the east line of Lot 93 to the southeast corner of said lot; thence along the south line of Lots 91 through 93 to the northeast corner of Lot 163 of said "Leo A. Temrowski's Greater Van Dyke Subdivision"; thence south along Lots 163 through 168 of said "Leo A. Temrowski's Greater Van Dyke Subdivision" to the southerly right-of-way line of Timken Avenue (50 feet wide) also being the northwest corner of Lot 31 of "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1"; thence east along the north line of Lots 30 and 31 of "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the northeast corner of said Lot 30; thence south along the east line of Lot 30 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the southeast corner of said lot; thence west along the south line of Lots 30 and 31 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the northeast corner of Lot 35; thence south along Lots 35 through 37 and 100 through 102 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the southeast corner of said Lot 102; thence east along the north line of Lot 106 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the northwest corner of Lot 166 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" also being the south line of Republic Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 165 and 166 to the northeast corner of said Lot 165; thence south along the east line of Lot 165 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the southeast corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lots 177 and 178 to the northeast corner of said Lot 178; thence south along the east line of Lot 178 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the southeast corner of said lot, also being the north right-of-way line of Continental Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 176 through 178 to the southwest corner of said Lot 176; thence south along the east line of Lot 234 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" and the northerly extension thereof, to the southeast corner of said Lot 234; thence west along the south line of Lot 234 to the southwest corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lot 242 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" and the southerly extension thereof, to the southerly right-of-way line of Paige Avenue (50 feet wide), also the northeast corner of Lot 303 of "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1"; thence east along Lots 302 through 273 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the northeast corner of said Lot 273, also being the west right-of-way line of Federal Avenue (50 feet wide); thence south along the east line of Lots 273 and 340 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the southeast corner of said Lot 340, also being the north right-of-way line of Nine Mile Road (66 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 326—340 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1" to the southeast corner of Lot 325 of said "Pipers Van Dyke Subdivision No. 1", also being the west right-of-way line of Automobile Boulevard (50 feet wide); thence south along the east line of Lot 17 of "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" and the northerly extension thereof to the southeast corner of Lot 17 of "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms"; thence west along the south line of Lots 17 through 23 to the southwest corner of said Lot 23; thence south along the east line of Lot 389 of "amended plat of Lots 30 through 43, Lots 67 through 70 & the vacated portion of Dodge Ave., Piper's First Van Dyke Farms" to the southeast corner of said lot also being the north right-of-way line of Dodge Avenue (50 feet wide); thence along the south right-of-way line of said Dodge Avenue and the south line of Lot 389 of said "amended plat of Lots 30 through 43, Lots 67 through 70 & the vacated portion of Dodge Ave., Piper's First Van Dyke Farms" to the west right-of-way line of said Dodge Avenue; thence south along the west right-of-way line of Dodge Avenue and the east line of Lot 392 of said "amended plat of lots 30 through 43, lots 67 through 70 & the vacated portion of Dodge Ave., Piper's First Van Dyke Farms" to the southeast corner of Lot 392; thence west along the south line of Lot 392 of said "amended plat of Lots 30 through 43, Lots 67 through 70 & the vacated portion of Dodge Ave., Piper's First Van Dyke Farms" to the northeast corner of Lot 76 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms"; thence south along the east line of Lot 76 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the southeast corner of said lot, also being the north right-of-way line of Maxwell Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 75 and 76 of "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the southwest corner of said Lot 75; thence south along the east line of Lots 107 through 111 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the northwest corner of Lot 143 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms", also being the south right-of-way line of Cadillac Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lot 143 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the northeast corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lot 143 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the southeast corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lot 151 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the northeast corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lot 151 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the southeast corner of said lot, also being the north right-of-way line of Ford avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 150 and 151 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lots 182 through 186 of said "Pipers First Van Dyke Farms" and the east line of Lots 219 through 258 of "Pipers Second Van Dyke Farms" to the northwest corner of Lot 261 of said "Pipers Second Van Dyke Farms"; thence east along the north line of Lot 261 of said "Pipers Second Van Dyke Farms" to the northeast corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lot 261 of said "Pipers Second Van Dyke Farms" to the southeast corner of said lot, also being the north right-of-way line of Hudson Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lot 261 of said "Pipers Second Van Dyke Farms" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lots 293 through 297 of said "Pipers Second Van Dyke Farms" and the east line of Lots 330 through 334 of "Pipers Third Van Dyke Farms" to the northeast corner of Lot 367 of said "Pipers Third Van Dyke Farms"; thence east along the north line of Lot 366 of said "Pipers Third Van Dyke Farms" to the northeast corner of the west ½ of said Lot 366; thence south along the east line of the west ½ of Lot 366 of said "Pipers Third Van Dyke Farms" to the southeast corner of the west ½ of said lot; thence west along the south line of Lot 366 of said "Pipers Third Van Dyke Farms" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lots 369 through 371 of said "Pipers Third Van Dyke Farms" to the northwest corner of Lot 287 of "the Maples Subdivision", also being the south right-of-way line of Toepfer Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 287 and 288 of said "the Maples Subdivision" to the northeast corner of said lot; thence south along the east line of Lot 288 of said "the Maples Subdivision" to the southeast corner of said lot; thence west along the south line of Lots 287 and 288 of said "the Maples Subdivision" to the northeast corner of Lot 7 of said "the Maples Subdivision" thence southerly along the east line of Lots 7 through 12 of said "the Maples Subdivision", also being the west line of a 16 feet public alley, to the northeast corner of Lot 13 of said "the Maples Subdivision", also being the south right-of-way line of Orchard Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 204 through 207 to the northeast corner of the west 23 feet of Lot 207 of said "the Maples Subdivision"; thence south along the east line of the west 23 feet of lot 207 of said "the Maples Subdivision" to the southeast corner of the west 23 feet of said lot; also being the centerline of a vacated public alley; thence west along the centerline of said alley to the northeast corner of Lot 201 of said "the Maples Subdivision"; thence south along the east line of Lot 201 to the southeast corner of said lot, also being the north right-of-way line of Meadow Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 201 through 203 of said "the Maples Subdivision" to the northerly extension of the east line of Lots 25 through 36 of said "the Maples Subdivision"; thence southerly along the northerly extension of the east line of Lots 25 through 36 of said "the Maples Subdivision" and the east line of said lots, also being the west line of a 16 feet public alley, to the northeast corner of Lot 37 of said "the Maples Subdivision", also being the south right-of-way line of Prospect Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the south right-of-way line of said Prospect Avenue to the northwest corner of Lot 43 of said "the Maples Subdivision"; thence southerly along the west line of Lot 43 of said "the Maples Subdivision", also being the east line of a 20 feet public alley, to the southwest corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lots 48 and 49 of "Winchester Subdivision" to the northeast corner of the west 28 feet of said Lot 48; thence south along the east line of the west 28 feet of Lot 48 of said "Winchester Subdivision" to the southeast corner of the west 28 feet of said lot, also being the south right-of-way line of Westminster Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 48 and 49 of said "Winchester Subdivision" to the south west corner of said Lot 49; thence southerly along the east line of Lots 56 through 61 of said "Winchester Subdivision", also being the west line of a 20 feet public alley, to the southeast corner of said Lot 61; thence east along the south line of Lots 62 through 67 of said "Winchester Subdivision", to the southeast line of the west 14 feet of said Lot 67; thence southerly to the north right-of-way line of Fisher Avenue (50 feet wide), said point being 302 feet east of said Van Dyke Avenue; thence west along the north right-of-way line of said Fisher Avenue to the northerly extension of the east line of Lot 10 of "Kroll Van Dyke Ave. Subdivision"; thence south along the northerly extension of the east line of Lot 10 of said "Kroll Van Dyke Ave. Subdivision", and the easterly line of said Lot 10, to the southeast corner of said lot; thence west along the south line of Lot 10 of said "Kroll Van Dyke Ave. Subdivision", to the northeast corner of Lot 18 of said "Kroll Van Dyke Ave. Subdivision"; thence south along the east line of Lot 18 to the southeast corner of said lot, also being the north right-of-way line of Jackson Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lot 18 of said "Kroll Van Dyke Ave. Subdivision" to the southeast corner of lot 15 of said "Kroll Van Dyke Ave. Subdivision"; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 8 through 14, and the west line of a 20 feet public alley, to the westerly extension of the north line of Lots 92 and 93 of "a. J. Christe's"; thence east along the westerly extension of the north line of Lots 92 and 93 of said "A. J. Christe's", and the northerly line of said Lots 92 and 93, to the north east corner of said Lot 93; thence south along the east line of Lot 93 of said "A. J. Christe's" to the northwest corner of Lot 164 of said "A. J. Christe's", also being the south right-of-way line of Rivard Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 164 through 154 of said "A. J. Christe's", to the northeast corner of said Lot 154; thence south along the east line of Lot 154 to the centerline of a vacated 16 feet public alley; thence west along the centerline of said vacated alley to the northerly extension of the easterly line of Lot 177 of said "A. J. Christe's"; thence south to the northeast corner of Lot 177 of said "A. J. Christe's"; thence east along the north line of Lots 178 through 182 to the northeast corner of said Lot 182; thence north along the northerly extension of the east line of Lot 182 of said "A. J. Christe's", to the centerline of said vacated alley; thence east along the easterly extension of the centerline of said vacated alley to the centerline of vacated Ascension Avenue (50 feet wide); thence south along the centerline of said Ascension Avenue to the north right-of-way line of eight mile road (variable width); thence west along the north right-of-way line of said Eight Mile Road to the southwest corner of Lot 214 of "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision"; thence north along the west line of Lot 214 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", also being the east right-of-way line of Winfield Avenue (50 feet wide), to the northwest corner of said lot; thence east along the south line of Lot 167 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", to the southeast corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lot 168 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", to the northwest corner of said lot, also being the south right-of-way line of Rivard Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 168 through 171 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", to the northeast corner of said Lot 171; thence south along the east line of Lot 171 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", to the southeast corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lot 208 through 188 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision" to the northwest corner of Lot 3 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision"; thence northerly along the west line of Lots 4 through 9 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", also being the east line of an 18 feet public alley, to the northwest corner of said Lot 9; thence west to the southwest corner of Lot 145; thence north along the west line of Lot 145 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", to the north right-of-way line of Jackson Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the north right-of-way line of said Jackson Avenue to the southwest corner of Lot 109 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision"; thence north along the west line of Lot 109 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision" to the northwest corner of said lot; thence west along the south line of Lots 101 and 102 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision" to the southwest corner of said Lot 101; thence north along the west line of Lot 101 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", to the northwest corner of said lot, also being the south right-of-way line of Fisher Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 101 through 103 to the northwest corner of Lot 18 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision"; thence northerly to the southwest corner of Lot 22 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", also being the east line of a 18 feet public alley; thence west to the southwest corner of Lot 61 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision"; thence north along the west line of Lot 61 of said "Rivard's Gardens Subdivision", to the southwest corner of Lot 4 of "Jackson Subdivision", also being the north right-of-way line of Yacht Avenue (50 feet wide); thence north along the west line of Lot 4 of said "Jackson Subdivision", to the northwest corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lot 4 of said "Jackson Subdivision" to the southwest corner of Lot 1 of "Leo A. Temrowski's Subdivision"; thence northerly along the west line of Lots 1 through 7, also being the east line of a 20 feet public alley, to the southwest corner of Lot 2723 of "Pipers Van Dyke No. 9" also being the north right-of-way line of Orchard Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the north right-of-way line of said Orchard Avenue to the centerline of a vacated 20 feet public alley; thence northerly along the centerline of said vacated alley to the northwest corner of Lot 2610 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 9", thence west along the south line of Lot 1069 of "Pipers Van Dyke No. 5" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lot 1069 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 5" to the northwest corner of said lot, also being the south line of Toepfer Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lot 1069 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 5" to the northeast corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lots 1063, 1064 and 1012 through 1014 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the southeast corner of Lot 1009 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4", also being the north right-of-way line of Chalmers Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lot 1009 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lots 1009 and 914 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the southwest corner of Lot 908 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4", also being the north right-of-way line of Studebaker Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 907 through 905 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the southwest corner of said Lot 905; thence north along the west line of Lot 905 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the northwest corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lots 905 through 908 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the northeast corner of said Lot 908; thence north along the west line of Lots 840 through 842, 769 through 771, 838 and 839 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4", to the southwest corner of Lot 768 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4", also being the north right-of-way line of Packard Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lot 766 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lot 766 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the northwest corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lot 766 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the northeast corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lots 697 through 700 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the northwest corner of said Lot 697; thence east along the north line of Lot 697 of said "Pipers Van Dyke No. 4" to the southwest corner of Lot 1519 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6", also being the east line of a 16 feet public alley; thence north along the west line of Lots 1516 through 1519 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6", to the easterly extension of the south line of Lot 1510 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6"; thence west along the south line of Lot 1510 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lots 1510, 1485, 1474, 1449, 1438, and 1413 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6" to the northwest corner of said Lot 1413; thence west along the south line of Lot 1401 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6" to the southeast corner of Lot 1378 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6", also being the north right-of-way line of Dodge Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 1378 through 1382 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6" to the southwest corner of said Lot 1382; thence north along the west line of Lot 1382 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6" to the northwest corner of said lot; thence west along the south line of Lots 1350 through 1359 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6" to the southwest corner of said Lot 1350, also being the east right-of-way line of Peters Avenue (50 feet wide); thence north along the west line of Lot 1350 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 6" to the northwest corner of Lot 447 of "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2", also being the south right-of-way line of Paige Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 436 through 447 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2" to the northeast corner of said Lot 436; thence north to the northwest corner of Lot 428 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2"; thence west along the south line of Lot 384 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lot 384 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2" to the southeast corner of Lot 374 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2", also being the north right-of-way line of Continental Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 372 through 374 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2" to the southeast corner of said Lot 372; thence north along the west line of Lot 372 of said "Piper's Van Dyke Subdivision No. 2" to the northwest corner of Lot 41 of "Jackson Park", also being the south right-of-way line of Lozier Avenue (50 feet wide); thence east along the north line of Lots 37 through 41 of said "Jackson Park" to the northwest corner of Lot 36 of said "Jackson Park"; thence north along the west line of Lots 89 through 93 of said "Jackson Park" and Lots 216 through 220 of "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision" to the southwest corner of Lot 163 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision", also being the north right-of-way line of George Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lots 164 through 166 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision" to the southwest corner of said Lot 166; thence north along the west line of Lot 166 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision" to the northwest corner of said lot; thence east along the north line of Lots 164 through 166 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision" to the northeast corner of said Lot 164, also being the west line of a 18 feet public alley; thence north along the east line of Lot 153 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision" to the southeast corner of Lot 102 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision", also being the north right-of-way line of Theut Avenue (50 feet wide); thence west along the south line of Lot 102 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision" to the southwest corner of said lot; thence north along the west line of Lots 27, 38, 41, 102 of said "Poleski Van Dyke Subdivision" to the centerline of Wood Avenue (60 feet wide); thence east along the centerline of said Wood Avenue to the centerline of said Van Dyke Avenue; thence north along the centerline of said Van Dyke Avenue to the point of beginning. 
Containing 91 acres more or less 
Subject to the rights of the public and any governmental unit in any part of land taken, used or deeded for road or highway purposes and subject to any covenants, easements or restrictions of record, if any. 
Note: These legal descriptions have been prepared from City of Warren Record Information. No field surveys have been performed and no property irons have been set. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 80-633, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 2-113. - Adoption of downtown district development plan. 
The tax increment financing plan together with the development plan shall constitute the downtown district development plan. The downtown district development plan, as amended and as approved by the downtown development authority, was submitted to the city council on August 23, 2005 and accepted as amended by the city council on March 28, 2006, and is hereby adopted as amended except that: 
(1)  The actual parts of each project to be financed by each series of bonds will be approved by a resolution of the downtown development authority and referred to the city council for approval by the city council. 
(2)  The approval will include an approximate description of the public facilities being financed together with a cost estimate therefor. 
A full copy of the downtown district development plan shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and the downtown development authority for inspection by the public. After public hearing and due consideration the city council determines that the downtown development plan as amended: 
(a)  The amended tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 14 and 15 of said Act 197; 
(b)  The amended development plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of said Act No. 197; 
(c)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing; 
(d)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of said Act No. 197; 
(e)  The amended development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city; 
(f)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the project area; 
(g)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 80-633, § 3, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 2-114. - Board of directors. 
The authority shall be under the supervision and control of the board. The board shall consist of the chief executive officer plus eight (8) members. Members shall be appointed by the chief executive officer, subject to approval by the council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an interest in property located in the district. (Not less than one (1) of the members shall be the representative of the Warren Consolidated Schools.) If the district has one hundred (100) or more persons residing within it, not less than one (1) of the members shall be a resident of the district. Members shall be appointed to serve for a term of four (4) years, except that of the members first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for terms of one (1) year, two (2) shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years, two (2) shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years, and two (2) shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed and qualified. Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify by taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the chief executive officer for the unexpired term only. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the board shall be elected by the board. The board shall adopt bylaws governing its procedures subject to the approval of the council. The board may employ and fix the compensation of a director, subject to the approval of the city council. Such director shall furnish a bond in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) payable to the authority for use and benefit of the Authority and shall file the same with the city clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-115. - Powers of authority. 
Except as specifically otherwise provided in this division, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-116. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the council. 
(b)  The board shall prepare annually a budget and shall submit it to the council for approval in the manner and at the time as set forth in the adopted bylaws, and which budget shall contain the information, required of municipal departments. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the council. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)  The authority shall submit financial reports to the council at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the council. 
(d)  All expense items of the authority shall be publicized monthly and the financial records shall always be open to the public in accordance with Public Act 197 of 1975. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 80-633, § 4, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 2-117. - Termination. 
Upon completion of its purposes, the authority may be dissolved by the city council. The property and assets of the authority, after dissolution and satisfaction of the obligations of the authority, shall revert to the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-118. - Section headings; severability; repealer. 
Section headings are provided for convenience only and are not intended to be part of this division. If any portion of this division is held to be unlawful, the remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect. Any prior or existing inconsistent ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions herein are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-119. - Publication and filing. 
This division shall be published after its adoption in full in the Macomb Daily, a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and the city clerk shall file a certified copy of this division with the Michigan Secretary of State promptly after its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 80-584, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY HISTORICAL COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the city a commission hereafter to be known as the city historical commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1201)  
Sec. 2-122. - Composition, appointment. 
The city historical commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1202)  
Sec. 2-123. - Officers. 
The city historical commission shall each year elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1204)  
Sec. 2-124. - Meetings. 
The city historical commission shall hold meetings regularly, at least once in each month, and shall designate the time and place thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1204)  
Sec. 2-125. - Procedure; records. 
The city historical commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1204)  
Sec. 2-126. - Functions. 
The functions of the city historical commission shall be to further public interest in all matters relating to the history of the city and its environs, and to that end it may acquire and maintain appropriate exhibits, cooperate in educational and research programs, and issue bulletins and other publications. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1205)  
Sec. 2-127. - General powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the city historical commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  To acquire, collect, own and exhibit, in the name of the city, articles of historical interest and value which pertain to the history of the city and its environs; 
(2)  With the approval of the city council and in the name of the city, to acquire, take and hold, by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, such real and personal property as may be proper for carrying out the objects and functions for which it is established, and any property, real or personal, received in trust shall be held in the name of the city, but in conformity with the terms of the trust; 
(3)  To otherwise promote public interest in, and to preserve, the history of the city and its environs; 
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers and duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1206)  
Sec. 2-128. - Expenditures. 
Neither the city historical commission, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council.  
Sec. 2-129. - Historical society. 
(a)  The city historical commission may create, if it deems it necessary and convenient in achieving its objects and purposes, an historical society consisting of persons interested in discovering and preserving the history of the city and its environs. The historical society shall exist for the sole purpose of assisting the commission in achieving its aims and purposes. 
(b)  The city historical commission, upon creating an historical society, shall determine the fees or dues to be charged for membership in the society. All dues or fees so collected shall be used and applied in conformance with the exercise of the powers and the duties enumerated in the commission for the purpose of furthering public interest in the history of the city and its environs. 
(c)  The city historical commission shall, on the last day of each month, file with the controller and city treasurer a report giving the date of collection or receipt of all money collected or received by the commission, and shall pay monthly into the city treasury all moneys so collected. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1207)  
DIVISION 3.5. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 1993, amended the Code by the addition of §§ 2-130—2-139, and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been designated as Div. 3.5. 
Cross reference— Downtown development authority, § 2-108 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-130. - Title. 
This division [Ordinance No. 80-445] shall be known as the "Downtown Development Authority Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan Ordinance" of the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-131. - Determinations. 
(a)  The city council hereby determines that the Downtown Development Authority (herein the "authority") has prepared and recommended for approval a development and tax increment financing plan on file with the city clerk (herein the "plan") for the development area in the authority's downtown district within the City of Warren (herein the "city"). 
(b)  The city council hereby determines that on November 9, 1993, it held a public hearing on the plan pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended (the "Act"). 
(c)  The city council hereby determines that it has given the taxing jurisdictions in which the development area is located an opportunity to meet with the city council and to express their views and recommendations regarding the plan, as required by the Act. 
(d)  The city council hereby determines that after consideration of the plan, it has decided to approve the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-132. - Findings. 
(a)  The development plan included in the plan meets the requirements set forth in section 17(2) of the Act and the tax increment finance plan meets the requirements set forth in section 14(2) of the Act. 
(b)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(c)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose of the Act. 
(d)  Any land included within the development area to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
(e)  The plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
(f)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the development area. 
(g)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities, to the extent required by the plan, are reasonably necessary for the development plan and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-133. - Public purpose. 
The city council hereby determines that the plan constitutes a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-134. - Best interest of the public. 
The city council hereby determines that it is in the best interests of the public to proceed with the plan in order to halt property value deterioration, to increase property tax valuation, to eliminate the cause of the deterioration in property values, and to promote growth in the downtown district. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-135. - Approval and adoption of plan. 
The plan is hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the plan and all later amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-136. - Conflict and severability. 
All ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of the division are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed, and each section of the division and each subdivision of any section thereof is hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or holding of any section or subdivision thereof to be invalid or void shall not be deemed or held to affect the validity of any other section or subdivision of the division. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-137. - Paragraph headings. 
The paragraph headings in this division are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be a part of the division. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-138. - Publication and recordation. 
This division [Ordinance No. 80-445] shall be published in full promptly after its adoption in the Macomb Daily, a newspaper of general circulation in the city, qualified under state law to publish legal notices, and shall be recorded in the ordinance book of the city, which recording shall be authenticated by the signature of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-139. - Effective date. 
This division is hereby determined by the city council to be immediately necessary for the interests of the city and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and upon publication as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 80-445, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY CRIME COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses generally, Ch. 22; police, Ch. 22; police, Ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Created. 
There is hereby created in and for the city a commission hereafter to be known as the city crime commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1501)  
Sec. 2-142. - Composition; appointment; qualifications. 
The commission shall consist of twelve (12) members, appointed by the mayor, each of whom shall be residents of the city for at least two (2) years. Members of the commission may be persons with qualifications in such areas as: Law enforcement, crime prevention, public communication, and education. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1502; Ord. No. 80-330, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 2-143. - Commissioner of police, attendance at meetings. 
The commissioner of police shall be an honorary member of the city crime commission and the commissioner or a representative shall attend all meetings of the commission, unless excused therefrom by the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1505)  
Sec. 2-144. - Officers. 
The city crime commission shall each year elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1504)  
Sec. 2-145. - Meetings. 
The city crime commission shall hold meetings regularly, at least once in each month, and shall designate the time and place thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1504)  
Sec. 2-146. - Procedure; records. 
The city crime commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1504)  
Sec. 2-147. - Purpose and function. 
The purpose and function of the city crime commission shall be to study the crime situation in the city on a continuing basis. This study shall include periodic contacts by the commission with members of the community such as school, business and neighborhood leaders as well as police department personnel. The crime commission shall serve to provide good communication and education within the community about law enforcement and crime prevention. It shall recommend any needed changes in procedures to the mayor. The commission should be available to receive citizen questions and complaints about crime and should make recommendations accordingly. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1506; Ord. No. 80-330, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 2-148. - Scope and extent of duties and powers. 
The scope and extent of the commissions duties and powers shall include but not be limited to the following areas: 
(1)  Public perceptions of crime and law enforcement: 
a.  Public understanding of enforcement procedures; 
b.  Public understanding of available enforcement resources; 
(2)  Types and frequency of crime; 
(3)  Juvenile delinquency and youth guidance; 
(4)  Victims of crime; 
(5)  Police needs for personnel, resources and equipment; 
(6)  Conduct an annual seminar on crime for the community; 
(7)  Ensure that public access cable television be provided police department programming. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1507; Ord. No. 80-330, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 2-149. - Expenditures. 
Neither the city crime commission, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council.  
Secs. 2-150—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CULTURAL COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the city a commission hereafter to be known as the cultural commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1801)  
Sec. 2-162. - Composition, appointment. 
The cultural commission shall consist of nine (9) members who shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1802)  
Sec. 2-163. - Officers. 
The cultural commission shall each year elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1803)  
Sec. 2-164. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the cultural commission will be held monthly, and as often as may be deemed necessary by the chairperson. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1803)  
Sec. 2-165. - Procedure; records. 
The cultural commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1803)  
Sec. 2-166. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the cultural commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  To act as an advisory commission to the mayor and city council; 
(2)  To consider, study and recommend plans for the development of city-wide cultural programs; 
(3)  To promote, coordinate and develop the performing and creative arts by making recommendations for programs for cultural opportunities and experiences for the citizens of the city, and further to facilitate communications with the state council for the arts. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1804)  
Sec. 2-167. - Expenditures. 
Neither the cultural commission, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the cultural commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1805)  
Sec. 2-168. - Advisory body. 
The following city officials or their designated representatives shall together act as a nonvoting advisory body to the cultural commission, making recommendations and suggestions and aiding and cooperating in carrying out all of the duties of the commission as set forth in section 2-166: recreation director, library director, a representative of the mayor's office, and one (1) city councilmember. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1806)  
Secs. 2-169—2-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ELECTED OFFICIALS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference— Compensation of city council, § 5.1; salary of mayor, § 7.5; compensation of city clerk, § 7.11; compensation of city treasurer, § 7.12. 
State Law reference— Authority to create local officers compensation commissions, MCL 117.5c. 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Created; purpose. 
There is hereby created an elected officials compensation commission which shall establish the salaries of all local elected officials. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1901) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a).  
Sec. 2-182. - Composition, appointment, qualifications. 
The elected officials compensation commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the majority of the city council. No member of the commission shall be a member, employee or member of the immediate family of a member of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government. Members shall be appointed before October first of the year of the appointment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1902) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a).  
Sec. 2-183. - Terms. 
All appointments to the elected officials compensation commission shall be for seven-year terms. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1902) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a).  
Sec. 2-184. - Vacancies. 
If any member of the elected officials compensation commission shall subsequently become disqualified, the member shall immediately cease to be a member. All vacancies to the commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the other members were appointed. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1902) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a).  
Sec. 2-185. - Organization, meetings, salaries. 
(a)  The elected officials compensation commission shall immediately after appointment meet and organize by the election of one of their members as chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary. The commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15) days in every odd numbered year. The commission shall make its determination of salaries within forty-five (45) calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. The members shall receive no compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement of their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The commission shall determine the salaries of such local elected officials, which determined salaries shall be the salaries, unless rejected by the city council by resolution of two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the city council. 
(b)  The salaries as determined shall be filed with the city clerk and shall become effective thirty (30) days after they are filed with the city clerk, unless rejected by the city council. In case the city council rejects the commission's determined salaries, the existing salaries shall prevail No other compensation shall be paid to local elected officials; however, expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city shall be reimbursed. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1903) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(b).  
Sec. 2-186. - Amendment of this division. 
The procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by Charter amendment or revision. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1904) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(f).  
Secs. 2-187—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ANIMAL WELFARE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Created. 
There shall be created for the city a commission to be known as the animal welfare commission. 
(Ord. No. 80-591, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-604, § 1, 3-23-04)  
Sec. 2-192. - Members and term. 
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the mayor. The members shall serve for three-year terms and may be re-appointed for any number of terms. Council and the mayor may appoint ex-officio members. 
(Ord. No. 80-591, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-604, § 1, 3-23-04)  
Sec. 2-193. - Meetings and procedure. 
The animal welfare commission shall hold meetings regularly, at least once in each month, and shall designate the time and place thereof. The commission shall adopt its rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. The commission shall elect officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 80-591, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-604, § 1, 3-23-04)  
Sec. 2-194. - Purpose. 
The purpose and function of the commission shall be to study the proper care, husbandry, welfare, maintenance, education, and awareness issues of all animals that reside within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 80-591, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-604, § 1, 3-23-04)  
Sec. 2-195. - General duties. 
The duties of the animal welfare commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Review and recommend to the mayor and council programs and practices that will develop citizen cooperation in the maintenance, proper care and animal rights of all animals in the city. 
(2)  Advise and provide studies and recommendations to the mayor and council on such issues as husbandry (housing, food, shelter, water, general maintenance), medical care, cruelty to animals, licensing, promotion of spay and neuter programs, enforcement of ordinances and promotion of legislative action regarding animal cruelty, investigations, and recommendations regarding wildlife incidents, and recommendations of additional ordinances designed to protect animals within the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-591, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-604, § 1, 3-23-04)  
Sec. 2-196. - Expenditures. 
Neither the animal welfare commission, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-591, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-604, § 1, 3-23-04)  
Secs. 2-197—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PUBLICATIONS AND MAILING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Created. 
There is hereby created a commission for the city hereafter to be known as the publications and mailing commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2702)  
Sec. 2-212. - Composition, appointment. 
The publications and mailing commission shall consist of three (3) members to be appointed by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2702)  
Sec. 2-213. - Officers. 
The publications and mailing commission shall each year elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary.  
Sec. 2-214. - Procedure; records. 
The publications and mailing commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings.  
Sec. 2-215. - Expenditures. 
Neither the publications and mailing commission, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council.  
Sec. 2-216. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Public expense shall include the expenditure of city money and the use of city equipment and the services of city personnel and any other direct or indirect expenses incurred by the city as a result of activities described in this division. 
Report shall include any writing, picture, document, graphic representation or communication of any sort intended for distribution by any means to the public at large and not specifically required by constitution, statute, Charter or city ordinance. It shall not include routine correspondence necessary in the normal course of city business, or notices, agendas, minutes or other items required to be furnished or made available to the public or portions thereof, by statute, Charter or ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2701) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-217. - Duty to review reports prior to publication or mailing. 
The publications and mailing commission shall review any report before it is printed or otherwise reproduced or mailed or otherwise disseminated at public expense. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2703)  
Sec. 2-218. - Reports, dissemination at public expense; draft, statement; submission to commission. 
Any person wishing to print or otherwise reproduce or mail or otherwise disseminate any report at public expense shall submit a draft of the proposed report to the publications and mailing commission. Appended to the draft shall be a statement setting forth the number of copies of the report to be distributed, the proposed method of distribution, the public purpose to be served by the report, and such other information as the commission may require. The commission shall within a reasonable time after receiving the draft of the report approve or disapprove the same. The commission shall also approve the method and extent of distribution. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2704)  
Sec. 2-219. - Commission review; considerations. 
In reviewing proposed reports, the publications and mailing commission shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the report relates to a matter of public concern or interest which may properly be furthered at public expense; 
(2)  Whether the report is fair, objective and accurate, considering its purposes and subject matter; 
(3)  No matters of a partisan political nature, and no matters intended to further the political interests of a particular elected official shall be published, printed, mailed or promulgated at public expense; 
(4)  Whether the cost to the city is justified by the value of the report to the public and the public interest being served thereby. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2705)  
Sec. 2-220. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Include in any envelope used to mail any regular city, county or school tax bill, anything other than the tax bill containing the information required by law, unless approval of the publications and mailing commission is first obtained; 
(2)  Include in any envelope used to distribute city paychecks, anything other than the check as prepared by the controller and signed by the treasurer, unless approval of the publications and mailing commission is first obtained; 
(3)  Print or otherwise reproduce or distribute in any manner at city expense any report unless the same shall have been first approved by the publications and mailing commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2706)  
Sec. 2-221. - City officers liability. 
Any officer of the city having city employees under the officer's direction and control or having charge of city funds or equipment who causes such employees to participate in the preparation, reproduction or dissemination of any report in violation of the terms of this division, or who causes funds or equipment in the officer's charge to be so used, shall be liable to the city for the full costs incurred by the city as the result of such violation. The costs shall include, but not limited to, any actual cash expended, the full cost to the city of any employee time spent on such unlawful activities, and the value of the use of any city equipment or materials employed in such unlawful activity. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2708)  
Secs. 2-222—2-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - HOUSING COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Authority to create a housing commission, MCL 125.653. 
 
Sec. 2-236. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the city a commission to be known hereafter as the housing commission. 
(Code 1967, § 10-401)  
Sec. 2-237. - Composition; appointment. 
The housing commission shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 10-402) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.654.  
Sec. 2-238. - Terms. 
The term of office of members of the housing commission shall be five-year staggered terms. 
(Code 1967, § 10-402) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.654.  
Sec. 2-239. - Compensation. 
Members of the housing commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1967, § 10-402) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.654.  
Sec. 2-240. - Removal of members; filling of vacancies. 
Members of the housing commission may be removed from office by the mayor. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1967, § 10-402) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.654.  
Sec. 2-241. - Meetings; rules of procedure; records; quorum; officers and employees. 
The housing commission shall meet at regular intervals, such meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A president and vice-president shall be elected by the housing commission. The housing commission, with consent of the council, may appoint a director, who may also serve as secretary, and, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter relative to civil service, such other employees as it may deem necessary. The housing commission, with consent of the council, shall prescribe the duties of all of its officers and employees and may, with the approval of the mayor, fix their compensation. 
(Code 1967, § 10-403) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.655; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.  
Sec. 2-242. - Operating funds. 
Funds for the operation of the housing commission may be provided by the city council, but the housing commission shall, as soon as possible, reimburse the city for all money expended by it for the housing commission, from revenues received from the sale of bonds. 
(Code 1967, § 10-404) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.656.  
Sec. 2-243. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The housing commission shall have the following enumerated powers and duties: 
(1)  To determine in what areas of the city it is necessary to provide proper sanitary housing facilities for families of low income and for the elimination of housing conditions which are detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare; 
(2)  To purchase, lease, sell, exchange, transfer, assign and mortgage any property, real or personal, or any interest therein, or acquire the same by gift, bequest or under the power of eminent domain; to own, hold, clear and improve property; to engage in or to contract for the design and construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, extension or repair of any housing project or part thereof, to lease or operate any housing project; 
(3)  To control and supervise all parks and playgrounds forming a part of such housing development, but may contract with existing departments of the city for operation or maintenance of either or both; 
(4)  To establish and revise rents of any housing project, but shall rent all property for such sums as will make them self-supporting, include all charges for maintenance and operation, for principal and interest on loans and bonds, and for taxes; 
(5)  To rent only to such tenants as are unable to pay for more expensive housing accommodations; 
(6)  To call upon other departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, but such departments shall be reimbursed for any added expense incurred therefor. 
(b)  The housing commission shall have such other powers relating to such housing facilities project as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city council or as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. However, all powers and duties granted to the housing commission in this section are specifically reviewable by the council, further that without council concurrence, housing commission decisions may not be implemented. 
(Code 1967, § 10-405) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.657.  
Sec. 2-244. - Conflicts of interest by members. 
No member of the housing commission or any of its officers or employees shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract for property, materials or services to be acquired by the housing commission. 
(Code 1967, § 10-406) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.658.  
Sec. 2-245. - Annual reports to city council. 
The housing commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city council, and shall make such other reports as the city council may from time to time require. 
(Code 1967, § 10-407) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.659.  
Sec. 2-246. - Eminent domain; projects declared for public purposes. 
The housing commission may recommend to the city council the institution and prosecution of proceedings under the power of eminent domain in accordance with the state law and the provisions of the Charter relative to condemnation. Housing projects contemplated by this division are hereby declared to be for public purposes within the meaning of the Constitution, state laws and Charter relative to the power of eminent domain. 
(Code 1967, § 10-408) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.660(a).  
Sec. 2-247. - Slum clearance and housing projects declared to be for public purposes. 
Slum clearance and housing projects contemplated by this division are hereby declared to be for public purposes within the meaning of the Constitution, state laws and Charter relative to the powers of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 10-409) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.692.  
Sec. 2-248. - Deeds, contracts, leases and purchases. 
All deeds, contracts, leases or purchases entered into by the housing commission shall be in the name of the city and shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 10-410) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.661.  
Sec. 2-249. - Commission to have control of housing project; purchases not required to be made through purchasing department. 
The housing commission, subject to the approval of the city council, shall have complete control of the entire housing project, including the construction, maintenance and operation, as fully and completely as if the housing commission represented private owners. Contracts for construction or purchase of materials entered into by the housing commission shall not be required to be made through the city purchasing division; however, must be approved by the council. 
(Code 1967, § 10-411) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.662.  
Sec. 2-250. - Claims. 
All claims that may arise in connection with the housing projects shall be presented as are ordinary claims against the city; provided, that written notice of all claims based upon injury to persons or property must be served upon the city clerk within sixty (60) days from the happening of the injury, but the disposition thereof shall rest in the discretion of the housing commission, and the cost of investigation, attorneys' fees, all claims that may be allowed and final judgments obtained from such claims shall be paid only from the operating revenue of the housing projects. 
(Code 1967, § 10-412) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.663.  
Sec. 2-251. - Notes, bonds and other obligations or claims not debts or charges against city or members of commission. 
The notes, bonds or other obligations, or any claims of whatever nature, against the housing project, shall not be debts or charges against the city, nor against any member of the housing commission, and no individual liability shall attach for any official act done by any member of such housing commission. 
(Code 1967, § 10-413) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.664.  
Sec. 2-252. - Estimate of costs prior to purchase, improvements, operation, etc. 
Whenever the housing commission shall determine to purchase, acquire, construct, improve, enlarge, extend, operate or repair any housing facility, it shall first cause an estimate to be made of the cost thereof, and the fact that such estimate has been made and the amount thereof shall appear in the ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(Code 1967, § 10-414) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.665.  
Sec. 2-253. - Free service, etc., prohibited. 
No free services or rental shall be furnished by any such project to the city or any state agency or to any agency, instrumentality or person. 
(Code 1967, § 10-415) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.675.  
Sec. 2-254. - Management of projects generally; minimum revenue to be produced by rentals. 
The housing commission shall manage and operate its housing projects in an efficient manner so as to enable it to fix the rental for dwelling accommodations at the lowest possible rates consistent with its providing decent, safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations. The housing commission shall not construct or operate any such project for profit. To this end, the commission shall fix the rental for dwellings in projects at no higher rates than it shall find to be necessary in order to produce revenues which, together with all other money, revenue, income and receipts from whatever sources derived available for such purposes, will be sufficient: 
(1)  To pay, as the same become due, the principal and interest on the bonds issued for such projects; 
(2)  To meet the cost of, and to provide for, administration, operation and maintenance of the projects, including the cost of any insurance on the projects or on bonds issued therefor; 
(3)  To create, during not less than the six (6) years immediately succeeding its issuance of any bonds, a reserve sufficient to meet the largest principal and interest payments which will be due on such bonds in any one (1) year thereafter and to maintain such reserve; and 
(4)  a. 
By setting up a reserve for taxation purposes of five (5) percent of the gross rentals of the project for any one (1) year, which sum shall be paid to the city and other taxing units in proportion to the amount of taxes received for such unit in the year previous to the acquiring of the site for any housing project; or 
b.  To pay to the city and other taxing units a sum annually in taxes equal to the amount of taxes received prior to the acquiring of any such project site, from the assessment previously levied against such site. 
(Code 1967, § 10-416) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.677.  
Sec. 2-255. - Records and accounts. 
The housing commission shall install, maintain and keep proper books of record and account, separate entirely from other records and accounts of the city, in which full and accurate entries shall be made of all dealings or transactions of, or in relation to the properties, business and affairs of the project. The housing commission, not later than three (3) months after the close of any fiscal year, shall cause to be prepared a balance sheet and an income and surplus account, showing respectively, in reasonable detail, the financial condition of the project at the close of such preceding calendar, operating or fiscal year and the financial operations thereof during such year. Such balance sheets and income and surplus accounts shall, at all reasonable times during usual business hours, be open to examination and inspection by any taxpayer, renter of the property of the project, or any holder or owner of bonds issued under the provisions of this division and Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of 1933 (MCL 125.651 et seq.), First Special Session, or anyone acting for or on behalf of such taxpayer, renter or bondholder. 
(Code 1967, § 10-417) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.685.  
Sec. 2-255.1. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  To the extent not inconsistent with federal law or regulation, state law or local ordinance, the housing commission, subject to approval of the city council, shall adopt and promulgate reasonable rules which establish: 
(1)  Eligibility requirements for admission to housing; 
(2)  Obligations of tenants, including regulations for the use and occupation of housing units and common areas; 
(3)  Just cause for the termination of the right of use and occupation, so that a tenant may be clearly apprised of the precise reasons for a termination; 
(4)  Conditions for continued occupancy, taking account of such factors as family size and changes therein, fluctuations in income, availability of standard accommodations elsewhere, and other relevant matters. 
(b)  The housing commission, subject to approval of the city council, may adopt such other rules which are necessary to the just and effective administration of local housing projects constructed and operated as provided by this division. 
(c)  All rules to be valid shall be published in a conspicuous place in each housing project operated by the housing commission. 
(d)  No tenancy or contract right to occupy housing in a project or facilities shall be terminated by the project management or the local housing commission except for just cause. 
(e)  Just cause to terminate a tenancy or contract right to occupy housing includes, but is not limited to: a failure to comply with the obligations of the lease or the lawful rules and regulations of the housing commission; the use of a unit for any unlawful purpose; the maintenance of any unsafe, unsanitary or unhealthful condition in any dwelling unit or in any of the common areas; and ineligibility for continued occupancy by reason of over-income. 
(Code 1967, § 10-418) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.694a, 125.694b.  
Sec. 2-255.2. - Commission may designate certain persons to execute tenant leases for commission. 
The housing commission, subject to approval of the city council, may designate their housing managers, assistant housing managers, the superintendent and assistant superintendent of housing operations to execute tenant leases for the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 10-419)  
Sec. 2-256. - Liberal construction of division. 
This division, being necessary for and to secure the public peace, health, safety, convenience and welfare of the city and the people of the city; shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 10-420) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.690.  
DIVISION 10. - WARREN CITY COMMISSION FOR SENIOR HEALTH CARE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-257. - Created; qualifications; composition; number of members. 
There shall be created a Warren city commission for senior health care services consisting of twelve (12) members. Five (5) members shall be Warren senior citizens, six (6) members shall be representatives from health care organizations with varied backgrounds, and one (1) member shall be an employee of the city. The mayor shall have the sole appointment for the member who shall be an employee of the city. The remaining eleven (11) members, shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-348, § 1, 12-8-87; Ord. No. 80-354, § 1, 5-24-88; Ord. No. 80-736, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 80-739, § 1, 5-10-16)  
Sec. 2-258. - Definition. 
In this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Health care organization shall mean organizations and people whose primary intent is to promote, restore or maintain health. 
Senior citizen shall mean any person who is fifty-five (55) years or older. 
(Ord. No. 80-348, § 1, 12-8-87; Ord. No. 80-736, § 1, 3-8-16)  
Sec. 2-259. - Terms of office. 
The term of office shall be three (3) year staggered terms. A commissioner, whose term of office has expired, shall continue to hold office until a successor has been appointed. Should a vacancy occur on the commission, a replacement shall be appointed, as provided above, to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 80-348, § 1, 12-8-87; Ord. No. 80-736, § 1, 3-8-16)  
Sec. 2-260. - Compensation. 
Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 80-348, § 1, 12-8-87)  
Sec. 2-261. - Meetings; rules of procedure; records; quorum; officers. 
The commission shall meet at regular intervals, such meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Seven (7) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 80-348, § 1, 12-8-87)  
Sec. 2-262. - Duties and powers. 
The commission shall have the following duties and powers: 
(a)  To identify all active senior citizen groups and organizations in the City of Warren and maintain a listing of such; 
(b)  To maintain contact with each group or organization on a regular basis; 
(c)  To identify health care information needs of the Warren senior citizen community and to, if need be, conduct public hearings; 
(d)  To assemble available information materials to address identified needs; 
(e)  To actively disseminate these materials to identified senior citizen groups and organizations; 
(f)  To sponsor informational health care seminars on a quarterly basis; 
(g)  To offer health care advisory clinics to counsel Warren senior citizen on their health care planning, procedures and problems; 
(h)  To provide more efficient senior citizen health care service by promoting cooperation in the community of Warren health care professionals; 
(i)  To pursue funding from public and private resources currently available for senior citizen health care information material purposes; 
(j)  To work to expand available free transportation services for Warren senior citizens through private organizations and volunteers; 
(k)  To meet with the mayor on an annual basis to establish goals and objectives. 
(Ord. No. 80-348, § 1, 12-8-87)  
Sec. 2-263. - Annual reports to city council. 
The commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city council and at such time shall state its goals and objectives for that coming year and shall make such other reports as the city council may from time to time require. 
(Ord. No. 80-348, § 1, 12-8-87)  
DIVISION 11. - COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES 
 
Sec. 2-264. - Created. 
There shall be created for the city a commission to be known as the commission on disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 80-565, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 2-265. - Members and term. 
The commission shall consist of six (6) members to be appointed by the mayor, at least three (3) of whom shall be persons covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. The members shall serve for one-year terms and may be re-appointed for any number of terms. 
(Ord. No. 80-565, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 2-266. - Meetings and procedure. 
The commission on disabilities shall hold meetings regularly, at least once in each month, and shall designate the time and place thereof. The commission shall adopt its rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. The commission shall elect officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 80-565, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 2-267. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the city to make city buildings, facilities and services accessible to all citizens. This policy may only be effectively achieved by ensuring that persons with disabilities are provided with full inclusion to the city services and buildings. The commission is created for the purpose of addressing matters within the city affecting persons with disabilities and compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-565, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 2-268. - General duties. 
The duties of the commission on disabilities shall be as follows: 
(1)  Review and recommend to the mayor and council the development of programs and practices that will improve inclusion to city services and facilities for persons with disabilities. 
(2)  Advise the city on compliance with federal and state regulations and legal developments affecting city accessibility to disabled persons. Provide city departments, boards and commissions with information on state and federal laws and regulations. 
(3)  Address issues as the mayor may from time to time request pertaining to the city's accessibility to services and compliance with federal and state regulations. 
(4)  Provide information and recommendations to the mayor and council on improvements to city services, facilities and practices to more effectively attain the goals of compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and enhanced inclusion. 
(5)  Encourage and promote better communication and a greater understanding of persons with disabilities among the community and city employees, officers, boards and commissions. 
(Ord. No. 80-565, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 2-269. - Expenditures. 
Neither the commission on disabilities, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-565, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 2-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCES[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— General finance, Ch. 8; taxation, Ch. 9; special assessments, Ch. 10; contracts, Ch. 14. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(1); any ordinance making any appropriations saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(5). 
State Law reference— Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 211 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Mileage expense accounts. 
(a)  All mileage expense accounts of the individual members of the various boards and commissions of the city, and all employees of the city, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or statute, shall be submitted to the city controller within thirty (30) days immediately following the month in which the mileage expenses are incurred. 
(b)  Failure to comply with this section shall make the expenses for that period of time uncollectible. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-2001, 2-2002)  
Sec. 2-272. - Fees for birth and death certificates. 
The city clerk shall charge the following fees: 
(1)  A search including one (1) certified copy of a birth record ..... $7.50 
Additional identical copies ordered at the same time, per copy ..... 3.00 
(2)  A search including one (1) certified copy of a death record ..... 7.50 
Additional identical copies ordered at the same time, per copy ..... 3.00 
(3)  A search for a vital record with an official statement that the record could not be located ..... 7.50 
Additional years searched, per year ..... 3.00 
(4)  Exemplified copies, per copy ..... 10.00 
Additional exemplified copies of identical copies ordered at the same time ..... 4.50 
(5)  Upon formal application, a person sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall be charged a fee of two dollars ($2.00) for a search and one (1) copy of one (1) certificate of registration of his or her birth record. 
(Code 1967, § 3-126; Ord. No. 80-320, § 1(55), 5-13-86)  
Secs. 2-273—2-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INVESTMENT OF SURPLUS FUNDS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Investment of surplus funds, MCL 129.91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-286. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Banker's acceptance means a negotiable time draft or bill of exchange drawn on and accepted by a commercial bank, the customary means of effecting payment for merchandise sold in import-export transactions. Acceptance of the draft irrevocably obligates the bank to pay the bearer the face amount of the draft at maturity. 
Base point means one hundredth of one percent (.01%). 
Commercial paper means a short-term unsecured promissory notes issued by a corporation to investors. The notes are in bearer form maturing from one (1) to two hundred seventy (270) days selected by the purchaser. 
Fund means an independent fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts recording cash and/or other resources together with all related liabilities, obligations, reserves and equities which are segregated for the propose of carrying on specific activities or attaining certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions or limitations. 
Investment in mutual fund, trust or pool means a fund, trust, or pool specifically designated for investment by governmental agencies under state law managed bay banks which are approved investment authorities under Schedule A. 
Master notes with corporations means the equivalent of a private placement of commercial paper with negotiated rates. 
Net worth means the sum of the capital stock, paid in capital in excess of par and retained earnings of a bank or other financial institution. 
Public moneys means any moneys belonging to the city which shall come into the hands of the city treasurer pursuant to any provision of law authorizing such officer to collect or receive the same. 
Reverse purchase agreement means the purchase of specific securities for a fixed period at a fixed interest rate under an agreement to sell the securities back to the party from whom they were purchased. 
Short sale means a contract for the sale of securities which the city does not own, or certificate for which are not within its control. 
Surplus funds means at any given date and for any particular discrete fund, the total of cash and other current assets that are expected to be resolved into cash or its equivalent in the natural course of events and with reasonable certainty. 
Total investable funds means the total cash and other current assets that are expected to be resolved into cash or its equivalent in the natural course of events and with reasonable certainty in all city funds excluding the policed and fire retirement fund and the general employees' retirement fund. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2601; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-287. - Designation of agents for the collection of taxes, special assessments, and water and sewage treatment charges. 
The city council shall, by resolution designate certain banks as the city's agents for the collection of city special assessments, city taxes, school taxes, and water and sewage treatment charges. The resolution shall specify the manner, time, and method for the collection of the aforementioned assessments, taxes and charges. Banks, credit unions and/or savings and loan associations named in a resolution passed pursuant to this section shall be authorized depositories solely for the purpose of collecting special assessment, taxes and charges and disbursing them in the manner provided by the resolution or this division. Public moneys shall not be invested in banks, credit unions and/or savings and loan associations named in the resolution passed pursuant to this section unless investment in such bank, credit union and/or savings and loan association as specifically authorized by section 2-288. 
(Code 1967, 2-2602; Ord. No. 80-286, § 1, 6-14-83; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89)  
Sec. 2-288. - Authorized investments. 
(1)  The city treasurer is hereby authorized to invest surplus funds as follows: 
(a)  Bonds, securities, and other obligations of the United States or an agency or instrumentality of the United States. 
(b)  Certificates of deposit, savings accounts, deposit accounts, or depository receipts of a financial institution, but only if the financial institution complies with subsection (2) below. 
(c)  Commercial paper rated at the time of purchase within the two (2) highest classifications established by not less than two (2) standard rating services and that matures not more than two hundred seventy (270) days after the date of purchase. 
(d)  Repurchase agreements consisting of instruments listed in subdivision (a), above. 
(e)  Bankers' acceptances of United States banks. 
(f)  Obligations of the State of Michigan or any of its political subdivisions that at the time of purchase are rated as investment grade by not less than one (1) standard rating service. 
(g)  Mutual funds registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, Title I of Chapter 686, 54 Stat. 789, 15 U.S.C. 80a-1 to 80a-3 and 80a-4 to 80a-64, with authority to purchase only investment vehicles that are legal for direct investment by a public corporation. However, a mutual fund is not disqualified as a permissible investment solely by reason of either of the following: 
1.  The purchase of securities on a when-issued or delayed delivery basis. 
2.  The ability to lend portfolio securities as long as the mutual fund receives collateral at all times equal to at least one hundred (100) percent of the value of the securities loaned. 
3.  The limited ability to borrow and pledge a like portion of the portfolio's assets for temporary or emergency purposes. 
(h)  Obligations described in subdivisions (a) through (g) if purchased through an interlocal agreement under the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 7, MCL 124.501 to 124.512. 
(i)  Investment pools organized under the Surplus Funds Investment Pool Act, 1982 PA 367, MCL 129.111 to 129.118. 
(j)  The investment pools organized under the Local Government Investment Pool Act, 1985 PA 121, MCL 129.141 to 129.150. 
(2)  The city treasurer shall not deposit or invest the funds in a financial institution that is not eligible to be a depository of funds belonging to the State of Michigan under a law or rule of this State of Michigan or the United States. 
(3)  Assets acceptable for pledging to secure deposits of public funds are limited to assets authorized for direct investment under subsection (1). 
(4)  The securities, which serve as collateral, shall be held by the issuing financial institution provided that a written trust agreement has been executed. Institutions without safekeeping departments or abilities must deliver said securities to a third party custodian with which the City of Warren has executed an agreement. Said agreements must be approved by city council pursuant to resolution. 
(5)  The city treasurer shall only invest the surplus funds of the City of Warren in institutions eligible under section (2) above, and with concurrence by resolution of city council. 
(6)  The city treasurer shall not deposit or invest in excess of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00) at or within any one (1) financial institution. 
(7)  The city treasurer shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the investable funds of the City of Warren in any one (1) form of investment. 
(8)  The city treasurer shall not have in excess of fifty (50) percent of the City of Warren's total amount of surplus funds in any one (1) financial institution. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2603; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89; Ord. No. 80-385, § 1, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 80-419, § 1, 10-13-92; Ord. No. 80-575, § 2, 11-13-01)  
Sec. 2-289. - Investment policy; cash flow projections. 
(a)  It is the intent of this division that at all times public moneys be invested in the types of investment permitted by section 2-288 to the maximum extent permissible by the cash flow needs of the city. 
(b)  To this end, the city treasurer shall project the annual cash flow needs of the city and update monthly a comparison of actual cash flow to the annual projection. Such cash flow projections and comparisons shall be on file. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2605; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89)  
Sec. 2-290. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-575, § 4, adopted Nov. 13, 2001, repealed § 2-290, which pertained to maturity dates of investments. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-291. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Every business day, the city treasurer shall furnish the city controller a written notification of all financial transactions involving public moneys entered into by the city treasurer. The term "financial transactions" shall include deposits and any and all transfers of public moneys from one account to another, from one institution to another, and the amount available for investment by each bank account for the next business day. Such notification shall be delivered to the controller by the close of the working day on which the transaction occurred and in any event no later than the next business day. The notification shall contain such information about each transaction. 
(b)  The city controller shall prepare a monthly report for distribution to the mayor and the city council no later than the close of the fifteenth business day following the close of the city's investment position at the close of the month and shall contain a description of all investment, their cost, par value, face interest yield, actual interest yield, interest receivable, current market value, and such other information as the investment policy commission may require. The monthly report shall also disclose all demand deposit depositories and account balances. The report shall also contain a summary of individual investment transactions by investment category and fund for the month. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2606; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89)  
Sec. 2-292. - Securities, dealers and brokers. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall not utilize the services of a securities dealer or broker in effecting investments unless the city treasurer shall have obtained the prior approval of the city council. 
(b)  Securities purchased by the city may be held for safekeeping only in financial institutions named in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2607; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89)  
Sec. 2-293. - Bank accounts. 
(a)  No bank accounts in the name of the city or any of its officers or agencies shall hereafter be opened without prior approval of the city council through the city treasurer. 
(b)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Code 1967, § 2-2608; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89; Ord. No. 80-575, § 5, 11-13-01)  
Sec. 2-294. - Prohibited investments. 
No public monies shall be invested in securities or institutions or in any other manner than those approved by ordinance. The city treasurer shall comply with all the applicable laws of the State of Michigan and of the United States. No public monies shall be invested contrary to law, such as arbitrage, short sales or on margin or any transaction requiring the borrowing of funds. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2609; Ord. No. 80-379, 12-26-89; Ord. No. 80-575, § 3, 11-13-01)  
Secs. 2-295—2-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET STABILIZATION FUND[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Budget stabilization funds, MCL 141.441 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-306. - Established. 
There is hereby established a budget stabilization fund pursuant to Act No. 30 of the Public Acts of 1978 (MCL 141.441 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2301)  
Sec. 2-307. - Purpose. 
For the purposes of this division the budget stabilization fund is a fund established for the purpose of budget stabilization, consisting of such sums as may be authorized by a resolution adopted by two-thirds vote of city council from all or part of a surplus in the general fund resulting from an excess of revenue in comparison to expenses. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2302) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.443(1).  
Sec. 2-308. - Limitations. 
The amount of money in the budget stabilization fund shall not exceed either fifteen (15) percent of the city's most recent general fund budget, as originally adopted, or fifteen (15) percent of the average of the city's five (5) most recent general fund budgets, as amended, whichever is less. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2303) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.443(3).  
Sec. 2-309. - Investments, earnings. 
The money in the budget stabilization fund may be invested as provided by law with the earnings of the fund to be returned to the city's general fund. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2304) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.443(4).  
Sec. 2-310. - Excess. 
If the money in the budget stabilization fund exceeds that permitted in section 2-308, the excess money shall be appropriated in the city's next general fund budget, but shall not be appropriated to the budget stabilization fund. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2305) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.443(5).  
Sec. 2-311. - Purposes of appropriations. 
Money in the budget stabilization fund may be appropriated for the following purposes: 
(1)  To cover a general fund budget, when the city's annual audit reveals such a deficit; 
(2)  To prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the number of employees at any time in the fiscal year when the city's budgeted revenue is not being collected in an amount sufficient to cover budgeted expenses; 
(3)  To prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the number of employees when in preparing the budget for the next fiscal year the city's estimated revenue does not appear sufficient to cover estimated expenses; 
(4)  To cover expenses arising because of a natural disaster, including a flood, fire or tornado. However, if federal or state funds are received to offset the appropriations from the fund, that money shall be returned to the fund. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2306) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.444(1).  
Sec. 2-312. - Determination of revenue and expenses. 
In determining whether the city's revenue is not sufficient to cover its expenses, a reduction in the amount of money received for the fiscal year from any source in comparison to the amount of money received from the previous fiscal year, including a reduction in the allocation of state tax money, shall be considered. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2307) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.444(2).  
Sec. 2-313. - Prohibited appropriations. 
Money in the budget stabilization fund shall not be appropriated for the acquisition, construction or alteration of a facility as part of a general capital improvements program. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2308) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.445.  
Secs. 2-314—2-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASING[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, adopted May 23, 1995, amended former Div. 4, relative to purchasing, in its entirety to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Div. 4 derived from Code 1967, §§ 2-501—2-510 and Ord. No. 80-455, § 1, adopted May 10, 1994. 
 
Sec. 2-331. - Authority. 
There is hereby established, as prescribed in the Charter, a division of purchasing under the direction and control of the controller, whose duties shall be set forth in this division. Rules and regulations are hereby promulgated by the council pursuant to Section 14.1, 14.2 and 14.3 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-332. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Contractual services shall mean any and all telephone, gas, water, electric light, and power service, towel and cleaning service; insurance, leases for all grounds and buildings, office or other space required by the using agencies; the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property; professional and technical services and services provided to residents and property owners in the city through written agreement with the city. 
Controller shall mean the controller, the deputy controller, any designated agent of the controller, or the purchasing agent. 
Supplies, materials, and equipment shall mean any and all articles or things which shall be furnished to or used by any agency, including any and all printing, binding, stationery, forms, journals, publication advertising reports. These supplies, materials and equipment shall be defined the same as goods are defined pursuant to MCLA § 440.1101 et seq. as amended (PA 1962, No. 174 as amended), commonly referred to as the Uniform Commercial Code. Supplies, materials and equipment not defined as goods by the Uniform Commercial Code shall be defined as contractual services. 
When a vendor provides supplies, materials, equipment, goods and services to the City of Warren, the solicitation and procurement of said contract shall be determined by the contract as a whole and by the dominant intent of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-333. - Centralized purchasing. 
Departments, divisions, offices and agencies of the city shall procure all equipment, material, supplies and services through the purchasing division of the department of accounting. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-334. - Contracting authority and accounting control. 
All purchases and contracts for acquisition of equipment, material, supplies, and goods and services shall be initiated by the purchasing agent pursuant to a written requisition, or request for specifications for the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged. The mayor and city clerk are authorized to sign formal contracts on behalf of the city pursuant to the Warren City Charter and this division. A contract shall include a purchase order, specifications, general conditions, special conditions, plans, instructions and other items which are part of the bid package and proposal or combination thereof, as authorized by law. No purchase order or contract shall be issued to a vendor unless and until the proper funding is available in such office, department or agency by the department of accounting under procedures established by the controller. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-334.1. - Labor harmony through prevailing wage and benefits for city projects. 
(a)  Definitions: 
City project means new construction, alteration, repair, installation, painting, decorating, completing, demolition, conditioning, reconditioning, or improvement of public roads, land either owned by the city or under the direction and control of the city, public buildings or public facilities authorized by a contracting agent, the cost of which is clearly anticipated to be in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). "City project" shall not include work done pursuant to any collective bargaining agreement between the city and its employees. 
Construction mechanic means a skilled or unskilled mechanic, laborer, worker, helper, assistant, apprentice, journeyman or other professional designation working on a city project, but shall not include executive, administrative, professional, office or custodial employees. 
Contracting agent means any officer, board, commission or authority of the city authorized to enter into a contract for a city project, or to perform a city project by the direct employment of labor. 
(b)  Requirements: 
(1)  Every contract for a city project which is executed between a contracting agent and a successful bidder or an approved responder to a request for proposal for a city project, entered into pursuant to a request for proposal advertisement and/or an invitation to bid for that city project, which requires or involves the employment of construction mechanics, and which is owned, controlled or financed, in whole or in part, by the city, shall contain an express term that the rates of wages and benefits to be paid to each class of mechanics by the bidder and all of his or her subcontractors shall be not less than the wage and benefits rate prevailing on similar projects in the city. The city's department of public service shall determine the prevailing wage at the rate established by the most recent survey of the Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services for prevailing wage determination under Act 166 of the Public Acts of 1965, as amended. 
(2)  A schedule of the prevailing wage and benefits for the classes of construction mechanics called for in a contract shall be made a part of the specifications for the work to be performed on a city project and shall be printed in the contract forms where work is to be done by contract. 
(3)  Every contractor and subcontractor on a city project shall keep posted in a conspicuous place on the construction site a copy of all prevailing wage and fringe benefit rates prescribed by the contract and shall keep accurate records showing the name, occupation, and actual wages and benefits paid to each construction mechanic employed by him or her in connection with said contract. This record shall be made available on demand for inspection by the contracting agent or the city. 
(4)  Contract specifications may include, when appropriate, a requirement that the successful bidder shall enter into a project labor agreement with the Greater Detroit Building and Construction Trades Council, AFL-CIO, and its affiliated unions for the development and construction of the project. 
(5)  The contracting agent, by written notice to the contractor and the sureties of the contractor known to the contracting agent, shall terminate the contractor's right to proceed with that part of the contract and city project for which less than the prevailing rates of wages and benefits have been paid or will be paid, and may proceed to complete the contract by separate agreement with another contractor. The contracting agent shall withhold payment for work done until liabilities for unpaid wages and excess costs to the city for reletting the work have been met. 
(6)  In addition to any penalty provisions provided for in this section, any contractor found to be in volition of this section by any contracting agent shall be prohibited for two (2) years from bidding on any city project, regardless of the anticipated cost of the contract to be bid. 
(c)  Exemption. The requirements set forth in this section will not apply to a project or contract of the City of Warren, or any of its authorities, agencies or departments, including those authorities, agencies and departments created by the City of Warren under statutes of the State of Michigan, if that project or contract is subject to an exemption from labor standards or prevailing wage requirements under federal or state laws or regulations. 
(d)  Retroactivity. The provisions of this section shall not apply to contracts entered into or the bids made before the effective date of this section, or the effective date of an amendment to this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-519, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-684, § 1, 3-9-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-519, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 1997 amended ch. 2 by the addition of a new section 2-334.2, which provisions have been redesignated at the editor's discretion as section 2-334.1.  
Sec. 2-334.2. - Living wage requirements for service contracts. 
(a)  Purpose; application; exclusions. The intent of the following provisions is to ensure that the city requires for any contract for services in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) the contractor who is employed to perform work for the City of Warren shall pay a living wage to all employees who are assigned to perform work on the City of Warren premises. Contracts for the purchase of goods and contracts to lease or purchase property are excluded from the application of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section the following terms and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
Contract for services shall mean the act of entering into a contract to perform services, including the subcontracting of services, however, contracts for the purchase of goods and contracts to lease or purchase property are excluded. 
Contractor shall mean a person that contracts with the city to perform certain services. 
Employee shall mean an individual who is employed by another to provide labor in exchange for payment of wages or salary. 
Employer shall mean the person who engages employees to provide labor in exchange for payment of wages or salary. 
Federal poverty line shall mean the official poverty line defined by the office of management and budget based on bureau of census data for a family of four (4), as adjusted to reflect the percentage change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers. 
Health care benefits shall mean the right granted to an employee under a contract, certificate or policy of insurance to have payment made by a health care insurer or health care corporation for specified medical or health care services for the employee and dependents. 
Living wage shall mean an hourly wage rate which is equal to or greater than the federal poverty line established for a family of four (4) for a forty-hour work week, fifty (50) weeks per year. 
Person shall include firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, however operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
Plant Rehabilitation and Industrial Development District Act shall mean Public Act 198 of 1974, MCL 207.551 et seq. 
(c)  Limitations on contracts for services. The city shall not enter into any contract for services with any contractor who does not demonstrate that it pays its work force a living wage which is equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the federal poverty line, unless health care benefits are provided to its employees equal to the level of benefits customarily provided in the industry, then the contractor shall demonstrate that it pays its work force a living wage which is equal to one hundred (100) percent of the federal poverty line. The contractor shall be required to maintain this rate of pay for the duration of the contract period. 
(d)  Compliance with adjustments in the federal poverty line. The purchasing director, his or her designee or other employee designated by city council, shall serve as the contract compliance auditor. The contract compliance auditor shall monitor the federal poverty line and shall notify anyone with a service contract with the city of any adjustment in the federal poverty line. The contract compliance auditor shall require all contractors with service contracts with the city to annually demonstrate compliance with the requirements contained in subsection (c) of this section. In addition, any contractor who is required to pay its work force a living wage under subsection (c) of this section shall post a notice of such requirement in the work place during the contract period. The notice shall also state that if the contractor has failed to comply with the requirement of subsection (c) of this section that the employee may file a notice of noncompliance upon the City of Warren contract compliance auditor and serve a copy on the contractor. 
(e)  Notice of non-compliance. Any employee of a contractor who believes the contractor has failed to comply with subsection (c) of this section, shall file a notice with the contract compliance auditor and serve it on the contractor alleging noncompliance. Upon receiving the notice alleging non-compliance, the auditor shall forward a copy to the living wage appeal committee for review. The auditor shall determine the accuracy of the allegation and shall notify the contractor to submit proof of compliance within thirty (30) days or it shall be grounds for termination of the contract. 
(f)  Non-compliance. In the event, the auditor determines that a contractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this section, the failure to rectify the non-compliance within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for the termination of a contract for services. 
(g)  Limitation on bid acceptance. The city shall not accept any bids for a period of five (5) years from any contractor who, while contracting with the city, had failed on two (2) separate occasions to comply with subsection (c) of this section during the previous five-year period. 
(h)  Exemptions from application of this section. The following exemptions from compliance with this section shall apply: 
(1)  Any public corporation shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; 
(2)  Any private corporation that has received 501 (c)(3) qualification, which has ten (10) employees or less, shall be exempt from compliance with this section; 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not apply where there is an applicable collective bargaining agreement; 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall not apply where federal, state, or local law requires payment of a prevailing wage; 
(5)  The provision contained in subsection (c) of this section requiring payment of a living wage as defined in this section does not apply to any employee enrolled in a job training program, summer youth employment program or work study program not to exceed ninety (90) days; 
(6)  The living wage appeal committee may recommend individual or group exemptions from the application of this section in cases in which compliance with this section would cause an economic hardship. All exemptions under this subsection shall be subject to city council and mayoral approval. 
(i)  Appeal from application of this section. Any person desiring to contract with the city shall have the opportunity to appeal the application of this section to the living wage appeal committee. The appeal must be filed with the purchasing division at least fifteen (15) days prior to the deadline for the submission of bids. The living wage appeal committee shall consider the request at a public meeting convened in accordance with the open meetings act. The committee may exempt a contractor from the application of this section upon demonstration of the following: 
(1)  The proposed contract is implemented through the tri-county cooperative and payment of the living wage as defined in this section is not required thereunder; or 
(2)  The benefit of applying this section is clearly outweighed by the harm resulting from the application of this section. 
(j)  Membership of the living wage appeal committee. The living wage appeal committee shall consist of five (5) members: the mayor or designee; the city controller or designee; the purchasing director or designee; a member of the Warren-Centerline Chamber of Commerce as designated by the mayor and confirmed by city council; and a Warren resident designated by the Michigan State AFL-CIO appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Each member of the committee shall serve for a three-year term. The committee shall meet as necessary to review any appeal filed for exemption from the application of this section. 
(k)  Effective date. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any contract executed prior to the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-550, § 1, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 80-596, § 1, 4-8-03)  
Sec. 2-334.3. - Application of living wage requirement to industrial facilities exemption certificates. 
The plant rehabilitation and industrial development district act provides for the establishment of plant rehabilitation districts and industrial development districts in local governmental units and authorizes the exemption of industrial property from certain taxes pursuant to an industrial facilities exemption certificate. In applying the provisions of this act, the city shall also require compliance with the following ordinance provisions: 
(1)  The city shall not grant any industrial facilities exemption certificate unless it is demonstrated that the petitioner pays its work force a living wage as defined in section 2-334.2 which is equal to one hundred and twenty-five (125) percent of the federal poverty line, unless health care benefits are provided to its employees equal to the level of benefits customarily provided in the industry, then the petitioner shall demonstrate that it pays its work force a living wage as defined in section 2-334.2 which is equal to one hundred (100) percent of the federal poverty line. The petitioner shall be required to maintain this rate of pay for the duration of the exemption period. 
(2)  The petitioner shall be required to comply with adjustments in the federal poverty line during the exemption period and shall be required to annually demonstrate compliance with this requirement. 
(3)  In the event the city determines that a petitioner has failed to comply with the requirements of this section, the failure to rectify the non-compliance within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for the revocation of the industrial facilities exemption certificate. 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a plan rehabilitation or industrial development district established prior to the effective date of this section; nor to an industrial facilities exemption certificate approved prior to the effective date of this section. 
(5)  The provision contained in subsection (1) requiring payment of a living wage does not apply to any employee enrolled in a job training program, summer youth employment program or work study program to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(6)  Any person desiring to appeal the application of this requirement, may file a petition for appeal with the living wage appeal committee as provided in subsection 2-334.2(i). 
(Ord. No. 80-550, § 1, 1-11-00)  
Sec. 2-335. - Using agencies; requirements, filing. 
All using agencies of the city shall file with the city controller a letter of use and function with their estimate of requirements in supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual services, at such times and for such future periods as the controller shall prescribe and further, that in order to encourage bulk or fleet purchases, the controller shall have authority to standardize specifications as may be necessary throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-336. - Purchases, requisition required; issuance, conditions. 
The city controller shall not issue any purchase order, except in cases of emergency, until a requisition has been submitted, signed by the head of the using department or agency, and approved by the controller, showing that there is sufficient funding for that purpose to defray the amount of such order. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-337. - Procurement methods. 
Procurement transactions shall be conducted through fair and open competition to satisfy the public need for equipment, material, supplies and services at economical prices. The following source selection techniques shall be employed to provide effective competition in the procurement process: 
(a)  Small purchase quotations. 
(b)  Request for quotations (RFQ). 
(c)  Sealed bidding. 
(d)  Cooperative purchasing. 
(e)  Sole source procurement. 
(f)  Spot market purchases. 
(g)  Merchandise for resale-market quotations. 
(h)  Proposals for professional or technical services or services provided to residents and property owners in the city through written agreement with the city. 
(i)  Emergency purchases. 
(j)  Purchases utilizing grant funds (state and federal). 
(k)  Reporting procedure. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, amended § 2-337 and repealed §§ 2-338—2-344 in its entirety to read as herein set out in §§ 2-337—2-337.11. The former §§ 2-338—2-344 pertained to small purchase transactions, spot market purchase, sealed bidding, merchandise for resale, professional or technical services, sole procurement, and cooperative purchasing, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, adopted May 23, 1995.  
Sec. 2-337.1. - Small purchase transactions. 
(a)  The using department shall procure equipment, material, supplies, goods and services costing at or below five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) at the discretion of the purchasing agent. 
(b)  Petty cash purchases for items constituting supplies, materials, and equipment may be authorized by the office accounting under rules and regulations established by the city controller. 
(c)  Small purchase quotation awards do not require council approval. 
(d)  Procurement requirements shall not be artificially provided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.2. - Requests for quotations. 
(a)  Requests for Quotations shall be obtained for procurement of equipment, material, supplies, goods and services costing in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and at, or below, fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) by the using department via an electronic bid network, or other means established by the purchasing agent and city controller, and approved by council. Bid submittals shall be issued by the vendor via on-line bidding. 
(b)  Quotation procedures shall be established by the office of the city controller, subject to review by the council to ensure that related purchase orders shall be awarded on the basis of low responsible quotation and cost-effective purchase. 
(c)  Request for quotation awards do not require council approval. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.3. - Sealed bidding. 
(a)  Sealed bidding shall be used for procurement of equipment, material, supplies, goods and services costing in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), except: 
(1)  Those of an emergency nature as outlined in section 2-337(i). 
(2)  Merchandise purchased for resale. 
(3)  In other limited situations identified in the quotation procedures established by the city controller and reported to the council in the bid report recommending award of a contract where the sealed-bidding process may discourage competitive bidding and/or not be cost-effective. 
(b)  A specifications committee consisting of the purchasing agent and the head of the department for whom the procurement is being made, shall work to develop and approve specifications. The specifications committee shall recommend the low responsible and cost-effective bid for award. When judged necessary by the committee, the city engineer or other technically qualified person may be designated to serve as an additional member of the specifications committee. 
(c)  Plans and specifications for items to be procured under the sealed bid process shall be prepared and posted electronically by the purchasing agent for public inspection. 
(d)  The process in which the sealed bids are posted via an electronic bid network shall be approved by the purchasing agent, city controller, and council. 
(e)  Sealed bid awards costing twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less do not require council approval. 
(f)  Sealed bid awards costing in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) require council approval. 
(g)  The purchasing agent may require bid deposits, bonds (performance, payment, maintenance, etc.), and liability insurance as part of the procurement process If it is deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public interest. 
When a bid security is necessary, a certified cashier's check or money order will be held as a guaranty that such a bidder will enter into the contract in accordance with the terms of such advertisement and bid. A bid bond may be used for such guaranty at the discretion of the purchasing agent. 
(h)  The mayor and clerk are authorized to sign formal contracts awarded under this section. No contract shall become operative until approved as to legality and form by the city's legal department. 
(i)  If the amount of any expenditure or sale of any item is estimated to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in any one (1) year, no such expenditure or sale shall be approved by council until thirty (30) days after it has been presented to council and, in the case of a purchase of services, after a report is made in writing to council by the controller specifying the experience, financial reliability and references of the contractor to whom award of the contract is proposed, the requirements of this section 2-337.3(i) may be waived where immediate procurement is essential to protect the life, health, or convenience of citizens, upon a majority vote of council. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.4. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The city may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any supplies, equipment, goods or services with one (1) or more public procurement units when it is in the best interest of the city. 
Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts between public procurement units and open-ended state or federal public procurement unit contracts which are made available to the city. 
The city may also utilize cooperative purchasing organizations, including those using electronic bidding, to purchase supplies and services when deemed by the purchasing agent, city controller, or council to be in the best interest of the city. 
Each cooperative purchasing agreement is subject to approval of the council, if the procurement of goods or services exceeds twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.5. - Sole source purchases. 
(a)  A sole source purchase for supplies, materials, services, or construction items where the cost is expected to be not more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) may be awarded by the purchasing agent without competitive bids or the approval of council, when the purchasing agent determines, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one (1) source for supplying the requested supply, material, service, or construction item and that the price is reasonable. 
Such sole sources include, but are not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  Proprietary replacement parts available only from authorized distributors; 
(2)  Professional or trade memberships, subscriptions, and publications; 
(3)  Public utilities and telephone service; and 
(4)  Federal, state and local government or agency contracts. 
(b)  With respect to purchases of supplies, materials, services or construction items where the cost is expected to be more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the council may award a contract, without competitive bids, after determining that there is only one (1) contractor or vendor for the requested purchase and that the price is reasonable. 
Documentation shall be furnished that supports the sole source determination. The written documentation shall be available for public inspection in the office of purchasing. The purchasing agent, along with a representative from the requesting department, shall conduct negotiations as appropriate. 
(c)  A sole source purchase shall be made at the lowest obtainable price. With respect to purchases of supplies, materials, services or construction items with a cost of more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the purchasing agent shall submit a report prior to approval of the council identifying the basis for the determinations that the proposed successful contractor or vendor is the sole source for the supplies, services or construction item sought to be purchased and that the price is reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.6. - Spot market purchases. 
(a)  Spot market purchases are defined as the procurement of a commodity (not a contractual service) in the open market through the quotation process to obtain the lowest price available at the time the item is needed; notwithstanding the annual cumulative purchasing total of such commodity can be projected to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
(b)  Upon the recommendation of the controller's department, the council may authorize the purchasing agent to make spot market purchases of a specific item for a specified period of time, when in the judgment of the council such authorization would be in the best interest of the city. 
(c)  After each spot market purchase the purchasing agent shall report to the mayor and the council the circumstances involved, including the name and bid of firms submitting quotations, the quotation selected, and the amount of the order placed. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.7. - Merchandise for resale. 
Because of the commercial nature and product characteristics of this type of procurement, the purchasing agent is authorized to purchase merchandise for resale through competitive quotation in the open market. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.8. - Professional or technical services. 
Engagements involving professional or technical services or services provided to residents and property owners in the city through written agreement with the city shall be approved by the mayor. Professional or technical services costing in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be recommended for award to the council by the review panel after requests for proposals have been issued and reviewed as follows: 
(a)  A review panel shall be assembled, consisting of the head of the department requesting the service, a member of council, the controller, the human resources/risk management office, purchasing agent, and the attorney's office, and such other persons who may be appointed by the mayor. The council representative placed on the review panel shall possess the express authority of the council to exercise his/her authority on the review panel. 
(b)  The purchasing agent and the review panel shall identify a list of qualified professionals or technical firms or persons to which a "request for proposal" shall be issued. 
(c)  The review panel shall study the proposals submitted, and by majority opinion, shall recommend to the mayor and council that firm or person deemed to possess the best combination of professional or technical skills, related experience, demonstrated responsibility, and a reasonable cost. 
(d)  The mayor and city clerk are authorized to sign contracts awarded under this section after approval by council. No contract shall become operative until approved as to legality and form by the department of law. 
(e)  To provide for continuity of effort, or uniformity of results, the council may extend an existing contract within the parameters of the Warren City Charter for professional, technical or contractual services as defined herein. 
(f)  When requests for proposals are issued: 
(1)  A copy shall be made available to the council office. 
(2)  When responses are received, a copy shall be distributed to each member of the review panel. 
(3)  When a proposal is accepted and sent to council for approval, it should also include the information why it was chosen and others were rejected, and also a financial history and references from other jobs that it has done. 
(g)  If the amount of any expenditure or sale of any item is estimated to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in any one (1) twelve month period, no such expenditure or sale shall be approved by council until thirty (30) days after it has been presented to council and, in the case of a purchase of services, after a report is made in writing to council by the controller specifying the experience, financial reliability, and references of the contractor to whom award of the contract is proposed, the requirements of this section 2-337.8(g) may be waived where immediate procurement is essential to protect the life, health, or convenience of citizens, upon a majority vote of council. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.9. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  In case of an actual emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using agency, which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of citizens, regardless of the amount of the expenditure, at the lowest obtainable price. 
(b)  Emergency purchases shall be authorized by the mayor, the city controller, or his or her designee, and the purchasing agent. 
(c)  Council shall be immediately notified upon the execution of an emergency purchase, based upon the limits contained in the purchasing ordinance. 
(d)  A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the purchasing agent with the council and shall be entered in the minutes of the council and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.10. - Grant funded purchases. 
Purchases utilizing grant funds shall be subject to either the city's purchasing ordinance or the rules governing federal or state grant programs, whichever is more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 2-337.11. - Reporting procedure. 
The purchasing agent shall submit a monthly report to council, which identifies purchases with monetary values over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and at, or below, twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-746, § 1, 11-22-16)  
Secs. 2-338—2-344. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note to 2-337.  
Sec. 2-345. - Disposition of city equipment, material or supplies. 
The purchasing agent is authorized to dispose of equipment, material and supplies which have become obsolete, or for which the city has no further need under the following procedures: 
(a)  The purchasing agent may effect disposition through trade-in against the purchase price of new or replacement items, as part of the procurement process outlined in this division. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may sell such items at a public auction, or through a sealed bid process, to the highest responsible bidder. Such auction or sealed bid process shall be advertised at least once in the official newspaper of the city at least ten (10) days prior to such public auction or public opening of sealed bids. 
(c)  Specialized items relatively unique to a municipal operation (such as fire apparatus, sewer cleaning equipment, street sweepers, etc.) may be sold by the purchasing agent (after advertisement in the official newspaper of the city, and in selected trade journals through open bids, or through a negotiated price with available sources including other units of government). 
(d)  Upon recommendation of the purchasing agent, the council may, by resolution, authorize alternative methods of disposition intended to result in a greater benefit to the city. 
(e)  Items which cannot be sold through public auction, or through the sealed or open bid process, may be sold as salvage, or scrapped by the purchasing agent if the item has no market value. A disposition record of all such items shall be maintained by the purchasing agent for three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-346. - Real property. 
Transactions involving the purchase, sale, gift or lease of real property shall be authorized by council resolution. Offers to purchase and proposals to sell city-owned property shall be reviewed by the city attorney and a recommendation made concerning: (1) the sufficiency of the consideration and (2) the public purpose involved in the land transaction. The following factors shall be considered and identified by the city attorney in making any recommendations to the city council for the purchase, sale or lease of real property: 
(a)  Purchase. 
1.  Identification of the public purpose involved in the proposed land transaction shall be construed liberally. 
2.  Determination of the market value of the property as indicated by an independent outside appraisal unless purchased by way of tax foreclosure. 
(b)  Sale. 
1.  Identification of the public purpose involved in the proposed land transaction shall be construed liberally. 
2.  Determination of the market value of the property as indicated by the assessor when the real property to be sold is: 
a.  Vacant; and 
b.  Zoned R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C or R-1-P; and 
c.  To be purchased by the owner of adjacent property that is also zoned either R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C or R-1-P; and 
d.  To be permanently combined with the adjacent property; and 
e.  Prohibited, by recorded deed restriction, from being used solely to construct a subsequent stand alone single family residence. This does not prohibit the combined real property from being used for this purpose. 
All real property transactions shall be authorized by council resolution. The market price of any property sold by the city and not within the zoning designations noted in paragraph 2. above shall be confirmed to the city council by both an independent appraiser and the city assessor pursuant to Charter Section 9.23. All land transactions involving city officers or employees shall be governed by applicable provisions of state law and City Charter on conflicts of interest and in any event, shall require a full disclosure of the officer or employee's interest and non-voting of the officer involved. Notwithstanding the above, all land transactions shall follow the procedures for land transactions as set forth in the Warren City Charter Sections 14.3 and 14.4. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 80-606, § 1, 4-13-04)  
Sec. 2-347. - Procedures. rules, regulations. 
The city controller shall formulate and establish such additional rules and regulations, subject to the provisions of this subdivision, as will expedite purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 2-348. - Persons in default to the city. 
No bid or response to a request for proposal shall be accepted from any person who is in default to the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-482, § 1, 5-23-95)  
Secs. 2-349—2-355. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STRUCTURAL CHANGES AND ALTERATIONS TO CITY BUILDINGS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9. 
 
Sec. 2-356. - Defined. 
The term "structural change or alteration", as used in this article, shall mean such a change as to alter the physical characteristics or appearance of the interior or exterior of a given building, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the relocation, addition, removal or replacement of partitions, walls, parapets and counters of every kind, nature and description. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1602) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-357. - Control vested in city council. 
The regulation and control of structural changes or alterations to any building owned, rented or leased by the city, for any and all of its municipal activities, is hereby vested in the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1601)  
Sec. 2-358. - Approval of council required. 
No structural change or alteration shall be made to any building owned, rented or leased by the city without the prior written authorization or approval of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1603)  
Sec. 2-359. - Requests for authorization. 
Requests for authorization or approval of structural changes or alterations as provided in this article, shall be presented in writing to the city council, through its secretary or deputy secretary. Such written request shall include a detailed narrative description of the structural change or alteration sought to be made, the reason or reasons for same, a drawing, sketch or diagram illustrating, insofar as is possible, such change or alteration, a complete list and description of materials to be used, an estimate of the cost of materials and labor, the signature of the head of the department, board, commission or municipal entity requesting approval, and the mayor's recommendation in approval or disapproval. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1604)  
Secs. 2-360—2-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 25. 
 
Sec. 2-371. - Definitions. 
No defined city officer shall violate the standards of conduct or procedural parameters as used in this article: 
(a)  City officer means an elected city officer of the city, as defined in section 4.1(a) of the Warren City Charter; and the members of the several boards and commissions created by or under the authority of section 4.1(b) of the Warren City Charter or applicable state law. 
(b)  Unethical conduct means a violation of the standards of conduct contained in section 2-372. 
(c)  Incompatible offices means the standards of conduct prescribed by 1978 PA 566. 
(d)  Conflict of interest—Kinship means the contracting with an entity that is either wholly owned or that is controlled by and through a controlling interest by a person who is related by consanguinity or affinity to within the second degree of a city officer. 
(e)  Person means any business, individual, club, other organization, or group of individuals. 
(f)  Procurement means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, services, or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or construction, including description of requirement, selection, and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
(g)  Gratuity means a payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service, or anything of more than a nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received. 
(h)  Confidential information means any information which is available to a city officer only because of the city officer's status as an employee of the City of Warren and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
(i)  Contract means all types of agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction. 
(j)  Contractor means any person having a contract with the city or a using agency thereof. 
(k)  Services means the furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
(l)  Direct or indirect participation means involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard. 
(m)  Non-employee means any person, not an employee of the City of Warren, who is involved directly or indirectly, including through a third party, in the procurement process with the City of Warren. 
(n)  Conflict of interest—Employment/financial means a personal interest of such substance as to induce action on his or her part to promote the governmental decision or contract for his or her own personal benefit. 
After debate has ended and after a motion, proposal, recommendation, or resolution is in place, a city officer shall not directly or indirectly participate in a vote regarding a governmental decision or a contract between the city and any of the following: 
(1)  Himself or herself. 
(2)  His or her employer who compensates the city officer for work regularly performed in excess of twenty-five (25) hours per week. 
(3)  A firm, partnership, limited liability company, or other unincorporated association, in which he or she is a partner, member or employee. 
(4)  Any corporation in which he or she is a stockholder owning more than one (1) percent of the total outstanding stock of any class if the stock is not listed on a stock exchange, or stock with a present total market value in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) if the stock is listed on a stock exchange or of which he or she is a director, officer, or employee. 
(5)  Any trust of which he or she is a beneficiary or trustee. 
The provisions of this section do not apply to a defined city officer or board or commission member if such person is employed by a public community college, junior college, or state college or university. 
(o)  Governmental decision means a determination, action, vote or disposition upon a motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, ordinance, or measure on which a vote by a defined city officer of the public body is required, and by which the public body formulates or effectuates public policy. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-372. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Disclosure of confidential information. It shall be unethical for a city officer to divulge to any person confidential information acquired in the course of employment in advance of the time prescribed for its authorized release to the public. 
(b)  Use of city property. It shall be unethical for a city officer to use personnel resources, property, and funds under the officer's official care and control for personal gain or benefit unless used judiciously and solely in accordance with prescribed constitutional, statutory, and regulatory procedures. 
(c)  Gifts or loans. It shall be unethical for a city officer to solicit or accept a gift or loan of money, goods, services, or other thing of value for the benefit of a person or organization, other than the city, which tends to influence the manner in which the city officer or another city officer performs official duties. 
(d)  Personal profit. It shall be unethical for a city officer to engage in a business transaction in which the city officer may profit from his or her official position or authority or benefit financially from confidential information which the city officer has obtained or may obtain by reason of that position or authority. 
(e)  Gratuities. It shall be unethical for a city officer to accept a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with a decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal therefore. 
(f)  Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for a city officer to be directly or indirectly involved in any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
(g)  Incompatible employment. It shall be unethical for any city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in section 2-371(n) described herein. 
(h)  Incompatible offices. It shall be unethical for any city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in 1978 PA 566. 
(i)  Incompatible kinship. It shall be unethical for any city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in Section 2-371(d) described herein. 
(j)  Contract fixing. It shall be unethical for a city officer to participate in the negotiation or execution of contracts, making of loans, granting of subsidies, fixing of rates, issuance of permits or certificates, or other regulation or supervision relating to a business entity in which the city officer has a financial or unethical interest. 
(k)  Unethical hiring. It shall be unethical for a city officer to be hired, or to hire a person, to solicit or secure a city contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
(l)  Financial conflict of interest. It shall be unethical for a city officer to violate the standards of conduct prescribed in Section 2-371(n) described herein. 
The prohibition against gratuities and kickbacks prescribed in this section shall be conspicuously set forth in every contract and solicitation therefor. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-373. - Waiver. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, a city officer shall be permitted to vote on, make, or participate in making a governmental decision if all of the following occur: 
(1)  The requisite quorum necessary for official action on the governmental decision by the entity of the city to which the city officer has been elected or appointed is not available because the participation of the public officer in the official action violates subsection 2-372(g), (i), (j) or (l) herein. 
(2)  Without breaching recognized professional confidences, the city officer promptly discloses any personal, contractual, financial, business or employment interest he or she may have in the governmental decision and disclosure is made part of the public record of the official action on the governmental decision. 
(b)  If a governmental decision involves the awarding of a contract, a city officer shall be permitted to vote on, make, or participate in making the governmental decision on issues defined in subsection 2-372(g), (i), (j) or (l) herein if all of the following occur: 
(1)  All of the conditions of subsection (a) of this section are fulfilled. 
(2)  The city officer will directly benefit from the contract in an amount less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or less than five (5) percent of the public cost of the contract, whichever is less. 
(3)  The city officer files a sworn affidavit containing the information described in subsection (b)(2) of this section, with the legislative or administrative body making the governmental decision. 
(4)  The affidavit required in subsection (b)(3) of this section is made part of the public record of the official action on the governmental decision. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-374. - Intent, public contracts. 
This article is intended as a code of ethics for city officers and not as a rule of law for public contracts. 
In the event of a conflict between this article and the city's purchasing ordinance, the provisions of the purchasing ordinance shall prevail. 
This article does not prevent the issuance of a contract awarded to the lowest qualified bidder, upon receipt of sealed bids pursuant to a notice for bids, and shall not preclude any qualified person, firm, corporation, or trust from bidding. This does not apply to amendments or renegotiations of a contract or to additional payments under the contract which were not authorized by the contract at the time of award. 
A contract in respect to which a city officer acts in violation of this article shall not be considered to be void or voidable unless the contract is a violation of another law which specifically provides for the remedy. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-375. - Whistleblower protections. 
(a)  A city officer or employee who has knowledge that a city officer has violated section 2-372 may report the existence of the violation to a supervisor, person, agency, or organization. A city officer or employee who reports or is about to report a violation of section 2-372 shall not be subject to any of the following sanctions because they reported or were about to report a violation of section 2-372. 
(1)  Dismissal from employment or office. 
(2)  Withholding of salary increases that are ordinarily forthcoming to the employee. 
(3)  Withholding of promotions that are ordinarily forthcoming to the employee. 
(4)  Demotion in employment status. 
(5)  Transfer of employment location. 
(b)  Whenever a city officer or employee who has reported or who intends to report a violation of section 2-372 may be subject to any of the sanctions under this section for reasons other than the city officer's or employee's actions in reporting or intending to report a violation of section 2-372, the appointing or supervisory authority before the imposition of a sanction shall establish by a preponderance of evidence that the sanction to be imposed is not imposed because the city officer or employee reported or intended to report a violation of section 2-372. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-376. - Whistleblower civil actions for relief or damages. 
(a)  A person who alleges a violation of section 2-375 may bring a civil action for appropriate injunctive relief, or actual damages, or both within ninety (90) days after the occurrence of the alleged violation. 
(b)  An action commenced pursuant to subsection (a) of this section may be brought in the circuit court for the county where the alleged violation occurred, the county where the complainant resides, or the county where the person against whom the civil complaint is filed resides. 
(c)  As used in subsection (a), "damages" means damages for injury or loss caused by each violation of section 2-374, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to diminish or impair the rights of a person under any collective bargaining agreement that he or she may derive benefits from. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-377. - Remedies ordered by court. 
A court, in rendering a judgment in an action brought pursuant to section 2-375, shall order, as the court considers appropriate, reinstatement of the employee, the payment of back wages, full reinstatement of fringe benefits and seniority rights, actual damages, or any combination of these remedies. A court may also award the complainant all or a portion of the costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney fees and witness fees, if the court determines that the award is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-378. - Notices of employee protections and obligations. 
The City of Warren shall post notices and use other appropriate means to keep his or her employees informed of their protections and obligation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99) 
State Law reference— MCL 15.342(e)  
Sec. 2-379. - Penalties. 
(a)  Elected officers defined by charter section 4.1(a). The city council shall have the authority to issue an oral or written warning or reprimand to a defined city officer or member of the board of zoning appeals for a violation or violations of the standards of conduct in this article. 
(b)  Board and commission members defined by charter section 4.1(b). Pursuant to charter section 7.6, the mayor shall have the authority to impose any one or all of the following sanctions on an affected board or commission member for violations of the standards of conduct in this article: 
(1)  Oral or written warnings or reprimands; 
(2)  Suspension of duties for specified periods of time; or 
(3)  Termination of duties. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-380. - Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical standards. 
(a)  General provisions. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the ethical standards of this article by persons affected by this article may be recovered by and on behalf of the City of Warren for the sole benefit of the City of Warren. 
(b)  Recovery of kickbacks by the city. Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a person affected by this article, to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable hereunder from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Sec. 2-381. - Severability, savings, repealer, sanctions. 
(a)  If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion of this article, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred at the time this article takes effect are saved and may be consummated according to the law in force when they are commenced. 
(c)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. 
(d)  To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this article constitute violations of the Michigan Criminal Code they shall be punishable as provided therein. Such penalties shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in sections 2-379 and 2-380 of this article. 
(e)  No provision contained herein shall be intended to restrict, preclude, hinder or otherwise impair the Macomb County Prosecutor or the Michigan Attorney General from exercising any and all rights, duties, obligations or discretion bestowed upon them in the exercise and fulfillment of their official functions. 
(Ord. No. 80-395, § 1, 9-11-91; Ord. No. 80-544, § 1, 4-27-99)  
Chapter 2.5 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS BUREAU[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and Building Regulation, Chapter 9; Garbage and Rubbish, Chapter 16; Nuisances, Chapter 21, excluding noise-based and smoking nuisances described in Article II and Article V; Property Maintenance, Chapter 28; Sign Erectors and Sign Permit Fees, Chapter 31; Vegetation, Chapter 38; and generally Appendix A, Zoning. 
State Law reference— MCL 117.4q, MCL 117.4r, and MCL 600.4027. 
 
Sec. 2.5-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure compliance with the Warren Code of Ordinances designated as blight violations. Previous enforcement mechanisms were not ensuring blight violation code compliance. 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 2.5-2. - Definitions. 
Blight violation. A violation of a provision of the Code of Ordinances, including appendices, that is designated as a blight violation. 
Bureau. The administrative hearings bureau. 
Credit union organization. A cooperative, nonprofit entity organized for the purposes of encouraging thrift among its members, providing a variety of financial services to its members, and providing an opportunity for its members to use and control their own money on a democratic basis in order to improve their economic and social condition, including credit unions organized pursuant to: the Credit Union Act, MCL 490.101 to 490.601; the laws of another state or territory of the United States; or the laws of the United States. 
Financial institution. A state or nationally chartered bank or a state or federally chartered savings and loan association, savings bank, or credit union whose deposits are insured by an agency of the United States government and that maintains a principal office or branch office in the State of Michigan under the laws of the State of Michigan or the United States. 
Government-sponsored enterprise. That term as defined in 2 USC 622(8), or the Michigan State Housing Development Authority created under the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, MCL 125.1401 to 125.1499c. 
Mortgage servicer. A person that, directly or indirectly, services or offers to service mortgage loans, as defined by MCL 445.1651a. 
Rules committee. A committee comprised of the city attorney, the public service director, and the director of property maintenance, or their representatives. 
Rules of procedure. Set of rules establishing the administrative hearings bureau's procedures, including procedures for: issuing written violation notices, default and admission of responsibility, conducting administrative hearings to determine responsibility, issuing final decisions and orders, and appeals. 
Violator. A person who the administrative hearings officer has found responsible for a blight violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 2.5-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 2.5-3(b), the bureau has exclusive jurisdiction to make determinations of responsibility and to impose penalties for blight violations. 
(b)  The bureau does not have jurisdiction over: 
(1)  A foreclosing governmental unit as defined by MCL 211.78; or 
(2)  An authority created under the Land Bank Fast Track Act, MCL 124.751—124.774. 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 2.5-4. - Administrative hearings officer. 
(a)  Appointment. 
(1)  The mayor shall appoint the administrative hearings officer. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  The administrative hearings officer shall be: 
i.  A current 37th District Court Magistrate; and 
ii.  Qualified as required by MCL 117.4q(11). 
(c)  Duties. 
(1)  The administrative hearings officer shall: 
i.  Conduct administrative hearings as provided for by the rules of procedure; 
ii.  If the alleged violator was served proper notice and the alleged violator fails to appear at the scheduled hearing, enter an order of default finding an alleged violator responsible for the violation; 
iii.  Propose necessary rules of procedure changes to the rules committee, as provided in section 2.5-5(a)(2); 
iv.  Issue written responsibility determinations as provided for by the rules of procedure; and 
v.  Impose penalties consistent with section 2.5-7 of this chapter. 
(d)  Vacancy. 
(1)  If the administrative hearings officer position is vacant for a period of time longer than thirty (30) days, the administrative hearings bureau is suspended until an administrative hearings officer is appointed. 
(2)  During the suspension, this chapter does not apply and all blight violations are municipal civil infractions handled by the 37th District Court, punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and/or costs; assessments; and damages and expenses as provided by MCL 600.8727(3). 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 1, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 2.5-5. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Adoption and amendment. 
(1)  The rules committee shall adopt rules of procedure that govern the operation of the administrative hearings bureau. 
(2)  The rules of procedure shall be amended by the following procedure: 
i.  The administrative hearings officer proposes changes to the rules of procedure through a written petition to the rules committee; 
ii.  The rules committee votes on each proposed change. A majority vote determines whether each proposed change is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 2.5-6. - Fine schedule. 
(a)  City council shall adopt a fine schedule of civil fines and costs for blight violations. 
(b)  City council shall update the fine schedule as needed. 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 2.5-7. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fines, costs, and other remedies. 
(1)  The administrative hearings officer shall impose on the violator: 
i.  Civil fines and costs, pursuant to the fee schedule; and 
ii.  A justice system assessment, as provided for by MCL 117.4q(13). 
(2)  The administrative hearings officer may also order the violator to: 
i.  Take corrective action to remedy the blight violation; 
ii.  Reimburse the city for documented enforcement costs; and 
iii.  Take any other appropriate legal or equitable action. 
(3)  The administrative hearings officer may waive a fine for a blight violation if he/she finds that the violator: 
i.  Is the owner-occupier of the dwelling where the blight violation occurred; 
ii.  Is a first-time offender of a blight ordinance; and 
iii.  Has corrected the violation. 
(b)  An administrative hearings officer shall not impose: 
(1)  A penalty of incarceration; or 
(2)  A civil fine in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 2.5-8. - Failure to obey administrative hearings officer's order. 
(a)  Failure to pay civil fines and costs under section 2.5-7(a)(1) as a separate offense; exemptions; penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in section 2.5-8(a)(2), a violator is guilty of a separate offense if: 
i.  The administrative hearings officer imposes a civil fine and costs of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more on the violator; and 
ii.  The violator fails to pay the civil fine and costs within thirty (30) days of the administrative hearings officer's responsibility determination. 
(2)  A violator is exempted from section 2.5-8(a)(1) if the violator: 
i.  Became the owner of the property by foreclosure or by taking a deed in lieu of foreclosure; and is a government-sponsored enterprise, a financial institution, a mortgage servicer, or a credit union service organization; or 
ii.  Is the owner of the property; and at the time that the administrative hearings officer imposed the civil fine and costs had filed, pursuant to MCL 211.7cc(2), a valid principal residence exemption affidavit for the current year certifying that the property is owned and occupied as a principal residence by the owner. 
(3)  Penalties. 
i.  A violator found guilty of failing to pay civil fines and costs under section 2.5-8(a)(1) is subject to the following penalty: 
1.  For a first violation, the violator is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
2.  For a subsequent violation, the violator is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(b)  Failure to obey the administrative hearings officer's order under section 2.5-7(a)(2) as a separate offense. 
(1)  If a violator fails to obey the administrative hearings officer's order to correct the blight violation and/or pay the city for enforcement costs under section 2.5-7(a)(2), that violator is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(c)  Lien, garnishment, or other collection methods authorized by law. 
(1)  If the administrative hearings officer imposes a civil fine and costs on a violator, and the violator fails to pay within thirty (30) days of the administrative hearings officer's responsibility determination, the property maintenance director or his/her representative may pursue any collection method authorized by law including filing a lien on the property involved in the blight violation, pursuant to MCL 117.4r; or filing a writ of garnishment, pursuant to MCL 600.4027, but not both. 
(d)  Zoning and building authorizations. 
(1)  As provided for in chapter 9, section 9-1 of the Code of Ordinances and appendix A, article XXIII, section 23.02(b), the city may prohibit a violator with unpaid administrative hearings bureau civil fines or costs from applying for building permits, certificates of compliance, variances, rezoning approvals, site plan approvals, planned unit development approvals, and other zoning and building authorizations. 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 2.5-9. - Chapter not inconsistent. 
This chapter applies to administrative adjudication proceedings conducted by the bureau to the extent that it is not inconsistent with the existing Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 1, 8-11-15)  
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sound trucks, § 21-32; advertising in parks restricted, § 23-14; signs, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference— Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq.; attaching advertising to trees prohibited, MCL 247.235; regulation of pricing and advertising, MCL 445.801 et seq.; false advertising, MCL 750.33. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 4, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-628, § 1, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 80-649, § 1, 5-8-07)  
Secs. 3-2—3-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 3-16. - Purpose. 
To protect the people against the nuisance of, and incident to, the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial handbills, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation thereof, and to that end the purposes of this article are specifically declared to be as follows: 
(1)  To protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors, by requiring the registration of all such solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors, together with the names of their employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and advertising distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees; 
(2)  To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter; 
(3)  To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial handbills; 
(4)  To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and disseminate information by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the same. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1501)  
Sec. 3-17. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature. 
Handbill distributor shall mean and include any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbill. 
Newspaper shall mean and include any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Private premises shall mean and include any dwelling house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1502) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 3-18. - Distributing in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any public place within the city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept the same. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1503) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 3-19. - Placing in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1504) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 3-20. - Distribution on uninhabited or vacant private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1505)  
Sec. 3-21. - Distribution on inhabited private premises. 
No person licensed under the provisions of this article, or any other person, shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this article, the aforesaid licensed or other person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1506)  
Sec. 3-22. - Prohibiting distribution where properly posted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Handbills," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1507)  
Sec. 3-23. - Hours of distribution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw or scatter any handbill, before the hour of 8:30 a.m. and after the hour of 6:00 p.m., or at any time on Sundays and the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1508)  
Sec. 3-24. - Distributor's license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as a handbill distributor for hire without first complying with the terms of this article and all other relevant laws and regulations; provided, that nothing contained herein shall apply to any person advertising his or her business or activity upon his or her own premises, if such business or activity is regularly established at a definite location in the city, and also if a license has been obtained therefor, if such license be required under the terms of any applicable law or ordinance. 
(b)  Any person desiring to engage, as principal, in the business of distributing handbills for hire, shall make application to and receive from the city clerk a license in the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this article. Such applicant shall make written application to the city clerk upon a form or forms provided for such purpose by the city clerk. Such form shall contain, among other things that may be required, the name, the business address, telephone number, and a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the applicant, the approximate number of agents and employees so to be engaged, together with a request for a license for the period for which the applicant seeks to engage in such business. 
(c)  Each day that distribution of handbills is to be made within the city, the licensee or his or her agent shall first register with the police department and shall provide the department with the following information: the name under which the license is issued, the license number, the agent's name, the address and the telephone number at which the licensee or his or her agent or the person in charge of the distribution may be reached during the period of distribution, the number of handbill distributors at work in the city and their respective names and addresses, the length of time required to complete the distribution, and such other information as may be required by the police department from time to time properly to enforce this article. 
(d)  Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the city council may revoke any license obtained under an application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the applicant with intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent representations, or for violation of this article, or any other grounds specified by law. 
(e)  The application for a license shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in section 18-18. No license issued under this section shall be transferable; and if such license shall be surrendered by the licensee therein named, or shall be revoked for cause, neither the licensee named in such license, nor any other person, shall be entitled to any refund of any part of such fee. Persons acting for licensees, as agents or employees, in the distributing of handbills, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a fee, but each person shall comply with each and all of the other provisions hereof, and be subject thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1509) 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 3-25. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, nor to handbills primarily or solely pertaining to religious, social or political activities, when distributed without monetary charge. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1510)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 4, §§ 1—8, and enacted a new Ch. 4 as set out herein. The former Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1967 Code, §§ 8-106, 8-107, 8-109—8-112, 8-249 and 8-250; Ord. No. 80-280, § 2, adopted May 2, 1983; Ord. No. 80-507, § 1, adopted March 11, 1997; Ord. No. 80-617, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 2005; Ord. No. 80-697, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2012. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Warren Liquor Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate alcoholic liquors and establishments dealing in alcoholic liquors for the public health, safety, and welfare of the city and persons within its jurisdictional boundaries. This chapter is designed to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent potential adverse impacts relating to alcoholic liquor. The regulations herein, including those provisions relating to the issuance, transfer, renewal, or revocation of liquor licenses and permits, are designed to provide objective and orderly procedures for the administration of this chapter. The council finds that nudity, partial nudity, and sexualized conduct in alcoholic liquor establishments begets undesirable behavior, including, violations of law and dangers to health, safety, and welfare of the public, and to that end incorporates as analogous and applicable hereto the findings and legislative record contained in chapter 6, article X as adopted by Ordinance No. 80-689. It is neither the purpose nor effect of this chapter to impose a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials or performances protected by the First Amendment. Where necessary, this chapter shall be construed to comply with all applicable constitutional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-3. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context: 
Alcoholic liquor means any beverage or compound containing one-half (½) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume, which is used for human consumption. For purposes of this chapter, the term includes, but is not limited to, beer, wine and spirits. 
Approval means the favorable consent of the city council or the police department for any alcoholic liquor-related license or permit that is required by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and that is sought for an entity or establishment in the city. Where the opinion of the city council or the police department is required to be considered, approval shall mean the favorable opinion of the city council or the police department, as applicable. See Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, Liquor Control Commission (MLCC), Approval Chart (dated 12-21-2012 and as amended from time to time) or other applicable MLCC bulletin. 
Disqualifying criminal act means: 
(1)  An offense punishable by death or imprisonment for ninety (90) days or more under any of the following statutes, as amended from time to time, for which less than ten (10) years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(i)  Michigan Penal Code (MPC) Chapter IV (Adulterating and Misbranding); 
(ii)  MPC Chapter X (Arson and Burning); 
(iii)  MPC Chapter XI (Assaults); 
(iv)  MPC Chapter XVII (Bribery and Corruption); 
(v)  MPC Chapter XXII (Compounding Offenses); 
(vi)  MPC Chapter XXVA (Criminal Enterprises); 
(vii)  MPC Chapter XXVIII (Disorderly Persons); 
(viii)  MPC Chapter XXXI (Embezzlement); 
(ix)  MPC Chapter XXXIII (Explosives, Bombs, and Harmful Devices); 
(x)  MPC Chapter XXXIV (Extortion); 
(xi)  MPC Chapter XLIII (Frauds and Cheats); 
(xii)  MPC Chapter XLIV (Gambling); 
(xiii)  MPC Chapter XLV (Homicide); 
(xiv)  MPC Chapter XLVIII (Indecency and Immorality); 
(xv)  MPC Chapter LVIII (Mayhem); 
(xvi)  MPC Chapter LXVII (Prostitution); 
(xvii)  MPC Chapter LXVIIA (Human Trafficking); 
(xviii)  MPC Chapter LXXVI (Sexual Conduct); 
(xix)  MPC Chapter LXXVIII (Robbery); 
(xx)  MPC Chapter LXXXIII-A (Michigan Anti-Terrorism Act); 
(xxi)  MCL Chapter 333, Part 74 (Controlled Substances—Offenses and Penalties); 
(xxii)  MCL 205.27 (Taxation—Prohibited Acts (including tax evasion)); 
(xxiii)  MCL 257.625 (Operating While Intoxicated, Impaired, Controlled Substance or other); 
(2)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one (1) of the foregoing offenses; 
(3)  Any offense enumerated in the city's code which contains the same elements as one (1) of the foregoing state offenses; or 
(4)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in the state, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Employee means any person who performs a service on the premises of an alcoholic beverage establishment on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Influential interest means any of the following: 
(1)  The actual power to operate or control the operation, management, or policies of a current or prospective alcoholic liquor business; 
(2)  Ownership of a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more of a current or prospective alcoholic liquor business; or 
(3)  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates a current or prospective alcoholic liquor business. 
License shall mean a license issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to sell, produce, or warehouse alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises. 
Licensed premises shall mean the location where the licensee is authorized to sell or store alcoholic liquor on or off the premises. 
Licensee shall mean a person holding a license to sell or store alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises, as well as such person's agents, servants and employees. 
Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation. 
Premises shall mean the location for which a license has been issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
Related permit shall mean any activity permit issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to a licensee for entertainment or other activities at the licensed premises, which legally require such a permit. 
Sale means the exchange, barter, traffic, furnishing, or giving away of alcoholic liquor which is regulated by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and this chapter. 
SDD or specially designated distributor means a person engaged in an established business licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to distribute spirits and mixed spirit drink in the original package for consumption off the premises. 
SDM or specially designated merchant means a person to whom the Michigan Liquor Control Commission grants a license to sell beer or wine, or both, at retail for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 4-4. - Sale or furnishing to persons under twenty-one (21) prohibited; defenses. 
(a)  Misdemeanor. Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the person has attained twenty-one (21) years of age. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) and subject to subsection (e), a person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1)  Diligent inquiry. A diligent inquiry means a good faith effort to determine the age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an official Michigan operator's or chauffeur's license, an official Michigan personal identification card, a military identification card, or any other bona fide picture identification which established the identity of a person. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction. If the violation set forth in subsection (a) is the result of an undercover operation in which the person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action, the retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  If a violation occurs in an establishment that is licensed by the commission for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a person who is a licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action. 
(1)  Corrective action. Corrective action means action taken by a licensee or a clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee designed to prevent a minor from further possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. Corrective action includes, but is not limited to, contacting a law enforcement agency and ejecting the minor and any other person suspected of aiding and abetting the minor. 
(d)  In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, a motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license, a military identification card, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action brought under this section. 
(e)  If the police department is the enforcing agency, a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) unless all the following occur, if applicable: 
(1)  Enforcement action is taken against the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed or attempted to consume, or possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor. 
(2)  Enforcement action is taken under this section against the person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who is not the retail licensee or the retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who sold or furnished the alcoholic liquor to the person less than twenty-one (21). 
(3)  Enforcement action under this section is taken against the clerk, agent, or employee who directly sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(f)  If a person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age participates in an undercover operation in which the person is to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor under the supervision of a law enforcement agency, his or her parents or legal guardian shall consent to the participation if that person is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13) 
State Law reference— MCL 436.1701.  
Sec. 4-5. - Unlawful purchases, consumption or possession by persons under twenty-one (21). 
(a)  A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase, consume or attempt to consume, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content except as provided in this section. A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by the following sanctions and is not subject to the sanctions prescribed in MCL 436.1909: 
(1)  For a first violation, by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). A court may order a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age under this subdivision to perform community service, participation in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services and/or to undergo substance abuse screening at his or her own expense. 
(2)  For a second violation, by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days but only if the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or both. The court may order the person under this subdivision to perform community service, participation in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services and/or undergo substance abuse screening and assessment as his or her own expense. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation, by imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days but only if the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. The court may order the person under this subdivision to perform community service, participation in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services and/or undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. 
(b)  When a person who has not previously been convicted of a violation of subsection (a) pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the person on probation upon terms and conditions that include, but are not limited to, the sanctions set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section and payment of a probation supervision fee as prescribed in section 3c of chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 771.3c. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter a plea of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications of disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime, including the additional penalties imposed for second or subsequent convictions under subsection (a)(2) and (3) of this section. There may be only one (1) discharge or dismissal under this subsection as to an individual. The records and identifications division of the department of state police shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this subsection. This record shall be furnished to either or both of the following: 
(1)  To a court, prosecutor, or police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action under subsection (a) has already once utilized this subsection. 
(2)  To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law enforcement agency, upon the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions: 
(i)  At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the department, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency. 
(ii)  The record is used by the department, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for employment. 
(c)  A violation of subsection (a) of this section successfully deferred, discharged, and dismissed under subsection (b) is considered a prior violation for the purposes of subsection (a)(2) and (3). 
(d)  The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsection (a) or (f) as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.319. 
(e)  Preliminary breath test requested. A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A police officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor. 
(f)  Fraudulent identification. A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age, or notwithstanding subsection (a), a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who uses a fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(g)  A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than eighteen (18) years of age who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (a) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The law enforcement agency shall notify the parent, guardian, or custodian not later than forty-eight (48) hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than eighteen (18) years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293; MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement agency may notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt and actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than seventeen (17) years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(h)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the state, by the liquor control commission, or by an agent of the liquor control commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(i)  The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of subsection (a): 
(1)  A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor. 
(2)  A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who accompanies an individual who meets both of the following criteria: 
(i)  Has consumed alcoholic liquor. 
(ii)  Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(3)  A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care concern. 
(j)  If a person under the age of eighteen (18) who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation as provided under subsection (j), the health facility or agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian of the individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the health facility or agency. 
(k)  This section shall not be construed to limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of this chapter. 
(l)  The consumption of alcoholic beverages by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member shall not be prohibited by this chapter if the purpose is solely educational and a necessary ingredient of the course. 
(m)  The consumption by a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this chapter. 
(n)  Subsection (a) does not apply to a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, the police department as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the police department and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(o)  The state police, the commission, or the police department shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, section 4-4(a) or (b), MCL 436.1701(1), or MCL 436.1801(2). 
(p)  In a criminal prosecution for the violation of subsection (a) concerning a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(q)  As used in this section: 
(1)  The term "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(i)  An alcohol content of not less than two hundredths (0.02) gram or more per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of urine. 
(ii)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(2)  The term "emergency medical services personnel" means that term as defined in section 20904 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20904. 
(3)  The term "health facility or agency" means that term as defined in section 20106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13) 
State Law reference— MCL 436.1703.  
Sec. 4-6. - Children in places where liquor is sold. 
A minor child under seventeen (17) years of age shall not be permitted to remain in a dance hall, saloon, barroom or any place where spirituous or intoxicating liquor, wine or beer, or any beverage liquor or liquors containing spirituous or intoxicating liquor, beer or malt liquor is sold, given away or furnished for a beverage, unless the minor is accompanied by parent or guardian. A proprietor, keeper or manager of any such place who permits a minor child to remain in any such place, and a person who encourages or induces in any way the minor child to enter the place or to remain therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13) 
State Law reference— MCL 750.141.  
Sec. 4-7. - Consumption on unlicensed premises. 
(1)  A person shall not do either of the following: 
(a)  Maintain, operate, or lease, or otherwise furnish to any person, any premises or place that is not licensed under the Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1 et seq.); where the other person may engage in the drinking of alcoholic liquor for consideration. 
(b)  Obtain by way of lease or rental agreement, and furnish or provide to any other person, any premises or place that is not licensed under the Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1 et seq.) within which any other person may engage in the drinking of alcoholic liquor for consideration. 
(2)  A person shall not consume alcoholic liquor in a commercial establishment selling food if the commercial establishment is not licensed under the Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1 et seq.). A person owning, operating, or leasing a commercial establishment selling food which is not licensed under the Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1 et seq.) shall not allow the consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to any hotel or any licensee under this Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.201 et seq. 
(4)  This section shall not be construed to repeal or amend MCL 436.2019. 
(5)  As used in this section, the term "consideration" includes any fee, cover charge, ticket purchase, the storage of alcoholic liquor, the sale of food, ice, mixers, or other liquids used with alcoholic liquor drinks, or the purchasing of any service or item, or combination of service and item; or includes the furnishing of glassware or other containers for use in the consumption of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the sale of food. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13) 
State Law reference— MCL 436.1913.  
Sec. 4-8. - Specific prohibitions on premises licensed for on-premises consumption. 
No licensee shall knowingly or recklessly engage in or permit on the licensed premises any of the following live conduct: 
(1)  Acts of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, or flagellation; 
(2)  The engaging in physical contact with, touching, caressing, or fondling, by an employee, of the breast, buttocks, lap, pubic region, or genitals of a patron, whether directly or through clothing or other covering; 
(3)  The engaging in physical contact with, touching, caressing, or fondling, by a patron, of the breast, buttocks, lap, pubic region, or genitals of an employee, whether directly or through clothing or other covering; or 
(4)  The display or exposure, by an employee, of his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic region, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, vulva or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof (excluding any portion of the cleavage of the female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part) to a patron. This subsection does not apply to conduct in theaters, concert halls, art centers, museums, or similar establishments that are primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances, when the performances that are presented are expressing matters of serious literary, artistic, scientific, or political value. The exception in the previous sentence shall not be construed to apply to any sexually oriented business as defined by applicable law. 
The city council finds that the regulations in this chapter, and in this section specifically, serve the substantial government interest in preventing negative secondary effects associated with nudity and sexualized conduct in establishments serving alcohol, as detailed in Resolution adopted April 23, 2013. The city council adopts and incorporates herein its findings and legislative record related to such negative secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-9. - Operating while intoxicated warning signs required. 
Any establishment holding a license pursuant to the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, as amended, MCL 436.1101 et seq., for on-premises alcoholic liquor consumption, shall be required to post operating while intoxicated warning signs in compliance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Wall sign near exit. A wall sign shall be posted in a visible location near each exit, no higher than fifty-four (54) inches measured from the ground, which contains the following two (2) statements: 
OPERATING A VEHICLE WHILE INTOXICATED IS AGAINST THE LAW (MCL 257.625) 
TAXICABS ARE AVAILABLE. THE FOLLOWING IS A LIST OF LICENSED TAXICABS AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS: 
(1)  List of taxicabs. The sign shall include a list of the name and telephone number of all licensed taxicabs in the city. The name and telephone number of licensed taxicabs is available from the city clerk. The posted list of licensed taxicabs shall be updated by the establishment annually on January 31. 
(2)  Size. The size of the operating while intoxicated warning sign shall be a minimum of eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches and the lettering used shall be at least one-half (½) inch in height. 
(b)  Table signs. A table sign shall be posted at each table in the establishment which contains the following statements: 
OPERATING A VEHICLE WHILE INTOXICATED IS AGAINST THE LAW. MCL 257.625 
TAXICABS ARE AVAILABLE. A LIST OF TAXICABS AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS ARE POSTED NEAR THE EXIT 
(1)  Size. The size of the operating while intoxicated warning signs posted on each table shall be a minimum of three (3) inches by five (5) inches and the lettering used shall be at least one-quarter (¼) inch in height. 
(c)  Penalty. The violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-9A. - Signs advertising alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  Effective July 1, 2017, any sign advertising alcoholic liquor is prohibited, unless the sign: 
(1)  Is not subject to local regulation under the Michigan Highway Advertising Act of 1972, MCL 252.301, et seq. as amended; 
(2)  References alcoholic liquors in the business name and was installed before April 30, 2015; or 
(3)  Has an area of ten (10) square feet or less. 
(b)  Signs advertising alcoholic liquor that are ten (10) square feet or less are limited to: 
(1)  One (1) sign per registered business; 
(2)  A width of five (5) feet; and 
(3)  A height of five (5) feet. 
(Ord. No. 80-729, § 1, 5-26-15)  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES, PERMITS, LOCAL APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 4-10. - Local approval of liquor license and related permit applications. 
If an application for local approval of a liquor license also seeks local approval for an MLCC dance, entertainment, or dance-entertainment activity permit, local approval for such permit(s) shall be granted provided that the application meets all of the requirements in this chapter for approval of a liquor license. In such situations, local approval of the liquor license application shall constitute local approval of the requested activity permit(s). No local approval shall be given for an application for a topless activity permit or for an extended hours permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-11. - Application for local approval required. 
(a)  MLCC application. An applicant for local approval must first submit an application for a liquor license or related permit to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and receive, upon submission of same, a request identification number (RID) from the MLCC. 
(b)  City application. An applicant for local approval shall file with the city police department liquor licensing division, 29900 Civic Center Drive, Warren, Michigan 48093, a completed application made on a form provided by the liquor licensing division. The application shall be signed by each person with an influential interest in the business for which local approval is sought. The application shall be notarized, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name and business or mailing address. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity, then all persons with an influential interest in the entity shall be deemed an applicant and shall provide the information required by this chapter. 
(2)  Type of license, permit, or alcoholic liquor-related approval desired. 
(3)  Address and legal description of the property where the license is to be located. 
(4)  A preliminary site plan showing the relationship of the structure or proposed structure for which approval is sought to the property and showing all land uses within three hundred (300) feet of the property. The preliminary site plan shall also include photographs or drawings of each of the sides of the structure. 
(5)  The applicant's employment and business history, which shall set forth the number of years, if any, that the applicant has worked in liquor licensed establishment(s) and the position or role that the applicant held in such establishment(s). 
(6)  A set of the applicant's fingerprints. Fingerprinting service shall be provided by the city Police Department upon request during normal business hours. 
(7)  A personal financial statement showing: 
(i)  The applicant's net worth as a function of assets compared to liabilities; 
(ii)  The applicant's capital investment in the venture for which approval of a liquor license or permit is sought; 
(iii)  Loans or lines of credit that have been secured to meet the obligations and business undertakings related to the venture; 
(iv)  Insurance policies which have been issued related to the venture. 
(8)  The applicant's criminal history, including all convictions, guilty pleas, Alford pleas, and pleas of no contest or nolo contendere. For each of these, the applicant shall provide: 
(i)  The offense charged; 
(ii)  The date of the offense; 
(iii)  The jurisdiction of the offense; 
(iv)  The date of the conviction, guilty plea, Alford plea, or plea of no contest or nolo contendere; 
(v)  If the applicant was incarcerated for the offense, the date on which the applicant was released from confinement; and 
(vi)  Whether the applicant is still on probation for the offense. 
(9)  A receipt showing that the applicant has paid the liquor license application fee in the amount of one thousand seven hundred twenty-eight dollars ($1,728.00) to the city treasurer pursuant to the resolution revising liquor license application fee adopted by the city council on September 14, 2010. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the liquor licensing division will forward the application to the police department investigation unit, the division of buildings and safety engineering, the fire department, and such other city departments as may be required. 
(d)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of an application pursuant to subsection 4-11(b) of this section, the liquor licensing division shall mail the applicant(s) a notice indicating that the application is complete, or shall mail the applicant(s) a notice indicating that the application is incomplete, specifying which portion(s) of the application are incomplete. With the notice required by the preceding sentence, the liquor licensing division may request any additional information related to an applicant's personal, employment, or business history, financial condition, and/or criminal history that relates directly to the applicant's ability to operate an alcoholic liquor-licensed establishment consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(e)  By submitting an application pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the applicant consents to a background investigation, including, but not limited to an investigation of criminal history, civil actions, investigations by other governmental bodies, penalties imposed by same, moral character, business reputation, or any other background area deemed necessary by the liquor licensing division. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-12. - Grant or denial of local approval. 
(a)  Local police. Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of an application pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the liquor licensing division shall: 
(1)  Issue a decision either approving or disapproving the application, specifying the reasons therefore, pursuant to the standards set forth in section 4-12(c) below; and 
(2)  Transmit its decision to the city council for council's consideration at its next meeting. 
(b)  City council. Within forty-five (45) days of the liquor licensing division's issuance of its decision, the city council shall: 
(1)  Issue a decision either approving or disapproving the application, specifying the reasons therefore, pursuant to the standards set forth in section 4-12(c) below; and 
(2)  Transmit its decision to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
(c)  Standards for approval. The liquor licensing division and the city council shall approve an application unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(2)  An applicant has had less than three (3) years management experience in a business that serves the public; 
(3)  An applicant has not paid the liquor license application fee; 
(4)  The subject premises is not in compliance with the zoning ordinance, except those restrictions referenced in Appendix A, Article IV-A, Division III, Section 4A.14(l); 
(5)  The subject premises lacks a required certificate of compliance. 
(6)  The buildings and safety engineering department, the county health department or applicable department, or the fire department has indicated that there are unpaid fees or uncured violations under its purview related to the subject premises; 
(7)  The city treasurer's office has denied a real estate tax clearance pertaining to the subject premises; 
(8)  The business does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease for the full period for which the license is sought; 
(9)  An applicant has had a liquor license revoked or not renewed for cause in the last ten (10) years under this article or a comparable city or township ordinance or state law, whether in Michigan or otherwise; 
(10)  An applicant has been found in violation of regulations promulgated by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or a similar agency regulating alcohol or liquor, on more than five (5) occasions in the last ten (10) years; 
(11)  An applicant has had an influential interest in a business that has been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance within ten (10) years prior to the filing of the application for local approval, if the conditions creating the nuisance occurred during the time that the applicant had the influential interest in the business; 
(12)  An applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty, or pled nolo contendere to a disqualifying criminal act, as defined in this chapter; 
(13)  The business is not licensed to do business in Michigan or has not obtained a sales tax license; 
(14)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this chapter or has falsely answered a question or has failed to answer a request for information related to the applicant's ability to operate an alcoholic liquor-licensed establishment consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(15)  The liquor licensing division or the city council finds, based on specified information available to the division or council, that issuance of an alcoholic liquor license would have a substantial negative effect upon vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic, noise, or economic development in the surrounding area; 
(16)  The liquor licensing division or the city council finds, based on specified information available to the division or council, that the applicant lacks the demonstrated ability to operate an alcoholic liquor-licensed establishment consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(d)  Tolling of deadline for decision. The deadlines for a decision by the liquor licensing division or the city council under this chapter may be tolled at the request of the applicant for a reasonable period of time as is necessary for the applicant to obtain and present all information requested by the division or the council that is related to the applicant's project or the applicant's ability to operate an alcoholic liquor-licensed facility consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare. The deadlines may also be tolled by the city council, for a period of up to thirty (30) days, to permit the gathering of additional information related to the project or the applicant's ability to operate an alcoholic liquor-licensed facility consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(e)  Reservation of authority. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, no applicant for local approval has a right to the issuance of an alcoholic liquor license to the applicant, and the city hereby reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such a license, based on objective criteria related to concerns of the public health, safety, and welfare as they relate to the project. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 80-729, § 2, 5-26-15)  
Sec. 4-13. - Transfer of existing licenses. 
An application for local approval of a transfer related to any existing alcoholic liquor license, including a transfer of location, shall be subject to the same procedures, standards, and fees contained in this chapter that apply to an application for local approval of a liquor license or related permit. In addition, when submitting the application, the transferee-applicant shall furnish a copy of any and all files which may be in the Michigan Liquor Control Commission's possession regarding that commission's investigation of the transferee as a present or previous licensee, or regarding any license(s) in which transferee has or has had a financial interest. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-14. - Objections to renewal; requests for revocation. 
(a)  Objection. The city council may object to a renewal of a liquor license or request the revocation of a liquor license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, based on the licensee's failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or based on the licensee's violation(s) of this chapter. 
(b)  Procedure. Before filing an objection to the renewal or a request for revocation of a license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the city council shall provide the licensee with notice and an opportunity to be heard. The council shall serve notice upon the license holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state: 
(1)  The proposed action. 
(2)  The specified grounds for the city's proposed action. 
(3)  The date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(4)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony, may cross-examine witnesses, and may be represented by an attorney. 
(c)  Hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the city council as a whole and be open to the public. The city council shall submit to the license holder and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, a written statement of its findings, determination, and specific grounds therefore. 
(d)  Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The city council may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it that, based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, that: 
(1)  The licensee would not meet the standards set forth in section 4-12(c) if the licensee were an applicant for a new license. 
(2)  The licensee has knowing or recklessly allowed three (3) or more violations of the regulations in this chapter in the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a nuisance to be maintained upon the premises. 
(4)  The subject premises has existing violations of building, zoning, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, health, or fire prevention codes. 
(5)  The operation of the licensed establishment has resulted in a pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the establishment that substantially disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood. 
(6)  The licensee has failed to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licenses establishment by allowing litter, debris, and/or refuse to unreasonably remain on the property or adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 4-15. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be independent and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of all provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby declared that such provisions would have been passed independently of such provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this chapter be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-709, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Chapter 5 - AMBULANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
Cross reference— Emergency preparedness, Ch. 11; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, MCL 333.20701 et seq.; local governmental ordinance, MCL 333.2078. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
Ambulance means a privately owned motor vehicle for highway use which is specially designed or constructed and equipped, which is intended to be used for, and is maintained or operated for, the transportation of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or other incapacitated or helpless, including funeral coaches or hearses, and which is equipped according to Part 203 of the Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.20701 et seq.) as amended. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1701; Ord. No. 80-340, § 8, 6-9-87) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-2. - Adoption of state law standards. 
There is hereby adopted by reference the standards in Public Act No. 79 of 1981 (MCL 333.20701 et seq.), and any rules adopted pursuant thereto, and such standards and rules shall be in full force and effect in the city as if set out fully herein.  
Secs. 5-3—5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Unlicensed ambulance operation, MCL 333.20712. 
 
Sec. 5-16. - Required. 
No person shall operate or engage in the business of operating an ambulance as such in the city without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this article; provided that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any ambulance from coming into the city to discharge persons accepted for transportation outside the city. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1702)  
Sec. 5-17. - Application. 
Any applicant desiring a license to engage in the business of providing ambulance service for hire shall file an application in writing with the city clerk on forms provided by the city and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and of the person who assumes legal responsibility for the ambulance operation; 
(2)  The name and address of the registered owner of each ambulance; 
(3)  The trade name and fictitious names under which the ambulance operation does business or proposes to do business; 
(4)  A description or reproduction of all advertisements including lettering, numbers, insignias, monograms, trademarks, color schemes, and other characteristics by which the ambulance operation is designated; 
(5)  The geographical service area in which the ambulance operation shall accept primary responsibility for providing ambulance services; 
(6)  A description of the location or locations at which ambulances will be based; 
(7)  Specific information for each vehicle to be used as an ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicular identification number, current license plate number, and an accurate statement of vehicle mileage; 
(8)  A declaration signed by the person designated in subsection (1) or an authorized representative of that person, which warrants that the applicant's ambulance operation has an available vehicle, personnel, and equipment to meet the terms of the proposed license and that the vehicle, personnel and equipment will be utilized by the ambulance operation in a manner that will meet all minimum standards and comply with applicable rules promulgated by the state department for emergency medical services; 
(9)  Other information the city or state requires to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1703) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 333.20751.  
Sec. 5-18. - Investigation. 
The city clerk shall refer the application under this article to the police commissioner, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the fitness of the applicant as to good moral character as defined in section 18-8 and experience in the business, and shall transmit the application with his or her findings and recommendations to the city council. If, in the opinion of the city council, the person making the application is a proper person by reason of good moral character or experience, and the applicant will provide services in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and that the schedule of rates and charges are fair and equitable, and the city council being of the opinion that there is a public necessity for the issuance of a license to the applicant, the city council shall, by resolution, authorize the granting of a license. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1703)  
Sec. 5-19. - Fees. 
Prior to issuance of the license by the city clerk the applicant shall pay an annual fee as set forth in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1703)  
Sec. 5-20. - Conditions for issuance. 
The city clerk shall not issue a license to the applicant except and unless such applicant complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  The ambulances to be operated under the license must be inspected by a competent automobile mechanic approved by the police commissioner and there shall be filed with the city clerk a certificate signed by the automobile mechanic and the police commissioner certifying that the ambulances are in good condition and safe for travel and transportation of passengers without undue danger. 
(2)  The applicant shall produce and file with the city clerk a certificate of an insurance carrier duly authorized to transact business in this state, certifying that it has insured the ambulances sought to be licensed in the minimum limits of liability required by the state department of emergency services, which certificate shall contain a provision to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the city at least ten (10) days prior to cancelling the insurance on the ambulances licensed under this article. 
(3)  The applicant shall file with the city clerk a schedule of ambulances and charges for transportation of passengers. No charge for transportation shall be made to any passenger in excess of the amount set forth in the schedule, and no changes in the charges shall be made without the permission of the city council and without filing such changes with the city clerk. Such schedule shall be open to inspection by the public at the city clerk's office at all reasonable times. 
(4)  The applicant shall produce and file with the city clerk a certified copy of the ambulance operation license and other licenses issued under the Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.20701 et seq.) as amended, for its employees as ambulance drivers, ambulance attendants, emergency medical technicians, emergency medical technician specialists, or advanced emergency medical technicians. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1705; Ord. No. 80-340, § 9, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 5-21. - Display. 
Each ambulance duly licensed as provided in this article shall prominently have the license displayed in a conspicuous place within the licensed ambulance. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1704)  
Sec. 5-22. - Inspection; suspension. 
Every licensed ambulance shall be made available for inspection by the police commissioner at any time, and the police commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to inspect, or cause the same to be inspected, whenever and as often as he or she may deem proper. If upon any such inspection, the police commissioner shall find that any ambulance is operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or contrary to any of the ordinances of the city or laws of the state, he or she shall have the authority to suspend the license and without unreasonable delay he or she shall report the same to the city council with his or her recommendations. During the interim period of such suspension and the city council acting thereon, the police commissioner is hereby authorized to temporarily allow another ambulance service to operate within the city, if in his or her opinion there is a public necessity therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1711) 
State Law reference— Annual inspection of ambulance operation, MCL 333.20758.  
Sec. 5-23. - Suspension or revocation. 
Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the city council, if in the judgment of the council, the best interest of the public requires such action, or at any time for failure of the licensee, his or her agents, drivers or attendants to observe the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city or laws of the state regulating traffic or ambulances or the transportation of passengers for hire, or for failure to keep in effect at all times such insurance policies as are required by section 5-20(2), or upon the recommendation of the police commissioner as provided for in section 5-22. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1712) 
State Law reference— Revocation and suspension, MCL 333.20765.  
Sec. 5-24. - Expiration. 
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next following. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1714)  
Secs. 5-25—5-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COST RECOVERY FOR MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION AND SERVICE FURNISHED TO CONFINED PERSONS 
 
Sec. 5-30. - Payment of medical services. 
A person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the city (confined person) shall be solely responsible for the payment of medical services provided to, and received by that person during the course of his or her confinement, or at the discretion of the city or a court of competent jurisdiction, including, without limitation, transportation to and from a medical treatment facility, and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or not requested by the confined person. The confined person shall be required to reimburse the city for any fees or charges incurred for such service, if not paid directly to the medical facility or practitioner by the confined person, or his or her insurance carrier. 
(Ord. No. 80-694, § 1, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 5-31. - Definition. 
"Confined person" as used in this article shall mean any person held, or who was held, in custody, confined, or incarcerated by the city, including, but not limited to: individuals who are: 
(1)  Under arrest; 
(2)  Incarcerated; 
(3)  Imprisoned; 
(4)  Escaped from confinement, including escaped while being transported during the course of confinement or while held in confinement by a judge; 
(5)  While under supervised release; 
(6)  On medical furlough; 
(7)  Residing in a half way house or mental health facility; 
(8)  Living under home detention; or 
(9)  Confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-694, § 1, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 5-32. - Billing agent. 
An independent agent providing contractual billing services for the city has the authority to act on behalf of the city to conduct the billing, and collection necessary to pursue reimbursement for medical services and related services furnished to confined persons, including, without limitation, billing the confined person, Medicare and/or applicable insurance carriers. 
(Ord. No. 80-694, § 1, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 5-33. - Additional remedies. 
The collection remedies set forth in this article are not exclusive and shall be in addition to other remedies available in equity or at law or through penalties as may be provided by law or ordinance. The city shall also have the right to bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect such costs that are not recovered through the methods set forth in section 5-32 above. 
(Ord. No. 80-694, § 1, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 5-34. - Fees. 
The fees for services of emergency vehicles owned or operated by the city for purposes of transporting a confined person for medical services shall be determined by the fire commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 80-694, § 1, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 5-35. - Severability. 
Should any provision or part of this article be declared by any court or public agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining parts and provisions of the article shall remain valid and enforceable, and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 80-694, § 1, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 5-36. - Preemption. 
To the extent any provision of this article conflicts with or is preempted by any provision of federal or state law, rule or regulation, such state or federal provision shall be deemed to control, and is incorporated by reference and may be enforced in connection with the enforcement or this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-694, § 1, 11-15-11)  
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate amusements, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
State Law reference— Crimes relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Penalty; compliance required. 
(a)  Unless specifically designated otherwise, the violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 5, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-612, § 1, 5-11-04)  
Secs. 6-2—6-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POOL AND BILLIARD ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-16. - Closing hours. 
No person shall keep open any room, hall or building licensed hereunder for a pool or billiard establishment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1967, § 3-402; Ord. No. 80-277, § 1, 2-22-83)  
Sec. 6-17. - Persons under sixteen prohibited. 
No person who is less than sixteen (16) years of age may remain or loiter in or about any pool or billiard room unless accompanied by a parent or guardian; nor shall the licensee thereof permit any such minor to remain or loiter therein. 
(Code 1967, § 3-403) 
State Law reference— Authority for this section, MCL 750.141,.  
Sec. 6-18. - Obstructions to public view prohibited. 
No licensee under this article shall permit on the licensed premises any obstruction of the public view by the use of drawn shades or blinds or screens, either permanent or movable. 
(Code 1967, § 3-404)  
Secs. 6-19—6-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Required. 
No person shall conduct, maintain or operate any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards without first procuring a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-401)  
Sec. 6-32. - Age requirement. 
No person shall be issued a license under this division unless he or she be over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1967, § 3-401)  
Sec. 6-33. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-401)  
Sec. 6-34. - Approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required. 
No license shall be issued under this division except upon approval of the police commissioner, the fire commissioner and the health officer. 
(Code 1967, § 3-401) 
Cross reference— Approval of city officers or department heads generally, § 18-7.  
Secs. 6-35—6-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOWLING ALLEYS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-51—6-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Required. 
No person shall conduct, maintain or operate any bowling alley open to the public without first procuring a license required in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-405)  
Sec. 6-62. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-405)  
Sec. 6-63. - Age requirement. 
No person shall be issued a license under this division unless he or she be over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1967, § 3-405)  
Sec. 6-64. - Approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required. 
No license shall be issued under this division except upon approval of the police commissioner, the fire commissioner and the health officer. 
(Code 1967, § 3-405) 
Cross reference— Approval of city officers or department heads generally, § 18-7.  
Secs. 6-65—6-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL FACILITIES USED FOR PUBLIC ADMISSION EVENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, adopted June 26, 2012, amended art. IV in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said article to read as herein set out. The former art. IV, §§ 6-76 and 6-91—6-94, pertained to public dance halls and derived from § 3-406 of the 1967 Code. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 6-76. - Purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide regulations to ensure the preservation of order and decorum and to protect the public peace when rental facilities are used for general admission events that are open to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 6-77. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
Capacity. The maximum number of persons allowed to occupy a room or floor area of a place of assembly. 
Net floor area . The floor area of a building or room intended for occupancy, excluding ancillary areas such as kitchens, washrooms, service rooms, janitor closets, cloakrooms, structural elements and fixtures permanently affixed to the floor. Net floor area is an assembly space where the public is expected to or may assemble. Seating, either affixed or unattached, and tables incidental to seating are included in net floor area. Areas that may be deducted from the gross floor area of a building or room to calculate the net floor area include: 
(1)  Bar fixtures and areas behind the bar; 
(2)  Items permanently affixed to the floor, or deemed by their nature to not be easily moved such as pool and gaming tables and gaming devices; 
(3)  Stages and platforms which are intended for performance only; 
(4)  Fixed counter tops; 
(5)  Fountains, aquariums and other large decorative items. 
Private event . A banquet, luncheon, entertainment, dance, party, sports event or other event or activity held at a place of assembly where guests are invited and admission is limited to the invited guests without any fee or charge required. 
Public admission event . Is an event held at a place of assembly for entertainment, dance, party, sports or other event or activity open to the public who may gain admission by paying a fee, payment of an admission charge or the rental of the premises to conduct an activity where the public generally may gain access with or without payment of a fee. 
Rental facility. Is a place of assembly such as any hall, room, building, portion of a building or other place of assembly available for rent, lease or loan for the purpose of public assembly, banquets, luncheons, entertainment, dances or sports events including facilities operated as a commercial establishment, a noncommercial establishment, or a private hall as defined as follows: 
(1)  Commercial rental facility . A rental facility operated for profit. 
(2)  Noncommercial rental facility. A rental facility operated by a nonprofit organization, such as a union, religious organization, fraternal organization, school. 
(3)  Private hall. The hall is available only to members and their invited guests who are not required to pay an admission charge or any fee. Includes social clubs and residential community buildings as follows: 
a.  Private social club . A private facility operated by a social organization which limits use to its members and invited guests. 
b.  Residential community building/clubhouse. Private facilities provided to the residents of a residential community and which limits use of the facilities to its residents. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC ADMISSION EVENTS HELD AT RENTAL FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 6-78. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a rental facility for a public admission event, as defined herein, without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk as provided in this division. 
(b)  The owner/operator of a rental facility is required to give written notice to any person renting the facility for a public admission event that a permit is required to hold the public admission event at the rental facility, and that the renter shall limit admission to the capacity number for the facility as specified on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-79. - Permit exemptions. 
Exempt from the provisions of this article are: 
(1)  Private events; 
(2)  Events held at private halls such as social clubs and residential community buildings where use of the facility is limited to its membership and their invited guests who are not required to pay an admission charge or any fee; and 
(3)  Dances and events sponsored by public or private schools, civic clubs, charitable organizations under IRS Code 501(c)(3), veterans' groups, fraternal societies, political and campaign action committees, church or religious societies and the chamber of commerce; 
(4)  Catering and banquet facilities where the owner provides entertainment and sells tickets or charges an admission, such as a dinner theatre; and 
(5)  Events held at auditoriums and exposition centers which are multipurpose facilities designed specifically for public admission events. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-80. - Application for a public admission event permit. 
Applicants for a public admission event permit shall file a completed application with the city clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the event. The application shall be signed as required by this section and notarized. An application is considered complete when it contains all information required by this section and is accompanied by the required fee. 
(1)  The applicant's full name, business address, and if different, applicant's mailing address. 
(2)  The business name, location, address, and phone number, and if a corporation under the laws of what state the corporation is incorporated. 
(3)  The name of the person who will manage or supervise the public admission event, the local address and permanent address of such individual, the capacity in which such person will act, whether as promoter, agent or otherwise. 
(4)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the person who will manage or supervise the public admission event. 
(5)  A statement as to whether the person who will manage or supervise the public admission event has been convicted of any crime or violation of any city ordinance including the nature of the offense(s) and the punishment imposed. 
(6)  Proof of insurance policies in amounts as required by section 6-83. 
(7)  Submission of a cash bond as required by section 6-84. 
(8)  A statement as to the number of parking spaces required by the ordinance and the number of parking spaces provided. 
(9)  If alcohol will be served or permitted on the premises, a copy of the license issued by the liquor control commission. 
(10)  Any other information the city clerk may deem necessary to protect the public good relating to the identity or character of the person who will manage or supervise the business or the method or plan of doing such business. 
(11)  The application shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual; by all the partners, if a partnership; or by the authorized officers, if a corporation. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-81. - Permit fee. 
A permit fee shall be required for each public admission event permit as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-82. - Local agent. 
If the applicant is acting as agent for another, or the applicant will have an agent performing the applicant's duties, the applicant shall be required to file with the application an instrument acknowledging the agent as the true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of process on behalf of the principal in respect to any matters arising out of the public admission event. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-83. - Insurance required; certificate of insurance. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of a public admission event permit, the applicant shall file with the city clerk proof of a general liability insurance policy issued by a company licensed to do business in the state for premise and public liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or willfulness of the permit holder, his or her agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence. The policy shall also include a provision that the insurer shall notify the City of Warren of any modification or cancellation of the insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-84. - Bond required. 
To ensure the preservation of order and decorum and to protect the public peace, a cash bond in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be posted with the city treasurer. The bond shall be returned to the permit holder after the event, unless the police and/or fire department is dispatched to the event to respond to a breach of the peace, a civil disobedience or disorderly premises. In the event the police and/or fire department are dispatched to the event, the bond shall be applied to the costs incurred for the police and/or fire response. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-85. - Investigation and approval. 
No permit shall be issued without the required investigation and approvals. The city clerk shall forward the application to the following officials for investigation and approval: 
(1)  The police commissioner shall conduct an investigation of the applicant's moral character pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in section 18-8 of this Code. After such investigation, the police commissioner shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and forward the application to the city clerk. 
(2)  In the event alcohol will be served, the liquor and licensing officer of the city police department shall conduct an investigation of the liquor control commission records related to the applicant and this location. After investigation, the officer shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and forward the application to the city clerk. 
(3)  The fire inspection division shall conduct an inspection of the premises to determine the capacity of the facility, and if the rental facility complies with all applicable provisions of the International Fire Code and State Construction Code, as amended. After such investigation, the fire commissioner shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and the capacity number for the facility, and forward the application to the city clerk. No permit shall be issued until an inspection has been conducted and the fire commissioner has approved, in writing, such issuance. 
(4)  the zoning official who shall review the application to determine whether the property is properly zoned for the proposed use; the required off site parking is provided; and if located within a residential district or within two hundred (200) feet of a residential district. The zoning official shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and forward the application to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-86. - Issuance of permit. 
The city clerk shall issue the public admission event permit for the date and location specified upon: 
(1)  Demonstrated compliance with all applicable regulations contained in this Code; and 
(2)  Receipt of all the following approvals: police commissioner, fire commissioner, zoning official, and if applicable, by the liquor and licensing officer. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-87. - Permit contents. 
The permit shall contain the permit number, the date the permit is issued, the date of the event, the hours of the event, the address where the public admission event will be held, the capacity of the rental facility, the name of the person authorized to conduct the event, and the name of the local agent. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-88. - Display of permit; nontransferable. 
The permit issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously on the premises. If the person applying for the permit shall desire to hold events in more than one (1) place within the city, or on more than one (1) date, a separate permit shall be required for each location and each date the event is held. The permit shall be posted conspicuously in each place. Any permit issued pursuant to this article is nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-89. - Denial, revocation, suspension. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be denied, revoked or suspended pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in section 18-12. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Secs. 6-90—6-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-95. - Capacity. 
The capacity shall be the lesser number of: 
(1)  The design occupant load, as defined in Section 1004.1 of the International Fire Code; or 
(2)  An alternative occupant load calculated by dividing the net floor area, in units of square feet, by the pertinent occupant per unit of area factor in Table 1004.1.1 of the International Fire Code. In all cases, the means of egress of the room or space shall be sufficient to handle the calculated occupant load. The capacity shall never exceed one (1) occupant per seven (7) square feet of net floor area as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-96. - Alcohol. 
No person, including the permit holder, shall sell, offer for sale, trade, provide, allow, possess, consume or attempt to consume any alcoholic liquor on premises of the rental facility unless the operator of the facility or the permit holder has obtained the appropriate permit from the liquor control commission pursuant to MCL 436.1101 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-97. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The hours of operation a public admission event held at a rental facility located in a residential district or within two hundred (200) feet of a residential district, shall be 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(b)  The hours of operation of a public admission event at a rental facility located further than two hundred (200) feet of a residential district shall be 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-98. - Outdoor events. 
There shall not be any outdoor activities or outdoor public admission events at the rental facility unless it complies with Section 4.35 of the Zoning Ordinance and approval was granted by the zoning board of appeals, and if required, pursuant to site plan approval by the planning commission. In no event shall an approved outdoor event/activity take place in any area required and designated for on-site parking. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-99. - Parking lot. 
Adequate on-site parking for passenger vehicles shall be provided as required by the zoning ordinance and pursuant to an approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-100. - Outdoor lighting required. 
The permit proposed for the public admission event shall not be approved unless the applicant demonstrates there is outdoor lighting on the premises and in the parking lot for security purposes. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-101. - Local agent on premises; capacity. 
The permit holder, or the local agent named on the application, shall remain on the premises for the duration of the public admission event to supervise the activities and shall be responsible to ensure the capacity does not exceed the number specified on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-102. - Disorderly premises/disturbing the peace. 
The permit holder, or the local agent named on the application, shall be responsible to maintain the public admission event to ensure there is not a violation of either section 22-113 of this Code for disorderly premises; or section 22-107 for disturbing the public peace. A conviction for disorderly premises or disturbing the peace shall be grounds for revocation, denial or suspension of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-103. - Minors. 
In the event there is possession or consumption of alcohol on the premises, a permit holder shall not allow the admission or attendance of any person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) to any public admission event. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Secs. 6-104—6-108. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PENALTY 
 
Sec. 6-109. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of Article IV is a misdemeanor which shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 6-110. - Permit eligibility. 
A permit holder convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Article IV shall not be eligible to apply for another permit for a period of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 80-703, § 1, 6-26-12)  
ARTICLE V. - SKATING RINKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-111—6-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-121. - Required. 
No person shall operate a skating rink without first procuring a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-409)  
Sec. 6-122. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-409)  
Sec. 6-123. - Approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required. 
No license shall be issued under this division except upon approval of the police commissioner, the fire commissioner and the health officer. 
Cross reference— Approval of city officers or department heads generally, § 18-7. 
(Code 1967, § 3-409)  
Secs. 6-124—6-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - THEATERS AND CONCERTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-136. - Exemptions for charitable, fraternal, etc., organizations. 
This article shall not extend to any exhibition by the pupils of any private or public school, or to any musical entertainment given by the members and for the benefit of any resident musical society, or to any exhibition of painting, engraving, sculpture or fine art, executed by a citizen of the city, or to any concert or musical entertainment fair, festival or lecture for the benefit of any church or benevolent object, or to any entertainment by any civic, fraternal, government, religious, charitable or benevolent organization, or to any game, or to any exhibition, race, contest or military exhibition given or managed by any association, club or company that is not conducted for profit. 
(Code 1967, § 3-412)  
Sec. 6-137. - Posting of prices. 
The scale of prices for admission to any theater shall be framed and hung at some conspicuous place at the entrance of the theater. 
(Code 1967, § 3-408)  
Secs. 6-138—6-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-151. - Required. 
No person shall establish, maintain or operate within the limits of the city any theater, moving picture show, or give any concert, vocal or instrumental, or a show or exhibit of any kind, unless a license has been issued as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-410)  
Sec. 6-152. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-410)  
Sec. 6-153. - Approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required. 
No license shall be issued under this division except upon approval of the police commissioner, the fire commissioner and the health officer. 
(Code 1967, § 3-410) 
Cross reference— Approval of city officers or department heads generally, § 18-7.  
Secs. 6-154—6-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND EXHIBITIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-171. - Exemptions for charitable, fraternal, etc., organizations. 
This article shall not extend to any exhibition by the pupils of any private or public school, or to any musical entertainment given by the members and for the benefit of any resident musical society, or to any exhibition of painting, engraving, sculpture or fine art, executed by a citizen of the city, or to any concert or musical entertainment fair, festival or lecture for the benefit of any church or benevolent object, or to any entertainment by any civic, fraternal, government, religious, charitable or benevolent organization, or to any game, or to any exhibition, race, contest or military exhibition given or managed by any association, club or company that is not conducted for profit. 
(Code 1967, § 3-412)  
Sec. 6-172. - Connection of temporary mobile living quarters to sanitary sewer required. 
No temporary mobile living quarters utilized in connection with circuses, fairs, carnivals or other similar uses shall be permitted in the city unless connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1967, § 4-109A)  
Secs. 6-173—6-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-186. - Required. 
No person shall establish, maintain or operate within the limits of the city any circus, menagerie, carnival, theatrical exhibit, playing game, or any natural or artificial curiosity or show or exhibit of any kind, unless a license has been issued as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-410)  
Sec. 6-187. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-410)  
Sec. 6-188. - Insurance and bond requirement. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of any license under this division, the applicant shall file with the city proof of a standard liability insurance policy or policies issued by a company licensed to do business in the state for public liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or willfulness of the licensee, his or her agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for any one (1) person and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for more than one (1) person and property damage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The applicant shall file a surety bond with a company authorized to do business in this state in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) indemnifying and agreeing to pay the city all damages, indebtedness or loss to the city arising from any acts or omissions of the licensee, his or her agents, servants, employees or his or her lessees or licensees, in the operation of such business. 
(Code 1967, § 3-125(10); Ord. No. 80-320, § 1(10), 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-189. - Approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required. 
No license shall be issued under this division except upon approval of the police commissioner, the fire commissioner and the health officer. 
(Code 1967, § 3-410) 
Cross reference— Approval of city officers or department heads generally, § 18-7.  
Secs. 6-190—6-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - AMUSEMENT PARKS AND RIDING DEVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-201—6-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-211. - Required. 
No person shall operate an amusement park or place or any amusement riding or moving device unless a license is obtained as provided in this division.  
Sec. 6-212. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18.  
Sec. 6-213. - Insurance and bond requirement. 
(a)  As a condition precedent to the issuance of any license for amusement parks or places, the applicant shall file with the city proof of a standard liability insurance policy or policies issued by a company licensed to do business in the state for public liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or willfulness of the licensee, his or her agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for any one (1) person and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for more than one (1) person and property damage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The applicant shall file a surety bond with a company authorized to do business, in this state in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), indemnifying and agreeing to pay the city all damages, indebtedness or loss to the city arising from any acts or omissions of the licensee, his or her agents, servants, employees or his or her lessees or licensees, in the operation of the business. 
(b)  As a condition precedent to the issuance of any license for amusement riding or moving devices, the applicant shall file with the city proof of a standard liability insurance policy or policies issued by a company licensed to do business in the state for public liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or willfulness of the licensee, his or her agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for any one (1) person and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for more than one (1) person and property damage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The applicant shall file a surety bond with a company authorized to do business in this state in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) indemnifying and agreeing to pay the city all damages, indebtedness or loss to the city arising from any acts or omissions of the licensee, his or her agents, servants, employees, or his or her lessees or licensees, in the operation of the business. 
(Code 1967, § 3-125(3), (4); Ord. No. 80-320, § 1(3), (4), 5-13-86)  
Secs. 6-214—6-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - AMUSEMENT MACHINES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Vending machines, Ch. 40. 
State Law reference— Pinball machines permitted in liquor establishments, MCL 436.28a; offense concerning coin operated devices, MCL 752.811. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-226. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Aisle means a passageway providing for traverse of pedestrian traffic. 
Amusement machine means any mechanically or electronically operated device or video device requiring the insertion of a coin or token for commencement of its operation and which is offered for use by the public as a game, entertainment or amusement, including children's rides but excluding shuffleboards, electronic dart boards, pool tables, billiard tables, or juke boxes as licensed under other applicable Code provisions. 
Amusement machine center means a commercial establishment where five (5) or more amusement machines, not including music vending machines or jukeboxes, are offered for use by the public. 
Amusement machine center owner means an owner of an amusement machine center. 
Distributor means any person who places any amusement machine, in any place or establishment for operation and for the purpose of receiving any type of compensation. 
Exitway means an entranceway or exitway doorway providing for entrance into the building or premises from a public way. 
Owner means any person, including an agent or employee, who operates, conducts or has charge or control of any place or establishment in which an amusement machine is available for operation by the public. 
(Code 1967, § 3-501; Ord. No. 80-281, §§ 2, 3, 4-26-83; Ord. No. 80-436, § 1, 8-10-93; Ord. No. 80-543, § 1, 4-13-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-227. - Location of machines. 
(a)  Amusement machines may not be located within nine (9) feet of any exitway. 
(b)  That side or sides of the machine from which it is intended that the machine be operated must be located so that the operating side has the following minimum aisle width: 
Minimum Width 
(inches) 
(1)  Amusement machine on one (1) side of aisle ..... 72 
(2)  Amusement machine on both sides of aisle ..... 96 
(Code 1967, § 3-505(4); Ord. No. 80-281, § 6, 4-26-83)  
Sec. 6-228. - Closing hours. 
It is unlawful for any person holding a license under this article to permit the operation of an amusement machine between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Code 1967, § 3-505(3))  
Sec. 6-229. - Prohibited conduct on premises. 
No licensee, owner or attendant, directly or indirectly by any agent or employee shall: 
(1)  Permit any person to loiter so as to cause an obstruction within or immediately outside the licensed premises; 
(2)  Permit any intoxicated person on the premises; 
(3)  Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquors on the premises nor shall the premises be accessible to any place where alcoholic liquors are kept, sold, distributed or given away unless the licensed premise possesses a valid license from the state liquor control commission; 
(4)  Permit on the premises, the possession or use of any controlled substance as defined in Public Act No. 368 of 1978; MCL 333.7101 et seq.; 
(5)  Permit noise or music to emerge from the licensed premise, which is disturbing to persons in the surrounding area; 
(6)  Permit the premises to become a nuisance; 
(7)  Permit any gambling or gambling paraphernalia on the premises. For purposes of this subsection, gambling shall mean the acceptance or payment of anything of value contingent upon the result of a race, contest, happening of an event not known to be certain or a game in which winning depends upon fortuitous or accidental circumstances beyond the control of the player. Gambling does not include the winning of free games or a prize in connection with a scheduled tournament not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) in value, or the use of redemption game devices as defined in chapter 40. 
(Code 1967, § 3-505(1), (2); Ord. No. 80-287, § 1, 6-28-83; Ord. No. 80-554, § 1, 3-28-00)  
Sec. 6-230. - Routine inspections. 
It shall be the duty of police officers to make routine inspections of all amusement machines, and if any unlawful practices are observed in connection therewith, they shall report the same to the police commissioner for such action as the commissioner may deem proper. 
(Code 1967, § 3-511(c))  
Secs. 6-231—6-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-246. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either in the capacity as a distributor or owner, to allow the maintenance and/or distribution for the purpose of operating any amusement machine without having first procured a license for the device pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-502(1))  
Sec. 6-247. - Application. 
(a)  License applications for amusement machines shall be made to the city clerk in the form and manner required by the clerk and in accordance with the provisions of this Code, and the application shall state, among other things: 
(1)  The number of amusement machines intended to be operated on the premises; 
(2)  The type of amusement machine; 
(3)  The name, address and location of the amusement machine center; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the amusement machine center; 
(5)  The name and address of the person responsible for operating or managing the amusement machines; 
(6)  The name and address of the distributor; 
(7)  The location and description of motor vehicle parking facilities provided for patrons utilizing the amusement machines; 
(8)  A scale diagram of the business floor plan, showing the permanent location of each amusement machine, including electrical outlets, all aisleways, exitway discharges and doorways. 
(a)  If, after the issuance of the license, the licensee desires to operate other amusement machines, in addition to the number stated in the application for a license, the licensee shall make a new application to the city clerk in the same form and manner as the original application for a license. 
(b)  Each and every application under this division shall be in writing and made out in duplicate, one (1) copy being referred to the director of the division of buildings and safety engineering, and one (1) copy to the city clerk. The application shall include two (2) copies of a scaled site plan showing the property with the size of the building indicated, all parking spaces and maneuvering lanes and type of business. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(1)—(4); Ord. No. 80-543, § 2, 4-13-99)  
Sec. 6-248. - Investigation by police commissioner. 
The police commissioner shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate the amusement machine to determine whether it violates any prohibition of this article, shall ascertain if the owner and/or distributor has been convicted of any felony or has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and in the case of renewals, shall investigate and report all violations of ordinances or statutes at the premises for the preceding licensing year, and on the basis of aforesaid investigation shall file his or her recommendation and report with the city clerk within twenty (20) days of the request. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(4)(a); Ord. No. 80-292, § 2, 8-30-83)  
Sec. 6-249. - Inspection by division of buildings and safety engineering. 
The director of the division of buildings and safety engineering shall: 
(1)  Assign an electrical inspector to inspect all wiring and connections to the amusement machines listed in the application and determine if the same complies with the city electrical code; 
(2)  Assign a zoning inspector to inspect the location to see if same complies with the pertinent sections of the city zoning ordinance; 
(3)  Determine whether the applicant's designated building has a proper certificate of occupancy and complies with all applicable health and safety ordinances and statutes of the city and state; 
(4)  For renewals, assign inspections for any new locations, new machines or relocated machines; 
(5)  File his or her recommendation and report with the city clerk within twenty (20) days of the request. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(4)(b); Ord. No. 80-292, §§ 3, 4, 8-30-83)  
Sec. 6-250. - Approval or disapproval. 
(a)  Within forty-five (45) days after the filing of the application and the required fees under this division, the city clerk shall approve or disapprove the application. 
(b)  If the city clerk disapproves an application for a license, the reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in writing. The city clerk shall have full and absolute power to disapprove such an application for either a new license or renewal of a previous license for any of the following specified reasons: 
(1)  Applicant makes a false or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has made a false or fraudulent statement in any application previously submitted to the city; 
(2)  Applicant has violated any provision of this article; 
(3)  Applicant is delinquent in taxes owed to a municipality. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(5), (6); Ord. No. 80-292, § 6, 8-30-83)  
Sec. 6-251. - Insurance required. 
The city clerk shall require a licensee under this division to furnish proof of public liability insurance in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person and four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000.00) for each accident, covering any damages arising out of the use or operation of any facilities operated in connection with the amusement machine center. Evidence of insurance in the form of a certificate or policy from the insurance carrier shall be filed with the clerk's office. The certificate shall stipulate that the insurance shall not be cancelled except upon ten (10) days prior written notice to the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(7); Ord. No. 80-543, § 3, 4-13-99)  
Sec. 6-252. - Fee. 
The applicant for a license under this division shall pay a fee as provided in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-504; Ord. No. 80-281, § 5, 4-26-83)  
Sec. 6-253. - Issuance. 
Upon meeting the requirements of this division, the city clerk is authorized to issue a license. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(10))  
Sec. 6-254. - Display. 
It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner and/or distributor to post the license permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the amusement machine is to be operated and maintained. 
(Code 1967, § 3-502(1)(a))  
Sec. 6-255. - Transfer. 
Licenses may be transferred from one (1) amusement machine to another amusement machine upon application to the city clerk to such effect, giving the description and serial number of the new machines and upon payment of the transfer fee. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(9); Ord. No. 80-281, § 4, 4-26-83)  
Sec. 6-256. - Renewal. 
A license may be renewed upon submission of a renewal application and upon payment of the renewal fee. The application shall be considered in the manner provided in section 6-247(a), except if the application is for the same location as the previous year, then no electrical inspection is required. One scaled drawing will be required with the application. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(10); Ord. No. 80-303, § 2, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 80-543, § 4, 4-13-99)  
Sec. 6-257. - Expiration. 
A license issued pursuant to this division shall be valid for one (1) year, expiring annually on the thirty-first day of August. 
(Code 1967, § 3-503(8))  
Sec. 6-258. - Seizure and destruction of machines. 
Police officers shall have the power to issue citations for any violation of this article. Upon the issuance of a citation for a violation of section 6-246, the owner shall apply for a license in accordance with the requirements of section 6-247 for the amusement machine within three (3) business days from the date of the citation. If the application is not made within three (3) business days, the police officer shall obtain a warrant authorizing the seizure of the machine and confiscate the machine which shall be returned only after the owner has secured the proper license and paid the additional fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per machine. 
(Code 1967, § 3-514)  
Secs. 6-259—6-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2005, amended Art. X, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. X pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-276. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the United Constitution and/or Michigan Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. , 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. , 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres , 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue , 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca , 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and 
East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County , 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County , 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County , 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids , 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); Deja Vu of Nashville, Inc. v. Metropolitan Gov't of Nashville and Davidson County , 466 F.3d 391 (6th Cir. 2006); Big Dipper Entm't, LLC v. City of Warren , 658 F. Supp. 2d 831 (E.D. Mich. 2009); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County , 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); Deja Vu of Cincinnati, L.L.C. v. Union Township Bd. Of Trustees , 411 F.3d 777 (6th Cir. 2005) (en banc); Little Mack Entm't II, Inc. v. Twp. of Marengo , 2008 WL 2783252 (W.D. Mich. July 17, 2008); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington , 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); City of Chicago v. Pooh Bah Enterprises, Inc. , 865 N.E.2d 133 (Ill. 2006); Andy's Restaurant & Lounge, Inc. v. City of Gary , 466 F.3d 550 (7th Cir. 2006); 181 South, Inc. v. Fischer , 454 F.3d 228 (3rd Cir. 2006); Bronco's Entm't, Ltd. v. Charter Twp. of Van Buren , 421 F.3d 440 (6th Cir. 2005); Charter Twp. of Van Buren v. Garter Belt, Inc. , 258 Mich. App. 594 (2003); Jott, Inc. v. Clinton Twp. , 224 Mich. App. 513 (1997); Michigan ex rel. Wayne County Prosecutor v. Dizzy Duck , 449 Mich. 353 (1995); Gora v. City of Ferndale , 456 Mich. 704 (1998); Rental Property Owners Ass'n of Kent County v. City of Grand Rapids , 455 Mich. 246 (1996); 15192 Thirteen Mile Road, Inc. v. City of Warren , 626 F. Supp. 803 (E.D. Mich. 1985); City of Warren v. Executive Art Studio, Inc. , No. 197353, 1998 WL 1993022 (Mich. App. Feb. 13, 1998); Tally v. City of Detroit , 54 Mich. App. 328 (1974); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora , 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); ILQ Investments, Inc. v. City of Rochester , 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); Kentucky Restaurant Concepts, Inc. v. City of Louisville , 209 F. Supp. 2d 672 (W.D. Ky. 2002); Restaurant Ventures v. Lexington-Fayette Urban County Gov't , 60 S.W.3d 572 (Ky. Ct. App. 2001); Deja Vu of Nashville, Inc., et al. v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County , 274 F.3d 377 (6th Cir. 2001); Ctr. for Fair Public Policy v. Maricopa County , 336 F.3d 1153 (9th Cir. 2003); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County , 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga , 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Brandywine, Inc. v. City of Richmond , 359 F.3d 830 (6th Cir. 2004); Currence v. City of Cincinnati , 28 Fed. Appx. 438 (6th Cir. Jan. 24, 2002); Broadway Books v. Roberts , 642 F. Supp. 486 (E.D. Tenn. 1986); Bright Lights, Inc. v. City of Newport , 830 F. Supp. 378 (E.D. Ky. 1993); Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton , 923 F.2d 470 (6th Cir. 1991); Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron , 40 F.3d 129 (6th Cir. 1994); O'Connor v. City and County of Denver , 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); Threesome Entertainment v. Strittmather , 4 F. Supp. 2d 710 (N.D. Ohio 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville , 973 F. Supp. 1428 (M.D. Fla. 1997), aff'd in part, rev'd in part , 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); In re Tennessee Public Indecency Statute , 172 F.3d 873 (6th Cir. Jan. 13 1999)(table); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane , 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset , 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach , 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Williams v. Morgan , 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale , 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall , 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph , 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols , 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane , 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); City of New York v. Hommes , 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); For the People Theatres of N.Y., Inc. v. City of New York , 793 N.Y.S.2d 356 (N.Y. App. Div. 2005); Taylor v. State , No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Gammoh v. City of La Habra , 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Warren Gifts, LLC v. City of Warren , No. 2:02-cv-70062, R. 26 (E.D. Mich. June 21, 2002) (denying motion for preliminary injunction); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton , Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc. , Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale , No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); 
and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; McCleary Report - 2004; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Holsopple Report - 1998; Warren Police SID Report/Affidavits - 2005; McCleary Report - 2005; Summaries of Key Reports of Secondary Effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; Dallas, Texas - 2007; Criminal Justice Policy Review - 2008; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Detroit, Michigan - 2010; David Sherman Testimony - 2000; Warren, Michigan - 2008; and Detroit Police Report Summaries - 2005-2009, 
the city council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to: 
personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects. 
(2)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 80-689, 9-14-10)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-277. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one (1) of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." A principal business purpose, as discussed in the previous sentence, exists when the commercial establishment: 
(1)  Has a substantial or significant portion of its displayed merchandise which consists of the enumerated material; or 
(2)  Has a substantial or significant portion of the wholesale value of its displayed merchandise which consists of the enumerated material; or 
(3)  Has a substantial or significant portion of the retail value of its displayed merchandise which consists of the enumerated material; or 
(4)  Derives a substantial or significant portion of its revenues from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration of the enumerated material; or 
(5)  Maintains a substantial or significant section of its interior floor space for the sale or rental or the enumerated material; or 
(6)  Regularly features the enumerated materials, and prohibits access by minors, because of age, to the premises, and advertises itself as offering the enumerated material on signage visible from public right-of-way; or 
(7)  Maintains an "adult arcade," which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or specified "anatomical areas." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. No establishment shall avoid classification as an adult cabaret by offering or featuring nudity. 
Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, other photographic reproductions, or live performances which are characterized by the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and which advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any on or off-premises advertising, including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown to more than five (5) persons for any form of consideration. 
City means the City of Warren, Michigan, including its officials, employees, and agents. 
City clerk means the City of Warren City Clerk or the Clerk's designee. 
City council means the City Council of the City of Warren, Michigan. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this ordinance, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
Employ, employee and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Hearing officer shall mean an attorney, not otherwise employed by the City of Warren, who is licensed to practice in the State of Michigan and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings in accordance with section 6-299 of this article. 
Influential interest means any of the following: (1) the actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business, (2) ownership of a financial interest of thirty (30) percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business, or (3) holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Licensee shall mean a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an "employee," it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate shall mean to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. 
Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business, or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person shall mean individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to section 6-284 of this article. 
Regularly means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
This definition does not apply to any place where persons appear in a state of semi-nudity in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class. 
Sexual device means any three (3) dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genital organ or anus or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices as any part of its business carried on in the premises. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services. 
Sexual encounter center shall mean a business or commercial enterprise that, as one (1) of its principal business purposes, regularly features for any form of consideration, physical contact between two (2) or more persons when one (1) or more of the person is semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an "adult bookstore or adult video store," an "adult cabaret," an "adult motel," an "adult motion picture theater," a "semi-nude model studio," a "sexual device shop," or a "sexual encounter center." 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means: 
(1)  Any of the following specified offenses, as amended from time to time, for which less than five (5) years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
a.  Criminal sexual conduct (MCL 750.520a - 750.520g), child sexually abusive activity (MCL 750.145c) computer crimes against children (MCL 750.145d(1)(a)); 
b.  Prostitution-related offenses (MCL 750.448-750.449a); 
c.  Offenses related to obscenity (MCL 752.365) and material harmful to minors (MCL 750.142-750.143); or 
d.  Indecent exposure (MCL 750.335a). 
(2)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one (1) of the foregoing offenses; or 
(3)  Any offense enumerated in the city's code which contains the same elements as one (1) of the foregoing state offenses; or 
(4)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Michigan, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in (1) above. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room shall mean the room, booth, or area of a sexually oriented business where a patron of the sexually oriented business is positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disk, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 80-689, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 6-278. - Classifications. 
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
(2)  Adult cabaret; 
(3)  Adult motel; 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(5)  Semi-nude model studio; 
(6)  Sexual device shop; 
(7)  Sexual encounter center. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Secs. 6-279—6-283. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 6-284. - License required. 
(a)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the City of Warren without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this article, of a sexually oriented business in the City of Warren without a valid sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the city clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the city clerk. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (e) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in paragraphs (1) through (7) below, accompanied by the appropriate fee identified in section 6-286: 
(1)  The applicant's full true name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five (5) years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address of the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether any applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement as to whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
The information provided pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (7) of this subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Diagram. An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description (including the sidwell number and street address) of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who are required to comply with sections 6-306 and 6-308(2) of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the interior configuration meets the requirements of those sections. 
(e)  Signature. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 6-285 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(f)  Disclosure. The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this Article shall be maintained by the office of the city clerk and all personal information shall be deemed confidential and may be disclosed only as required by law or by court order. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 80-689, § 3, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 6-285. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application under section 6-284 for a sexually oriented business license, the City of Warren City Clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that, on the date that the completed application is submitted, is lawfully operating a sexually oriented business in the city and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing date of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny the application. The city clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 6-284 for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article, the zoning district or the locational requirements of the City of Warren Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application under section 6-284 for a sexually oriented business employee license, the City of Warren City Clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing date of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall approve the issuance of a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 6-284 for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt the licensee from any other requirements set forth by city ordinance, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 80-689, § 4, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 6-286. - Fees. 
The fee for a license under this article shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 80-658, § 1, 8-28-07)  
Sec. 6-287. - Inspection. 
(a)  Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the city to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize only reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-288. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-289. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire on the thirty-first day of March unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in section 6-284 and section 6-286. 
(b)  Application for renewal shall be made not more than one hundred twenty (120) days nor less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date of the current license, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-290. - Effect of city's failure to act 
In the event that the city is required to do some act pursuant to this article within a prescribed time, and fails to complete such act within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of a condition necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the condition shall be deemed met the day after the deadline for the city's action has passed. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-291. - Pre-existing businesses. 
All existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days following the effective date of this ordinance. By the end of said ninety (120) days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall apply for a license, as applicable, and shall conform to the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Secs. 6-292—6-296. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, HEARING 
 
Sec. 6-297. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the employee has knowingly violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-298. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article and the licensee's license has been suspended within the previous twelve-month period. 
(b)  The city shall issue written intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for a license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes and the license shall be reinstated. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 6-299, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for two (2) years and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for two (2) years from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-299. - Hearing, denial, suspension, revocation, appeal. 
(a)  When the city clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the business address provided by the licensee on the application on file with the city clerk. The notice shall specify the location and the date, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date the notice is issued, on which the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the city clerk's intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. 
At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city clerk's witnesses. The city clerk may be represented by the city attorney or designee, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2) consecutive days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this ordinance, to the parties within five (5) days after the hearing. Either party may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the thirtieth day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the city clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging the city's decision or the hearing officer's decision is initiated, the city shall: 1) consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, 2) comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and 3) facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is in operation as of the effective date of this ordinance: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Secs. 6-300—6-304. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-305. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. Adult motels are excluded from this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-306. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films on premises. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disk, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The city clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one (1) person. 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of subparagraphs a., b. and c. of this paragraph are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in (5)a. though e. above. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in an operator's station at all times that any patron is on the portion of the premises monitored by that operator station. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-307. - Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: (a) post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; (b) designate one (1) or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and (c) provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-308. - Prohibited activities. 
It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations. 
(1)  Nudity. It shall be a violation of this article for a patron, employee, or any other person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
(2)  Semi-nudity. It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six (6) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor in a room of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(3)  Physical contact. It shall be a violation of this article for any employee who regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented business to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to drink, imbibe, possess or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city clerk, and summarizing the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-309. - Prohibition against minors in a sexually oriented business. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-689, § 5, adopted Sept. 14, 2010, repealed § 6-310 which pertained to liquor licensed establishments exempt and derived from Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2005.  
Secs. 6-311—6-313. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 6-314. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Misdemeanor. A person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or up to ninety (90) days' imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, it shall constitute a separate offense and shall be treated as a separate offense. 
(b)  Civil proceedings. The city attorney or designee is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to restrain or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunctive relief, shall be brought in the name of the city, however, the institution of civil proceedings shall not preclude enforcement of misdemeanor, administrative or any other proceeding authorized by ordinance, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-315. - Scienter required to prove violation of business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Secs. 6-316—6-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SEVERABILITY 
 
Sec. 6-321. - Severability. 
This article, and each section and provision of said article hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 6-322. - Conflicting Code provisions repealed. 
Any provision(s) in the City of Warren Code of Ordinances specifically in conflict with any provision in this ordinance is hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 80-621, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Secs. 6-323—6-327. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - REGULATIONS FOR FORTUNETELLING; LICENSE REQUIRED  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-328. - Fortunetelling defined. 
The term "fortunetelling" shall mean the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or reading the past, by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, cartomancy, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves, tarot cards, scrying, coins, sticks, dice, sand, coffee grounds, crystal gazing or other such reading, or through mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy or other craft, art, science, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, or by any such similar thing or act. It shall also include effecting spells, charms, or incantations, or placing, or removing curses or advising the taking or administering of what are commonly called love powders or potions in order, for example, to get or recover property, stop bad luck, give good luck, put bad luck on a person or animal, stop or injure the business or health of a person or shorten a person's life, obtain success in business, enterprise, speculation and games of chance, win the affection of a person, make one person marry or divorce another, induce a person to make or alter a will, tell where money or other property is hidden, make a person to dispose of property in favor of another, or other such similar activity. 
(b)  Fortunetelling shall also include pretending to perform these actions. 
(c)  Persons, as used in this article, shall mean an individual. Corporations and other legal entities shall not be entitled to a fortunetelling license. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-329. - Exception. 
This article shall not apply: 
(a)  To persons solely by reason that the person is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mindreading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, magic, giving of horoscopic readings or other fortunetelling at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons, and where any questions answered as part of such entertainment may be heard by all persons present at such public place. 
(b)  To persons conducting or participating in a religious ceremony from any bona fide church or religious association that conducts regular services and has a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all groups of like faith, provided that: 
(1)  The benefit, gain or advantage shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association except that the bona fide church or religious association may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a percentage only, pursuant to an agreement between the church and the ministers that is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 6-330. - License required for fortunetelling. 
No person shall advertise or offer or engage in fortunetelling, as defined in section 6-328, without first procuring a license issued by the city clerk as required in this article and pursuant to the general licensing requirements of chapter 18. The license shall expire pursuant to the provisions of section 18-13 of the Code of Ordinances and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-331. - Application for license for fortunetelling. 
An application for a fortunetelling license shall be made to the city clerk on the form provided. No application will be accepted unless the following information is provided: 
(a)  The full true name under which the business will be conducted. 
(b)  The applicant's full true name, and other names used, date of birth, Michigan Driver's License or passport or other government-issued identification, present residence address and telephone numbers. 
(c)  A copy of any fictitious business name statement under which the applicant is or intends to operate. 
(d)  The name or names under which the licensee will be identifying himself or herself to the public. 
(e)  The present or proposed address where the business will be conducted. If the business is to be conducted in a street location or other location that is not fixed, the applicant shall so indicate, and provide the applicant's home address. 
(f)  The applicant's gender, height, weight, color of hair, and color of eyes. 
(g)  All addresses at which the applicant has resided within five years prior to the application. 
(h)  The applicant's business, occupation, and employment history for the five years preceding the date of the application. 
(i)  The occupational permit history of the applicant, including whether such person has ever had a permit or license issued for any fortunetelling or related business, by any agency, board, city, city and county, county, territory or state, the issuing agency, the date of issuance, and whether the permit was suspended or revoked and the reasons therefor. 
(j)  The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others. 
(k)  All convictions of any crime within the seven years prior to the application other than traffic offenses, whether in Michigan or elsewhere, relating to fraud, theft, burglary, use of violence, deceit or false impersonation. 
(l)  Information requested by the police commissioner necessary to ascertain the truth of the matters specified and required on the application. 
(m)  A full set of fingerprints to be taken by the Warren Police Department. 
(n)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(o)  The required application fee as set forth in chapter 18. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-332. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review. Prior to issuance of a license, the city clerk shall distribute the application to the police department for review for compliance with this article and shall recommend approval or disapproval based on the review. The review shall be conducted and the application returned to the clerk's office within twenty (20) calendar days together with the department's recommendation. 
(b)  Police department. The police department shall conduct a background investigation of the applicant, including a criminal history check. The police department shall recommend approval of the license unless the police department finds: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or two (2) or more misdemeanors relating to fraud, theft, burglary, use of violence, deceit, or false impersonation within the seven (7) years prior to the date of application; or 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article or has provided false or misleading information on the application. 
(c)  Division of buildings and safety engineering. Shall review the application to determine whether fortunetelling activity complies with the zoning district and any applicable locational criteria required by the zoning ordinance; and if required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(d)  Issuance. Once the city clerk has received approval from the police department and further determined the application complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, and the applicant has paid all required fees, the city clerk shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 6-333. - Receipts. 
(a)  The fortuneteller shall issue a written receipt that shall include the name of the licensee who provided the services, the services rendered, the amount charged for each service provided, and the amount paid or expected. If payment is made in a method other than cash, check, or credit card, the receipt shall so indicate. 
(b)  The licensee must keep copies of receipts for five (5) years from date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-334. - Inspections. 
The record of receipts, payment records, the business premises, and all articles of property from customers that is received or maintained on the premises shall be open to inspection at all times during open business hours by a police officer or code official. As a condition of doing business, a licensee is deemed to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this section. The records described in this section shall not be open to inspection by the general public. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute grounds for license revocation pursuant to section 6-338. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-335. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  When a fortuneteller operates at a roving or unfixed location, the fortuneteller shall provide, in advance of providing any service, a written copy of rate information to the customer that shall be printed in plain, legible letters. 
(b)  When a fortuneteller operates out of a fixed location, the fortuneteller shall post rate information in a conspicuous place accessible by the patrons at the fixed location on a sign at least eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in 14-point type. 
(c)  If the fortuneteller operates by donation or an indirect method of payment, including remuneration that is at the discretion of the customer, the schedule of rates shall so indicate. 
(d)  The rates published shall be the only rates charged. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-336. - Effective date. 
Any person operating as a fortuneteller within the City of Warren when this article is enacted shall have (90) ninety days from the effective date of the article to obtain a license. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
DIVISION 4. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 6-337. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this article by any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days in jail, or both plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-338. - Revocation of license. 
Upon the conviction of any licensee, or of any clerk, agent, servant, or employee of the licensee for violation of any provision of this article, the license issued pursuant to this article, shall be revoked as provided in section 18-12 of the Code of Ordinances and upon entry of a conviction such person shall not be permitted to carry on a fortunetelling business within this city for a period of one (1) year after that conviction. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 6-339. - Severability clause. 
If any provision or clause of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other article provisions or clauses or applications, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 80-686, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Chapter 7 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Unlawful noise from animals and birds, § 21-26; rodent control, § 21-66 et seq.; animals restricted in parks, § 23-16. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Animal control officers. 
(a)  There shall be at least one (1) full-time animal control officer in the city. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt minimum employment standards relative to the recruitment, selection and appointment of animal control officers. The minimum standards shall include: 
(1)  Requirements for physical, educational, mental and moral fitness; 
(2)  A minimum course of study of not less than one hundred (100) instructional hours as prescribed by the state department of agriculture. 
Subsection (b)(2) shall not apply if the animal control officer is a police officer or has served at least three (3) years as an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18) 
State Law reference— Animal control officer required, MCL 287.270b; minimum employment standards, MCL 287.289c.  
Sec. 7-2. - Keeping animals other than household pets restricted near dwellings, stores, alleys or public places, unsanitary conditions and disturbing noises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, house, or maintain any animal or bees within three hundred (300) feet of any dwelling, store, alley or public place except such animals as are commonly kept or housed as household pets, or validly permitted chickens kept pursuant to section 7-11 of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to maintain any animal or fowl so as to create an unsanitary condition or odor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to keep any animal or fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(d)  Violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor and is declared a public nuisance. Animal control officers, police officers, and code enforcement officers have the authority to impound any animals, including fowl, causing a public nuisance. Violations of this section are subject to abatement as provided under chapter 21 of the Warren City Code. 
(Code 1967, § 4-901(a); Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-3. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal or any fowl owned by him or her or in his or her possession or control to run at large in any street, alley or public place, or upon the premises of another without express permission of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 4-901(b); Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Animals running at large, MCL 433.11 et seq. livestock running at large, MCL 433.51 et seq.  
Sec. 7-4. - Number of commonly kept household pets harbored restricted; nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to possess, harbor, shelter or keep more than five (5) dogs or cats, or any combination thereof that does not conflict with the sections listed below at any residential dwelling unit or commercial or industrial premises, excepting kennels, veterinary hospitals and pet shops. It shall be unlawful to maintain any household pets so as to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 1, 4-23-02; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-5. - Sanitary requirements. 
(a)  Every person lawfully keeping or harboring any animal shall keep or cause to be kept all manure or offal therefrom, which shall be deposited or accumulate from such animal, securely and closely confined to or buried upon his or her premises and in such manner as will prevent it from being scattered from such place of deposit into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or gutter of the city; and shall so cover and care for it as to prevent any malodorous or offensive condition to exist and to prevent any nuisance to arise therefrom. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any dog or other animal to accompany such dog or animal upon the public streets, sidewalks or other public property or upon private property not owned or under the person's control unless the person shall have in his or her possession a trowel, shovel or similar device and a container for the purpose of removing any feces dropped by such dog or animal. All animal feces shall be properly disposed of in accordance with subsection (a). 
(Code 1967, § 4-907; Ord. No. 80-414, § 1, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 80-538, § 3, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-6. - Impounded animals. 
In the case of any violation of this article, it shall be the duty of any duly appointed humane officer, peace officer, sheriff or health officer to seize such pets, fowl or animals and provide the necessary care and attention, and such pets, fowl or animals shall not be returned until all expenses for such care and attention shall have been paid. 
(Code 1967, § 4-908; Ord. No. 80-538, § 3, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18) 
Note— See the editor's note following, § 7-4.  
Sec. 7-7. - Dangerous animals. 
No person shall have a right of property in, keep, harbor, care for, act as custodian of or maintain in his or her possession any dangerous animal except at a properly maintained zoological park, licensed exhibit, circus, scientific or educational institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital or animal refuse in an escape-proof enclosure. 
As hereinafter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Dangerous animal means any animal other than domestic dogs and cats, which in a wild state are carnivorous or which because of their nature or physical makeup are capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to human beings, including but not limited to such animals which belong to the cat [family]; or snakes which are poisonous or otherwise present a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings as a result of their nature or physical makeup, including all constrictors; and/or any poisonous or life-threatening reptile. 
Owner means any person who (a) has a right of property in a dangerous animal, (b) keeps or harbors a dangerous animal, (c) has a dangerous animal in his care, or (d) acts as custodian of a dangerous animal. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. 
It is no defense to a violation of section 7-7 that the person violating such section has attempted to domesticate the dangerous animal. If there appears to be imminent danger to the public, any dangerous animal found not in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be subject to seizure and may immediately be placed in an approved facility. Upon the conviction of a person for a violation, the animal with regard to which the conviction was obtained shall be confiscated and placed in an approved facility, with the owner thereof to be responsible for all costs connected with the seizure and confiscation of such animal. Approved facilities include, but are not limited to, a zoological park, federally licensed exhibit, humane society, veterinary hospital or animal refuge. 
Whoever violates the provisions of section 7-7 in addition to any other penalties as may be appropriately applied under any other provision of this chapter, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 80-342, § 1, 7-14-87; Ord. No. 80-538, § 3, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-8. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter, other than the provisions of Article V, is a misdemeanor which shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 6, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-538, § 3, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-585, § 1, 4-23-03; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 7-4.  
Sec. 7-9. - Service dogs and service animals. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other article, a trained service dog or other service animal shall be granted access to all city facilities where the public is allowed so long as it is accompanied by its owner. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other article, a dog or other animal undergoing training to be a service dog or service animal, shall be granted access to all city facilities where the public is allowed so long as accompanied by a trainer meeting the requirements of sections (c) and (d) below. 
(c)  A service dog or service animal, either trained or in training, must be wearing a harness, hearing dog cape or service dog backpack. 
(d)  A trainer of service dog or service animal, while training on city property, must have in his or her possession a picture identification and identification stating that he or she is a representative or employee of an organization or trainee, or is a trainer, included on the Michigan Department of Labor's list of organizations or trainers that train service dogs. 
(e)  "Service dog" or "service animal" means a dog or animal that is twelve (12) months of age or older and is utilized to assist a person with the following disabilities: 
(1)  "Audibly impaired", as defined in MCL 752.61; 
(2)  "Blind person", as defined in MCL 393.351; 
(3)  "Deaf person", as defined in MCL 752.61; and 
(4)  "Physically limited", as defined in MCL 125.1351. 
(Ord. No. 80-664, § 1, 2-12-08, eff. 3-3-08; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-10. - Definitions. 
(a)  Animal means one (1) or more vertebrates other than human beings, including fowl, when used in this chapter. 
(b)  Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. 
(c)  Noise nuisance. Barking, howling, meowing, squawking or making other sounds, frequently or for a continued duration, which annoys, endangers, injures or disturbs a person of normal sensitivities on premises other than that occupied by the owner of the animal. After 10 p.m. and before 7 a.m., animal noises audible beyond the property line of the property where the animal is located are presumed to be an annoyance and disturbance and are presumed to constitute a noise nuisance. 
(d)  Sanitation nuisance. Unsanitary conditions resulting from animal droppings, food waste, debris, or any other thing to cause vermin infestation, odors, or disease hazards. 
(e)  Own. To have possession or a right of property in an animal or to permit a dog or cat to remain on or about one's premises five (5) days or more. 
(Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-11. - Keeping of chickens. 
(a)  Any person who keeps chickens in the city shall obtain a permit from the city and may keep not more than three (3) hen chickens in the city for personal use only and not for any business or commercial use. Completed applications shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk along with the fee which shall be determined by city council resolution. Application shall be made to the office of the city clerk and shall include any drawings or other information required by the department. If the applicant for the permit is not the owner of the property on which the applicant wants to keep chickens, the applicant must also provide the written consent of the owner of the property. The city clerk's office shall issue a permit where the application is in compliance with all requirements, regulations and ordinances of the city. Approved permit holders shall schedule an inspection within thirty (30) days of permit issuance. Failure to schedule an inspection shall result in an automatic revocation of the permit. If an inspection identifies noncompliance with any of the requirements set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the permit holder shall have fifteen (15) days to achieve compliance with the requirements or the department may revoke the permit or seek prosecution of the violation as a civil infraction. Permits shall be valid for up to one (1) year, shall be non-transferable, site-specific and shall expire on December 31st of each year. A person who wishes to continue keeping chickens shall obtain a new permit prior to expiration of the previous permit. Application for a new permit shall be pursuant to the procedures and requirements applicable at the time a person applies for a new permit. 
(b)  Notwithstanding this section, private restrictions on the use of property shall remain enforceable and take precedence over a permit. Private restrictions include but are not limited to deed restrictions, neighborhood association by-laws, condominium master deed restrictions, and covenant deeds. A permit issued to a person whose property is subject to private restrictions that prohibit the keeping of chickens is void. The interpretation and enforcement of the private restriction is the sole responsibility of the private parties involved. 
(c)  A person who keeps hen chickens shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Have a valid permit issued under this section. 
(2)  Keep no more than three (3) hen/female chickens at any time. 
(3)  Roosters or male chickens and any other type of fowl or poultry are prohibited. 
(4)  The principal use of the person's property is for a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, or a primary or secondary school. 
(5)  Slaughtering of any chickens at the property is prohibited. 
(6)  Chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure. Chickens shall be maintained in a fully enclosed structure or a fenced enclosure and shall be kept in the enclosed structure or fenced enclosure at all times. An enclosed structure shall be constructed of secured materials and shall be properly maintained. 
(7)  Chickens shall not be kept in any location on the property other than in the backyard. For purposes of this section, "backyard" means that portion of a lot enclosed by the property's rear lot line and the side lot lines to the points where the side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line established by the rear of the single-family or two-family structure and extending to the side lot lines. For properties where the principal use is a primary or secondary school, chickens shall not be kept in that property's front setback as defined under the Code. 
(8)  No enclosed structure shall be located within any side or rear yard setback area. An enclosed structure or fenced enclosure shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any property line of an adjacent property. 
(9)  All structures and enclosures for the keeping of chickens shall be constructed and maintained so as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents or vermin from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the structure or enclosure. 
(10)  All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens likely to attract rats, mice, or other rodents or vermin shall be secured and protected in sealed containers. 
(11)  Chickens shall be kept in compliance with the Michigan Department of Agriculture Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices for the Care of Farm Animals, as it relates to laying chickens, as amended, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(12)  A person who had been issued a permit shall submit it for examination upon demand by any police officer, code enforcement officer, or animal control officer. 
(13)  If the above requirements are not complied with, the city may revoke any permit granted under this section and/or initiate prosecution of a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Secs. 7-12—7-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 7-15. - Animal cruelty. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Adequate care means the provision of sufficient food, water, shelter, sanitary conditions, and veterinary medical attention in order to maintain an animal in a state of good health. 
(2)  Animal means one (1) or more vertebrates other than a human being. 
(3)  Licensed veterinarian means a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine under Article 15 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being MCL 333.16101 to 333.18838. 
(4)  Livestock has the meaning attributed to the term in the Animal Industry Act of 1987, Act No. 466 of the Public Acts of 1988, being MCL 287.701 to 287.747. 
(5)  Person means an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, governmental entity, or other legal entity. 
(6)  Neglect means to fail to sufficiently and properly care for an animal to the extent that the animal's health is jeopardized. 
(7)  Sanitary conditions means space free from health hazards including excessive animal waste, overcrowding of animals, or other conditions that endanger the animal's health. This definition does not include a condition resulting from a customary and reasonable practice pursuant to farming or animal husbandry. 
(8)  Shelter means adequate protection from the elements suitable for the age and species of animal and weather conditions to maintain the animal in a state of good health, including structures or natural features such as trees and topography. 
(9)  State of good health means freedom from disease and illness, and in a condition of proper body weight and temperature for the age and species of the animal, unless the animal is undergoing appropriate treatment. 
(10)  Water means potable water that is suitable for the age and species of animal, made regularly available unless otherwise directed by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously and without just cause or excuse kill, torture, mutilate, maim, or disfigure an animal or to willfully and maliciously and without just cause or excuse administer poison to an animal, or expose an animal to any poisonous substance, other than a substance that is used for therapeutic veterinary medical purposes, with the intent that the substance be taken or swallowed by the animal. 
(c)  An owner, possessor, or person having the charge or custody of an animal shall not do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to provide an animal with adequate care. 
(2)  Cruelly drive, work, or beat an animal, or cause an animal to be cruelly driven, worked, or beaten. 
(3)  Carry or cause to be carried in or upon a vehicle or otherwise any live animal having the feet or legs tied together, other than an animal being transported for medical care, or a horse whose feet are hobbled to protect the horse during transport or in any other cruel and inhumane manner. 
(4)  Carry or cause to be carried a live animal in or upon a vehicle or otherwise without providing a secure space, rack, car, crate, or cage, in which livestock may stand, and in which all other animals may stand, turn around, and lie down during transportation, or while awaiting slaughter. As used in this subdivision, for purposes of transportation of sled dogs, "stand" means sufficient vertical distance to allow the animal to stand without its shoulders touching the top of the crate or transportation vehicle. 
(5)  Abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned, in any place, without making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while traveling, walking, hiking or hunting shall not be regarded as abandoned under this section when the owner or custodian has made a reasonable effort to locate the animal. 
(6)  Willfully or negligently allow any animal, including one who is aged, diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, disabled, or non-ambulatory to suffer unnecessary neglect, torture, or pain. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  The violation of this section is a misdemeanor which shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(2)  As a part of the sentence for a violation of subsection (b) or (c), the court may order the defendant to perform up to one hundred (100) hours of community service. 
(3)  As a part of the sentence for a violation of subsection (b) or (c), the court may order the defendant to pay the costs of the prosecution and the costs of the care, housing, and veterinary medical care for the impacted animal victim, as applicable. If the court does not order a defendant to pay all of the applicable costs listed in this subsection, or orders only partial payment of these costs, the court shall state on the record the reasons for that action. 
(4)  If a term of probation is ordered for a violation of subsection (b) or (c), the court may order, as a condition of probation, that the defendant be evaluated to determine the need for psychiatric or psychological counseling, and, if determined appropriate by the court, to receive psychiatric or psychological counseling at his or her own expense. 
(5)  As a part of the sentence for a violation of subsection (b), the court may order the defendant not to own or possess an animal for any period of time determined by the court, which may include permanent relinquishment. 
(6)  As a part of the sentence for a violation of subsection (c), the court may order the defendant not to own or possess an animal for a period of time not to exceed the period of probation. If a person is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of subsection (c), the court may order the defendant not to own or possess an animal for any period of time which may include permanent relinquishment of animal ownership. 
(7)  A person who owns or possesses an animal in violation of an order issued under subsection (d)(4) or (d)(5) is subject to revocation of probation if the order is issued as a condition of probation. A person who owns or possesses an animal in violation of an order issued under subsection (d)(4) or (d)(5) is also subject to the civil and criminal contempt power of the court, and if found guilty of criminal contempt, may be punished by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(e)  Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the lawful killing of an animal pursuant to any provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Warren or pursuant to any of the following: 
(1)  The lawful killing of livestock or a customary animal husbandry or farming practice involving livestock. 
(2)  Pest or rodent control regulated pursuant to part 83 (pesticide control) of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, being MCL 324.8301 to 324.8336. 
(3)  Activities authorized pursuant to rules promulgated under section 9 of the Executive Organization Act of 1965, Act No. 380 of the Public Acts of 1965, being MCL 16.109. 
(4)  The lawful killing or use of an animal for scientific research pursuant to any of the following or a rule promulgated pursuant to any of the following: 
a.  Act No. 224 of the Public Acts of 1969, being MCL 287.381 to 287.395. 
b.  Sections 2226, 2671, 2676, 7109, and 7333 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being MCL 333.2226, 333.2671, 333.2676, 333.7109, and 333.7333. 
(Ord. No. 80-538, § 4, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-16. - Disturbing birds prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure, molest or disturb in any way any wild birds or the occupied nest, eggs, young or brood of any such wild birds, except that this provision shall not apply to any wild birds declared by any law or ordinance to be "pests." 
(Code 1967, § 4-902; Ord. No. 80-538, § 4, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 312.10(1)(e).  
Sec. 7-17. - Sick or dead animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or place any dead or fatally sick or injured animal, or part thereof, on any public or private place, or any sewer. 
(Code 1967, § 4-904; Ord. No. 80-538, § 4, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18) 
State Law reference— Business of disposing bodies of dead animals, MCL 287.231 et seq.; abandonment of sick animals, MCL 750.50.  
Sec. 7-18. - Feeding required. 
It shall be unlawful to feed any animal unwholesome or unsuitable food, or unclean water to drink, which is likely to cause or produce disease in the animal. 
(Code 1967, § 4-906; Ord. No. 80-538, § 4, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 80-766, § 1, 9-11-18) 
State Law reference— Feeding animals putrid or unwholesome food, MCL 750.467.  
Secs. 7-19—7-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq.; rules for control of rabies and the disposition of nonhuman agents carrying disease, including rabid animals, MCL 333.5111. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-26. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any dog to run at large: 
(1)  Upon the public streets, walks, parks or other public places within the city, unless the dog shall be attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog in such manner as to be kept under the control of the person accompanying it; 
(2)  Upon private property, with or without a leash, unless permission has been granted by the owner or occupant of the private property. 
(b)  If an owner or other person is convicted two (2) or more times of violating subsection (a), wherein the convictions occur within five (5) years of one another, the owner or other person so convicted shall thereafter either keep any and all dogs within his or her control either inside a fenced and enclosed yard, or leashed, whenever the dog or dogs are out of doors. Failure to comply with this subsection is a misdemeanor and is punishable pursuant to section 7-8. 
(Code 1967, § 4-916; Ord. No. 80-680, § 1, 7-28-09) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 7-27. - Female dogs in heat restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any female dog to permit the dog off the premises of the owner or custodian when in heat, unless the dog is under control and attached to a leash. 
(Code 1967, § 4-913)  
Sec. 7-28. - Annoying dogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep any dog which shall cause annoyance or disturbance to persons by frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping. 
(Code 1967, § 4-917)  
Sec. 7-29. - Vicious dogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit a vicious, fierce or dangerous dog to go unconfined and unrestrained on such person's premises, or to run at large. "vicious" is defined in Article V, section 7-123, herein. 
(Code 1967, § 4-918; Ord. No. 80-585, § 2, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-30. - Report of dog bites; quarantine. 
(a)  If any person is bitten by a dog, it shall be the duty of that person, or the owner or custodians of the dog having knowledge of same, to report same to the police department within twelve (12) hours thereafter. If the owner or custodian of any dog has any reason to believe or suspect that such dog has become infected with rabies, it shall be the duty of that person to report the same to the police department within twelve (12) hours thereafter. 
(b)  If there is any report to it as set forth in subsection (a), the police department shall take such dog into its possession and deliver it to the health officer. The health officer shall hold such dog in quarantine until a laboratory analysis by a licensed veterinarian is made to determine whether the dog is infected. The health officer shall promulgate and adopt such rules as he deems necessary for the procedure in all such cases and for the disposition of any dog delivered into his or her custody. The owner of such dog shall pay the costs involved in such quarantine. 
(Code 1967, §§ 4-914, 4-915) 
State Law reference— Rules for control of rabies and the disposition of nonhuman agents carrying disease, including rabid animals, MCL 333.5111.  
Sec. 7-31. - Interference with enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any dog warden or his or her agent in the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-911) 
Cross reference— Offenses against public administration, § 22-21 et seq.  
Sec. 7-32. - Number of dogs harbored restricted; nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to possess, harbor, shelter or keep more than three (3) adult dogs, at any residential dwelling unit or commercial or industrial premises, excepting kennels, veterinary hospitals and pet shops. For the purpose of this section, an adult dog shall be deemed to be any dog six (6) months or older. It shall be unlawful to maintain any dog so as to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor or otherwise. 
(Code 1967, § 4-922(2); Ord. No. 80-340, § 10, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-585, § 2, 4-23-02)  
Sec. 7-33. - Rabies vaccination required. 
It shall be unlawful to own, maintain, keep, or harbor any dog four (4) months old or older that has not been vaccinated against rabies, except as provided in section 7-34. 
(Ord. No. 80-567, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 80-674, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 7-34. - Rabies vaccination exception. 
(a)  Rabies vaccination exception. In the event a dog is allergic to the rabies vaccination, the city clerk may issue a license for the dog provided that the owner complies with all requirements of this section. 
(b)  Annual license required. To be eligible for the rabies vaccination exception, the owner of the unvaccinated dog must; (1) apply for a dog license as required by division 2, section 7-47 of this article; (2) pay all required fees set forth in section 18-18(17a), regulating dog license fees; (3) submit a written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian affirming that the dog is allergic to the vaccination shot and that the vaccination will have an adverse health impact on the dog; (4) provide an annual date when administration of the rabies vaccination will be re-evaluated; and (5) submit an affidavit signed by the owner affirming that "As the owner of an unvaccinated dog, I am aware of the risk of owning such unvaccinated dog and recognize the potential for court-ordered euthanasia and/or quarantine of the dog should it bite or otherwise expose a human to rabies". 
(c)  Registration required. Any dog that is allergic to a rabies vaccination and has not been vaccinated must be registered with the city clerk's office. It is the duty of the owner of an unvaccinated dog to notify the clerk's office if the dog is destroyed or moved from the city. the clerk's office shall maintain and update the registry of unvaccinated dogs and forward a copy to the animal control officer. 
(d)  Leash and muzzle required. The unvaccinated dog must be muzzled and restrained by a suitable leash and control maintained by a responsible person while on the sidewalk or in a public place. The animal control officer is authorized to make periodic checks on all unvaccinated dogs. 
(Ord. No. 80-674, § 2, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 7-35. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter unless the context requires a different meaning, the following word shall have the meaning ascribed by this section: 
(a)  Tethering: Tethering means the practice of securing a dog to a stationary object or pulley run by means of a metal chain or coated steel cable for keeping a dog restrained. Tethering does not mean walking a dog on a leash, or for temporary grooming, or other professional service. 
(Ord. No. 80-765, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-36. - Prohibition on tethering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to: 
(1)  Tether on a dog on anything but a chain, no heavier than 5/16" link, or a well-maintained coated steel cable of more than ten (10) feet in length, or three (3) times the length of the dog from tip of nose to base of tail, whichever is greater; 
(2)  Tether a dog without a swivel attached, and/or equipped on both ends; 
(3)  Use a tether or any assembly or attachments that, due to its weight, inhibits the free movement of a dog within the area tethered; 
(4)  Tether a dog on anything except a buckle-type collar or harness, or to tether around the dog's neck, to training collars such as choke or pinch-style collars, or in such a manner as to cause injury, strangulation, or entanglement of the dog on fences, trees, or other man-made or natural obstacles; 
(5)  Tether more than one dog to a single tether; 
(6)  Tether a dog less than four (4) months of age, unless accompanied at all times; 
(7)  Tether a dog without access to shade when sunlight is likely to cause overheating, or appropriate shelter to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness when the atmospheric temperature falls below 32 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(8)  Tether a dog without securing its food and water supply so that it cannot be tipped over by the tether; or to tether a dog outdoors in unsafe or unsanitary conditions or where tether does not allow the animal to defecate or urinate in an area separate from the areas where it must eat, drink or lie down; 
(9)  Tether a dog for more than three (3) hours. 
(Ord. No. 80-765, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Sec. 7-37. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this article by any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days in jail, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-765, § 1, 9-11-18)  
Secs. 7-38—7-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dog license, MCL 287.266 et seq.; authority for city to license dogs, MCL 287.290. 
 
Sec. 7-46. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain, keep or harbor any dog four (4) months old or older within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 4-909; Ord. No. 80-567, § 2, 3-27-01)  
Sec. 7-47. - Application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be made to the city clerk and shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog, and the name and address of the applicant and the last known previous owner. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(Code 1967, § 4-909; Ord. No. 80-585, § 3, 4-23-02)  
Sec. 7-48. - Fee. 
The fee for a dog license as required under this division, shall be prescribed in chapter 18, section 18-18, regulating licensing fees. 
(Code 1967, § 4-910; Ord. No. 7-48, § 1, 10-14-97)  
Sec. 7-49. - Tag; collar. 
Upon the issuance of a license under this division, the city clerk shall issue a tag made of metal or some other suitable durable material with the number of the license, the expiration date, and the words "Dog License, Warren, Michigan" stamped upon it. The owner of each dog licensed shall provide it with a substantial collar to which the tag shall be affixed and which at all times shall be kept on the dog. No person except the owner or custodian shall remove any collar or tag from any dog wearing same. It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a license tag has been issued to fail or refuse to produce the license tag for such dog upon demand of any police officer or agent of the police department. 
(Code 1967, § 4-910)  
Sec. 7-50. - Expiration. 
Each one-year license shall expire on the thirtieth day of April. Each three-year license shall expire on the thirtieth day of April, three (3) years from date of issuance. The application for a three-year license shall be accompanied by a certificate of a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies for a period of three (3) years. 
(Code 1967, § 4-910)  
Secs. 7-51—7-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - KENNELS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Kennel license, MCL 287.270 et seq.; authority for city to license kennels, MCL 287.270b. 
 
Sec. 7-66. - Compliance with division. 
No person shall own or operate a kennel within a residential zone as defined by the zoning code of ordinances (R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4, R-5). 
(Code 1967, § 4-919(1); Ord. No. 80-738, § 1, 5-10-16)  
Sec. 7-67. - Defined. 
For purposes of this division, a kennel shall be construed as an establishment wherein or whereon three (3) or more dogs are confined and kept for sale, or for boarding or breeding purposes for remuneration. 
(Code 1967, § 4-919(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definition, MCL 287.270.  
Sec. 7-68. - Construction. 
A kennel facility shall be so constructed as to prevent stray dogs or the public from obtaining entrance thereto and gaining contact with dogs lodged in the kennel. 
(Code 1967, § 4-919(3)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 287.270.  
Sec. 7-69. - License—Required; application. 
Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, in lieu of individual licenses required under section 7-46, apply to the city dog warden for a kennel license entitling the person to keep or operate the kennel. The application shall be made in writing on forms supplied for that purpose by the police commissioner. Proof of vaccination of dogs against rabies shall not be required with the application. The license shall be issued by the dog warden on the form prepared for such purpose and supplied by the commissioner of agriculture of the State of Michigan, and such license shall entitle the licensee to keep any number of dogs six (6) months old or over not at any time exceeding a certain number which shall be specified in the license. 
(Code 1967, § 4-919(4)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 287.270.  
Sec. 7-70. - Same—Fees. 
The owner shall pay a kennel license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each kennel. The owner shall pay the license fee at the time of the license application. 
(Code 1967, § 4-919(5); Ord. No. 80-738, § 2, 5-10-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 287.270.  
Sec. 7-71. - Same—Metal tags. 
With each kennel license the dog warden shall issue a number of metal tags equal to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel. All such tags shall bear the words "City of Warren, Macomb County, Michigan" and the number of the kennel license. Such metal tags shall be fabricated in such a way as to be readily distinguishable from individual dog license tags for the same year. 
(Code 1967, § 4-919(6)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 287.270.  
Sec. 7-72. - Same—Inspection certificate. 
(a)  The dog warden shall not issue a kennel license under the provisions of this division unless the applicant therefor shall furnish the warden with an inspection certificate signed by the state commissioner of agriculture, or the authorized representative of the commission, which inspection certificate shall state that the kennel to be covered by the license complies with the reasonable sanitary requirements established by the state commission of agriculture, and that the dogs therein are properly fed and protected from exposure commensurate with the breed of the dog. 
(b)  The foregoing inspection by the state commission of agriculture or its authorized representative shall have been made not more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of the application for license with the dog warden. 
(Code 1967, § 4-919(7), (8)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 287.270.  
Secs. 7-73—7-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 7-86. - Duty of police department. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to seize and impound any dog found anywhere in the city contrary to the provisions of this article. Additional duties are set forth in Article V, herein. 
(Code 1967, § 4-911; Ord. No. 80-585, § 3, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-87. - Release to owner. 
No dog impounded under this division shall be released to its owner or other authorized person without payment and such sums determined by the police department for its care and maintenance and without procuring a license as provided in section 7-46. Additional requirements set forth in Article V may also be implicated for violations under that article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-911; Ord. No. 80-585, § 4, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-88. - Disposition. 
(a)  The police department shall hold for four (4) days after impounding any unlicensed dog before destroying such animal, or if it is deemed valuable, selling it to the highest bidder at public auction to be held at noon of the fifth day. 
(b)  If the dog has a collar, license or other evidence of ownership, the police department shall notify the owner in writing and disposition of the animal shall not be made within seven (7) days from the date of mailing the notice. 
(c)  The police department shall maintain a record on each identifiable dog acquired, indicating a basic description of the animal, the date it was acquired and under what circumstances. The record shall also indicate the date of notice sent to the owner of an animal and subsequent disposition. 
(d)  This section does not apply to animals which are sick or injured to the extent that the holding period would cause undue suffering, or to animals whose owners request immediate disposal. 
(e)  If after such notice, the dog has not been claimed, the dog warden shall dispose of such dog by sale or by destruction in some humane manner. 
(f)  No dog so caught and detained shall be sold for the purpose of vivisection. 
(g)  All moneys derived from the sale of such dog, after deducting the expense of its detention, shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-911)  
Sec. 7-89. - Records required. 
The police department shall maintain a complete record of all dogs impounded under the provisions of this division and the disposition of same. 
(Code 1967, § 4-912)  
Secs. 7-90—7-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-101. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to have possession or custody of any cat without having it under control and/or confined to his or her premises at all times; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to pos- session or custody of any cat less than four (4) months of age, when proof of age can be and on request is submitted to a police officer. 
(Code 1967, § 4-920) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 7-102. - Exhibiting to authorized personnel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show or exhibit, at any reasonable time, any cat in his or her possession or custody to any licensed inspector, police officer or health official of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-921)  
Sec. 7-103. - Number of cats harbored restricted; nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to possess, harbor, shelter or keep more than three (3) adult cats, at any residential dwelling unit or commercial or industrial premises, excepting kennels, veterinary hospitals and pet shops. For the purpose of this section, an adult cat shall be deemed to be any cat six (6) months or older. It shall also be unlawful to maintain any cat or cats so as to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor or otherwise. 
(Code 1967, § 4-922(1); Ord. No. 80-340, § 11, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 7-104. - Report of cat bites. 
(a)  If any person is bitten by a cat, it shall be the duty of that person, or the owner or custodian of the cat having knowledge of same, to report same to the police department within twelve (12) hours thereafter. If the owner or custodian of any cat has any reason to believe or suspect that such cat has become infected with rabies, it shall be the duty of that person to report same to the police department immediately. 
(b)  If there is any report to it as set forth in subsection (a), the police department shall take such cat into its possession and deliver it to the health officer. The health officer shall hold such cat in quarantine until a laboratory analysis by a licensed veterinarian is made to determine whether the cat is infected. The health officer shall promulgate and adopt such rules as he deems necessary for the procedure in all such cases and for the disposition of any cat delivered into his or her custody. The owner of such cat shall pay the costs involved in such quarantine. 
(Code 1967, § 4-924) 
State Law reference— Rules for control of rabies and the disposition of nonhuman agents carrying disease, including rabid animals, MCL 333.5111.  
Sec. 7-105. - Agreements with animal hospitals authorized. 
The city may enter into necessary agreements with animal hospital owners and/or managers to carry out the terms of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-926)  
Secs. 7-106—7-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 7-121. - Authority; destruction upon failure to capture. 
Any police officer or other person designated by the city is authorized to impound any cat found running at large within the city. If capture cannot be effected, the police officer or such other person is authorized to destroy such cat. 
(Code 1967, § 4-923)  
Sec. 7-122. - Disposition. 
(a)  Any impounded cat shall not be sold or otherwise disposed of within four (4) days after its acquisition. 
(b)  If the cat has a collar, license or other evidence of ownership, the owner and/or manager of the animal hospital or shelter shall notify the owner in writing and disposition of the animal shall not be made within seven (7) days from the date of mailing the notice. 
(c)  The process of disposition shall be in such a manner as previously agreed upon between the city and owner and/or manager of an animal hospital or shelter. Each owner and/or manager of an animal hospital or shelter shall be required to maintain a record of each identifiable cat acquired, indicating a basic description of the animal, the date it was acquired and under what circumstances. The record shall also indicate the date of notice sent to the owner of an animal and subsequent disposition. The owner and/or manager of the hospital or shelter is made an agent of the city for this purpose, and his or her actions in this regard are declared to be for a governmental purpose. A minimum daily charge of one dollar ($1.00) shall be made for feeding and shelter of each cat so impounded. 
(d)  This section does not apply to cats which are sick or injured to the extent that the holding period would cause undue suffering, or to cats whose owners request immediate disposal. 
(Code 1967, § 4-925)  
ARTICLE V. - VICIOUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS—IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 7-123. - Vicious animal defined. 
As used in this section "vicious animal" shall mean and include: 
(1)  Any animal which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation. 
(2)  Any animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked to cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals. 
(3)  Any animal declared by the animal control officer to be a dangerous animal, or any dog determined to be a dangerous dog under the authority of the state legislature or declared by any court. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-124. - Potentially dangerous animal defined. 
"Potentially dangerous animal" means any of the following: 
(1)  Any animal which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within the prior thirty-six-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the animal are off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(2)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-125. - Potentially dangerous or vicious animal—Exclusions. 
(a)  No animal may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon, premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault. No animal may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if an injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal, which at the time the injury or damage was sustained because the domestic animal was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal. 
(b)  No dog may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
(c)  Dogs owned and controlled by local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies which are used in law enforcement or related activities may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-126. - Judicial process—Potentially dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  If an animal control officer or a law enforcement officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the animal control department or his or her immediate supervisor or the head of the local law enforcement agency, or his or her designee, shall petition the 37th District Court for a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the animal control officer or law enforcement officer to find probable cause shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant and shall be attached to the petition. The animal control department or head of the local law enforcement agency shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal that a hearing will be held by the 37th District Court at which time the owner or keeper of the animal may present evidence as to why the animal should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be served with notice of the hearing and a copy of the petition, either personally or by first-class mail with return receipt requested. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five (5) working days nor more than ten (10) working days after service of notice upon owner or keeper of the animal. The hearing shall be open to the public. The court may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, limit the scope of discovery, and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses. A jury shall not be available. The court may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious and make other orders authorized by this section and Ordinance No. 7-128(4), 7-128(5) and 7-129. 
(b)  After the hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (1) above, the owner or keeper of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued, either personally or by first-class mail postage prepaid by the court. If a determination is made that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with section 7-128 in accordance with a time schedule established by the animal control department or the head of the local law enforcement agency, but in no case more than thirty (30) days after the date of the determination or thirty-five (35) days if notice of the determination is mailed to the owner or keeper of the animal. If the petitioner or the owner or keeper of the animal contests the determination, he or she may appeal the decision of the court. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-127. - Immediate seizure of vicious or potentially dangerous animals. 
(a)  If upon investigation it is determined by the animal control officer or law enforcement officer that probable cause exists to believe the animal in question poses an immediate threat to public safety, then the animal control officer or law enforcement officer may seize and impound the animal pending the hearings to be held pursuant to this ordinance. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable to the city for the costs and expenses of keeping and impounding the dog, if the dog is later adjudicated potentially dangerous or vicious or dangerous. 
(b)  When an animal has been impounded pursuant to subsection (a) above and it is not contrary to public safety, the animal control officer shall permit the animal to be confined at the owner's expense in a department approved kennel, or veterinary facility. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-128. - Disposition of potentially dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  All potentially dangerous animals shall be properly licensed and vaccinated. The city clerk shall include the potentially dangerous designation in the registration records of the animals either after the owner or keeper of the animal has agreed to the designation or the court has determined the designation applies to the animals. 
(b)  A potentially dangerous animal shall be housed either within the owner's home or, if housed outside, within a kennel or other structure with proper flooring and a roof or other permanent cover. If the animal is normally housed within the home, the owner may permit the animal outside on the owner's property so long as the animal is restricted to the back or rear yard, the animal is securely chained or otherwise restricted so that the animal is at least four (4) feet away from the perimeter of the owner's property, and the yard is secured to prevent children from trespassing. A potentially dangerous animal may be off the owner's premises only if it restrained by a substantial leash, of appropriate length, and is under the control of responsible adult at all times. In no event shall a potentially dangerous animal be left unattended for any amount of time while off the owner's property, including chaining or tying up the animal to an object such as a post, fence, tree, etc. In no event shall a potentially dangerous animal be permitted on any city owned property, including parks, or on a public school property. 
(c)  If there are no additional instances of the behavior described in section 7-126 within a thirty-six-month period from the date of designation as a potentially dangerous animal, the animal shall be removed from the list of potentially dangerous animals. The animal may, but is not required to be, removed from the list of potentially dangerous animals prior to the expiration of the thirty-six-month period if the owner or keeper of the animal demonstrates to the animal control officer that changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner or keeper, such as training of the animals, have mitigated the risk to the public safety. 
(d)  A dog determined to be a vicious dog may be destroyed by the animal control officer when it is found, after proceedings conducted under section 7-126 that the release of the animal would create a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
If it is determined that an animal found to be vicious shall not be destroyed, the court may impose conditions upon the ownership of the animal that protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(e)  The owner of an animal determined to be a vicious animal may be prohibited by the city from owning, possessing, controlling, or having custody of any animal for a period of up to three (3) years, when it is found, after proceedings conducted under section 7-126, that ownership or possession of an animal by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-129. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter involving a potentially dangerous or vicious animal shall be punished by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and the court may impose costs. 
(b)  The court may also order the costs associated with impounding and caring for the animal to be imposed upon the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(c)  The court may also order the costs associated with destroying the animal to be imposed upon the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(d)  All fines fined pursuant to this article shall be paid to the city for the purpose of defraying the cost of the implementation of this chapter. 
(e)  The court may enter other orders necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-130. - Voluntary destruction. 
At any point before the order of the court, the owner or keeper of the animal may voluntary request that the animal be destroyed. The request may be made in open court or by letter that is properly notarized. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-131. - No conflict with section 7-7. 
The provisions of this chapter addressing vicious animals and potentially dangerous animals are not intended to conflict with the prohibitions against possessing dangerous animals, as set forth and defined in section 7-7. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Sec. 7-132. - Savings clause. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. No. 80-585, § 5, 4-23-03)  
Chapter 8 - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
State Law reference— Auctioneers and duties upon sales at auctions, MCL 446.26 et seq.; sales at public auctions, MCL 446.51 et seq.; UCC rules on sale by auction, MCL 440.2328. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Sale restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of, advertise for sale, or offer for sale at public auction any property of any kind unless he or she complies with the following conditions: 
(1)  Such sale shall be conducted by an auctioneer duly licensed as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Such property shall have been on the tax rolls of the city for a period of one (1) year prior to such sale, or comprise the stock of goods of a merchant who has regularly done business in the city for one (1) year continuously prior to such sale. 
(3)  All taxes, plus penalties, which have become a lien under any law or provision of this Code, shall have first been paid. 
(4)  If such sale is a closing-out sale, the statutes and provisions of state law regulating such sales shall be complied with. 
(5)  No property of any kind shall be added to the goods, wares or stock at any closing-out sale after the inventory is fixed, nor shall any property be added within sixty (60) days prior to the commencement of such sale in anticipation thereof. 
(6)  No property which has been struck off to the highest bidder during the course of such sale shall again be offered for sale during such auction. 
(7)  No sale of platinum, gold, silver, plated ware, precious or semi-precious stones, watches or other jewelry shall be permitted unless it is a closing-out auction and application therefor has been on file with the city clerk for a period of sixty (60) days prior to the first day of such sale, and every such article sold shall have securely attached to it a tag or label upon which shall be plainly written or printed in English a true and correct statement of the kind and quality of the metal of which such article is made or with which it is plated, and the true name or names, weight, quality and color of any precious or semi-precious stone or stones, together with the name of the manufacturer of such article. 
(8)  A sales book shall be kept, signed by the purchaser, showing each sale of any article at the time of purchase, opposite a description of the article, and if no purchaser comes forward to sign such book, then the next highest bidder shall have the right to sign such sales book and to demand and receive such article at the amount of his or her last highest bid. 
(9)  No auction shall be conducted or continued in the city after 6:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1967, § 3-704)  
Sec. 8-2. - Prohibited practices. 
The following acts, omissions and practices are prohibited: 
(1)  The use of deceit, fraud or misrepresentation in the sale or offering for sale of any article; 
(2)  The substitution of any article in place of an article bid upon at auction; 
(3)  The use of false bidders, cappers or puffers; 
(4)  The use of bells, buzzers, bally-hoo or any variety of mechanical or excessive vocal sound to attract attention in connection with sales at auction; 
(5)  The use of any false or misleading advertising matter, relative to the kind or quality of the goods or to the past history or present status thereof; 
(6)  The substitution of an unlicensed person in place of a licensed auctioneer; 
(7)  The failure to exhibit an auctioneer's license to any police officer upon demand at the place where an auction is conducted; 
(8)  The receipt for sale by auction or the sale by auction of any licensed auctioneer of any goods, wares or merchandise from any minor, knowing him or her to be such. 
(Code 1967, § 3-705)  
Sec. 8-3. - Accounts required. 
Each auctioneer shall keep an accurate record of all goods and chattels sold by him or her, together with the name and address of the person from whom such goods and chattels were received, which record shall be open to inspection by any police officer or the city clerk at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1967, § 3-706)  
Sec. 8-4. - Sworn statement required. 
(a)  At least five (5) full days before commencing any sale by auction, except as specified in section 8-6, the owner of the property sought to be sold shall file a sworn application with the city clerk which shall state the following: 
(1)  Whether the auction sought to be conducted is a closing-out auction; 
(2)  if it is a closing-out auction, that the application is made in good faith for the purpose of retiring from business and that all statutes and the provisions of this Code governing closing-out sales have been complied with; 
(3)  That the stock of goods, or other property, sought to be sold, is a bonafide part of applicant's stock or has been on the tax rolls of the city for one (1) year; 
(4)  A complete description of the property sought to be sold, in duplicate, including, if it is personal property, a completely itemized inventory with identifying numbers, or other means of readily determining the identity of each and every article; 
(5)  The place where the auction is to be conducted; 
(6)  The name of the auctioneer who is to conduct the sale; 
(7)  The name of the owner of the property for the preceding year; 
(8)  The length of time the applicant has been in business in the city and the address of such business; 
(9)  That all taxes on such property have been paid; 
(10)  That no property other than that listed shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises where the auction is being conducted during such auction sale; 
(11)  That all of the property listed is actually on the premises where the auction is to be conducted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the auctioneer to conduct the auction at any place other than that stated in the application, and it shall be unlawful for either the auctioneer or owner to do, either themselves or through their agents or servants, any act or thing contrary to the statements made in the application, and any false statement therein, or any act done contrary to such statements, shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 3-707)  
Sec. 8-5. - New goods. 
Whenever any auction sale is one of used or secondhand goods, no new goods, wares, merchandise or personal property shall be offered or included at such sale. 
(Code 1967, § 3-708)  
Sec. 8-6. - Household goods. 
The provisions of sections 8-1(2)—(7) and 8-4 shall not apply to auction sales of secondhand household furniture and household goods. The words "secondhand household furniture and household goods", in this chapter, mean household furniture and household goods which have actually been used for housekeeping purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 3-709)  
Sec. 8-7. - Sales authorized by court. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sale conducted by any sheriff, constable or other public or court officer, or any person acting under the license, direction or authority of any court. 
(Code 1967, § 3-710)  
Secs. 8-8—8-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 8-21. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of auctioneer or sell or cry off at auction any real estate, goods, wares or merchandise of any description within the city until he or she shall first procure a license so to do from the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 3-701)  
Sec. 8-22. - Age requirement. 
No license shall be issued under this article to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1967, § 3-702)  
Sec. 8-23. - Approval of police commissioner required. 
No license shall be issued under this article except upon the approval of the police commissioner. 
(Code 1967, § 3-702) 
Cross reference— Approval of city officers or department heads generally, § 18-7.  
Sec. 8-24. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this article shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-703)  
Sec. 8-25. - Bond requirement. 
Before any license is issued under this article, the applicant shall execute a bond in the penal sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) with two (2) or more sufficient surety companies, the bond to be approved by the city attorney. A license shall only be granted upon the condition that the applicant agrees to (1) faithfully comply with the provisions of the Charter and this Code as well as with the payment of all penalties which may be recovered against him or her for the violation of such provisions, (2) faithfully account to the consignor or owner of the goods entrusted to him or her and moneys received by him or her, and (3) agree to protect and/or reimburse any person purchasing goods who shall sustain any damage by unlawful or fraudulent sale by the auctioneer. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-125(2), 3-703; Ord. No. 80-320, § 1(2), 5-13-86; Ord. No. 80-588, § 1, 5-14-02)  
Sec. 8-26. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 7, 1-13-98)  
Chapter 9 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate buildings and structures, § 3.1(b)(2)(g). 
Cross reference— Housing commission, § 2-236 et seq.; structural changes and alterations to city buildings, § 2-356 et seq; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 20; unlawful construction noises, § 21-29; signs, Ch. 31; soil removal, dumping and regrading, Ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; subdivision regulations, Ch. 35; water and sewers, Ch. 41; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Penalty. 
(a)  Except if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d), the violation of a provision of this chapter is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(b)  A violator with any unpaid civil fines or costs imposed under chapter 2.5 of the Warren Code of Ordinances may be ineligible to apply for a building permit, certificate of compliance, or a variance, except if: 
(1)  The person (1) became the owner of the property by foreclosure or by taking a deed in lieu of foreclosure and (2) is a government-sponsored enterprise, a financial institution, a mortgage servicer, or a credit union service organization, as defined by chapter 2.5, section 2.5-2; or 
(2)  The person shows that the permit, certificate, or variance will correct, in whole or in part, the blight violation that was the subject of the unpaid fines, costs, or justice system assessments. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 8, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-629, § 1, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 80-650, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-731, § 3, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17) 
State Law reference— MCL 125.1509c.  
Secs. 9-2—9-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-575, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2001, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 9-16, 9-17. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Compliance with building code by cable television system, § 10-5. 
 
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION OF STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-635, § 1, adopted July 25, 2006, designated §§ 9-16 and 9-17 as Div. 1, Adoption of State Construction Code. 
 
Sec. 9-16. - Adoption of State Construction Code. 
The State Construction Code, comprising the Michigan Building Code and the Michigan Residential Code, as found in Part 4 of the Department of Consumer and Industry Services Construction Code as adopted by the State of Michigan and which incorporates the International Building Code, as amended and filed with Secretary of State, is hereby adopted by reference together with any and all amendments and is made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. The code official authorized by ordinance shall administer and enforce the code. The code is available for purchase and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-572, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 80-635, § 2, 7-25-06)  
Sec. 9-17. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
That the following provisions of the State Construction Code, comprising the Michigan Building Code and the Michigan Residential Code, adopted by reference, are hereby revised to read as follows: 
(a)  Section 101.1. Title. This ordinance shall be known as the Building Code, hereinafter referred to as "the code." 
(b)  Section 108.2. Authorization of Fee Schedule. A fee for each plan examination, building permit and inspection shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by city council. 
(c)  Section 108.6. Fee refunds. Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be canceled by the building official on the written request from the holder of such permit, provided such request is made within six (6) months from the issuance of the permit and prior to any inspection or other action under the permit, including any exercise of privileges granted by the permit. In the event any permit is canceled as provided above, the city treasurer, upon notification in writing from the building official; shall make a refund of eighty (80) percent of all fees paid in connection with the issuance of such unused permit, the city treasurer to retain a minimum of thirty dollars ($30.00) of the fees paid on any canceled permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-572, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 80-607, § 1, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 80-635, § 2, 7-25-06)  
DIVISION 2. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 9-18. - Participation in floodplain management program. 
The City of Warren currently participates in the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program to significantly reduce flood hazards to persons, reduce property damage, reduce public expenditures and to provide for the availability of flood insurance and federal funds or loans within its community. The City of Warren shall continue to participate in the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA's) National Flood Insurance Program as follows: 
(1)  Obtaining, reviewing, and utilizing flood elevation data available from federal, state or other sources pending receipt of data from the FEMA to identify the flood hazard area and areas with potential flooding; 
(2)  Ensuring all permits necessary for development in a designated floodplain are issued prior to a building permit being issued; 
(3)  Implementation of all applicable State Construction Code Regulations to development within a designated floodplain area; 
(4)  Assisting in the delineation of flood hazard areas, providing information concerning uses and occupancy of the floodplain or flood-related erosion areas and maintaining floodplain management records; 
(5)  Advising FEMA of any changes in community boundaries; 
(6)  Maintaining floodplain construction records; 
(7)  Adopting the applicable flood insurance rate maps (FIRMS) and revisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06)  
Sec. 9-19. - Floodplain management map adoption. 
The State Construction Code having been adopted by reference in section 9-16, and the Floodplain Management Regulations being a part of the Code, the City of Warren hereby adopts the following maps by reference; and declares the following maps to be part of section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code: The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled "Macomb County, Michigan All Jurisdictions Flood Insurance Study dated September 29, 2006 number 26099CV001" and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMS), dated September 29, 2006, numbers: 
26099CO312G 
26099CO314G 
26099CO316G 
26099CO317G 
26099CO318G 
26099CO319G 
26099CO336G 
26099CO338G 
26099CO339G 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 80-639, § 1, 10-24-06)  
Sec. 9-20. - Administration and enforcement by code official. 
Pursuant to section 9-16 of this article, the code official has been designated as the official authorized to administer and enforce the State Construction Code as adopted and incorporated pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, and including the provisions of Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code entitled Flood-Resistant Construction. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06)  
Sec. 9-21. - Floodplain permit required. 
The code official shall not issue a building permit for construction within the floodplain area, unless all necessary permits for development have been issued including a floodplain permit, approval or letter of no authority from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality under the floodplain regulatory provisions of Part 31, "Water Resources Protection" of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06)  
Sec. 9-22. - Implementation of State Construction Code regulations to floodplain management. 
In the event a building permit is issued for construction in a floodplain, the code official shall ensure the construction complies with the following codes as applicable: 
(1)  Applicable floodplain management regulations contained in the Michigan Residential Code, as amended, including all codes incorporated by reference; 
(2)  Floodplain management regulations contained in the Michigan Building Code, as amended, including all codes incorporated by reference; 
(3)  Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 80-639, § 1, 10-24-06)  
Sec. 9-23. - Floodplain construction records. 
The division of buildings and safety engineering shall maintain records of any issued certificates of flood proofing for new structures and substantially improved structures. Those certificates shall include the following minimum information as applicable to the particular building: lowest floor elevation, existence of a basement, method of flood proofing, and elevation to which the structure has been flood proofed. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06)  
Sec. 9-24. - Duties of city engineer. 
With regard to the National Flood Insurance Program and the regulation of development within the designated floodplain area, the duties of the city engineer shall include the following: 
(1)  To send notification to the department of environmental quality and adjacent communities of any proposed alteration or relocation of any watercourse. The city engineer shall also submit a copy of such notifications to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
(2)  To verify and record the actual elevation of all structures constructed in the floodplain, in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement; and in the case of structures flood proofed, the elevation to which the structure was flood proofed; 
(3)  To maintain all records and maps pertaining to the National Flood Insurance Program in the office of the city engineer which maps and records shall be open for public inspection; 
(4)  To obtain and utilize the best available flood hazard data for the purpose of administering this division in the absence of data from the flood insurance administration. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06)  
Sec. 9-25. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The regulations for flood protection incorporated by this division are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and based upon engineering and scientific methods of study conducted by the FEMA and other federal regulatory agencies. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. Approval of the use of the land under this division shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage. This division does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard area will be free from flood damage. This division does not create liability on the part of the City of Warren by reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06)  
Sec. 9-26. - Additional definitions. 
In addition to applicable definitions of the State Construction Code, the following definitions shall apply to floodplain management: 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and undetermined, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Flood or flooding means: 
(a)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; 2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 3) mudflows, and 
(b)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseen event which results in flooding, as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the FEMA, based on the FEMA Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled "Flood Insurance Study number 26099CV001" dated September 29, 2006 which delineates both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) is the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration which contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
Flood management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances, erosion control ordinances, and other regulations that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas designated in the flood insurance study which must be reserved in order to discharge base flood. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, gas or liquid storage facility, as well as a mobile home or manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 80-635, § 3, 7-25-06)  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 9-27. - Created. 
There is hereby created a construction board of appeals. This board is vested with all powers prescribed to it by the State of Michigan Construction Code (Act 230 of 1972, as amended) which was adopted by reference by the City of Warren through Warren Code of Ordinances Chapter 9, Article 2, Division 1. 
(Ord. No. 80-688, § 1, 8-10-10)  
Sec. 9-28. - Composition. 
(a)  Number of members. The construction board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. A person may serve on the construction board of appeals of more than one (1) governmental subdivision. 
(b)  Preferred qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) individuals, one (1) from each of the following professions or disciplines: 
(1)  Architectural or building experience. Registered design professional with architectural experience or a builder or superintendent of building construction with at least ten (10) years' experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(2)  Structural experience. Registered design professional with structural engineering experience. 
(3)  Mechanical and plumbing experience. Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing engineering experience or a mechanical contractor with at least ten (10) years' experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(4)  Electrical experience. Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience or an electrical contractor with at least ten (10) years' experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(5)  Fire protection experience. Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience or a fire protection contractor with at least ten (10) years' experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(Ord. No. 80-688, § 1, 8-10-10)  
Sec. 9-29. - Meetings; timeliness; purpose. 
(a)  Purpose of the board. If the city refuses to grant an application for a building permit, or if the city makes any other decision pursuant to or related to the State Construction Code or local ordinance, an interested person, or the person's authorized agent, may appeal in writing to the construction board of appeals on a form provided by the construction board of appeals. 
(b)  Timeliness of appeal. The construction board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render and file its decision with a statement of reason for the decision with the city from whom the appeal was taken not more than thirty (30) days after submission of the appeal. Failure by the construction board of appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision within the time limit is a denial of the appeal for purposes of authorizing the institution of an appeal. A copy of the decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed, before filing, to the party taking the appeal. 
(b)  Meetings open to the public. The business which the construction board of appeals may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the construction board of appeals held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended. Public notice of the time, date and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended. 
A record of decisions made by the construction board of appeals and any other writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the construction board of appeals in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act No. 442 of Public Acts of 1976, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-688, § 1, 8-10-10)  
Sec. 9-30. - Term. 
The term of appointment to the construction board of appeals shall be for a period of three (3) years, except that for the initial appointment of members, one (1) appointment shall be designated for one (1) year, one (1) appointment shall be designated for two (2) years and one (1) appointment shall be designated for three (3) years. The term of the initial appointments shall commence August 1, 2010. Terms commenced subsequent to the initial terms shall be three (3) years in duration, except when an appointment is made to fill a vacancy or to replace a member who has tendered their resignation, the term of the member appointed to fill the vacancy or replace the member who has tendered their resignation shall be for the duration of the unexpired term. Members shall be eligible for re-appointment to a succeeding term. 
(Ord. No. 80-688, § 1, 8-10-10)  
Sec. 9-31. - Procedure. 
This division does not prevent the city from granting its construction board of appeals additional powers or duties not inconsistent with the state construction code or local ordinance, or from establishing procedures to be followed by the construction board of appeals insofar as the procedures do not conflict with the state construction code or local ordinance. The construction board of appeals shall adopt rules and regulations relating to its procedure. 
(Ord. No. 80-688, § 1, 8-10-10)  
Secs. 9-32—9-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, adopted July 25, 2000, amended the provisions of former Art. III, relative to the electrical code, to read as herein set out in Art. III, Divs. 1—6. The provisions of former Art. III derived from Ord. No. 80-460, § 1, adopted July 12, 1994 and Ord. No. 80-529, adopted April 24, 1998. 
Cross reference— Compliance with electrical code by cable television systems, § 10-5; electrical systems for mobile homes, § 20-69; electrical regulations for vending machines, § 40-2. 
State Law reference— Licensing of electricians, regulating of wiring, etc., MCL 338.881 et seq.; licensing and inspection ordinances, MCL 338.886. 
 
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN ELECTRICAL CODE AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 9-36. - Adoption of Michigan Electrical Code. 
The Michigan Electrical Code as found in Part 8 of the Department of Consumer and Industry Services Construction Code, as adopted by the State of Michigan and filed with the Secretary of State is hereby adopted by reference together with any and all amendments and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 17.3(k).  
Sec. 9-37. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall be defined as follows: 
Apprentice electrician means an individual other than an electrical contractor, master electrician, or electrical journeyman, who is engaged in learning about and assisting in the installation or alteration of electrical wiring and equipment under the direct personal supervision of an electrical journeyman or master electrician. 
Board means City of Warren Electrical Examining and Appeals Board. 
Department means City of Warren Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering. 
Electrical equipment means all electrical devices, in connection with the generation, distribution, communication, and utilization of electrical energy, within or on a building, residence, structure, or properties including fire alarm and sign devices. 
Electrical contractor means a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing, or maintaining electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment. 
Electrical inspector means any person who has the necessary qualifications, training, experience, and technical knowledge to inspect all electrical apparatus for compliance with the codes and who shall be the agent or employee of the department designated by the building official as an electrical inspector. Inspectors shall be registered pursuant to Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, being MCL § 338.2301 et seq., and known as the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act. 
Electrical journeyman means a person other than an electrical contractor who, as his or her principal occupation, is engaged in the practical installation or alteration of electrical wiring. An electrical contractor or master electrician may also be an electrical journeyman. 
Electric sign means fixed, stationary, or portable self-contained, electrically illuminated equipment that has words or symbols designed to convey information or attract attention. The term includes outline lighting. Electric sign does not include those signs that are indoor or outdoor portable applications or recognized holiday residential signs listed with a recognized electrical testing laboratory and that use a cord cap-110 volt plug as the electrical energizing attachment method. 
Electrical wiring means all wiring, generating equipment, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with the generation, distribution, communication, and utilization of electrical energy, within or on a building, residence, structure, or properties, and including service entrance wiring as defined by the code. 
Fire alarm contractor means a person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing, or maintaining wiring, devices, appliances or equipment of a fire alarm system. 
Fire alarm specialty apprentice technician means an individual other than a fire alarm contractor or a fire alarm specialty technician who is engaged in learning about and assisting in the installation or alteration of fire alarm system wiring and equipment under the direct personal supervision of a fire alarm specialty technician. 
Fire alarm specialty licensure means licensure as a fire alarm contractor or a fire alarm specialty or apprentice technician. 
Fire alarm specialty technician means a person other than a fire alarm contractor who, as his or her principal occupation, is engaged in the practical installation or alteration of fire alarm system wiring. 
Fire alarm system means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire, or by-products of fire, installed within a building or structure. Fire alarm system does not include a single station smoke detector. 
Job-site means the immediate work area within the property lines of a single construction project, alteration project or maintenance project where electrical construction or alteration of electrical wiring is in progress. 
Master electrician means a person having the necessary qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to supervise the installation of electrical wiring and equipment in accordance with the standard rules and regulations governing that work. 
Minor repair work means electrical work such as repairing or replacing of snap switches, fuses, lamp sockets or receptacles; replacement of fixtures; repairing or taping bare connections; replacing lamps or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles; provided the total value does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Municipality means a city, village or township. 
Outline lighting means an arrangement of incandescent lamps or electric discharge tubing which is an integral part of an electrical sign that outlines certain features, such as the shape of a building or the decoration of a window. 
Owner means any natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation and any legal successor. In all proceedings, actions or prosecution hereunder, in which a corporation is the owner of any land, building, structure or part thereof, any of its officers, directors or persons in control or management thereof, as well as, the corporation, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
Sign specialist means a person who, as his or her principal occupation, is engaged in the installation, alteration or repair of electric signs. 
Sign specialty contractor means a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of manufacturing, installing, maintaining, connecting, or repairing electric sign wiring or devices, including wiring that is directly related to electric signs and is electrically dedicated as a sign circuit beginning at the load side of the sign circuit disconnect. 
Sign specialty licensure means licensure as a sign specialist or sign specialty contractor. 
Related sign wiring: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subdivisions (1), (2), and (3) that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at the load-side terminals of a disconnecting means located in the vicinity of the electric sign involved but does not include the installation of the disconnecting means, complete with line-side connections. 
(2)  In the case of electric sign installations having sign transformers installed physically apart from the electric sign, that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at the load-side terminals of a disconnecting means located in the vicinity of the electric sign involved but does not include the installation of the disconnecting means, complete with line-side connections. 
(3)  In the case of the free standing electric sign installations supplied through underground circuit conductors, that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at a wiring termination point adjacent to, within or immediately above the permanent base for the electric sign but does not include, if the base of the sign structure is suitable for use as a raceway, the installation of bushing, complete with free-length circuit conductors extending through to accommodate the connection of the related wiring within the sign structure raceway. 
(4)  In the case of electric signs specifically designed to be connected directly to the building wiring raceway or cable supply, that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at the point where the free-length circuit conductors extend through the building wiring raceway or cable at the specifically designed supply location for the electric sign involved but does not include the installation of the building wiring raceway or cable system to the specifically designated point of supply for the electric sign involved, complete with free-length circuit conductors extending through the building wiring raceway or cable to accommodate the connection of the related wiring. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Secs. 9-38—9-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL RULES 
 
Sec. 9-41. - Electrical inspectors. 
The city shall appoint (an) electrical inspector(s), who shall be licensed as a master electrician. The electrical inspector shall be the code official authorized to inspect all electrical installations for compliance with the provisions of this article. The electrical inspector shall register under Public Act 54 of 1986 within thirty (30) days of employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-42. - Right of access to buildings. 
Subject to the constitution and the laws of the state, the electrical inspector(s) and/or his or her deputy shall be granted access during daytime business hours to enter any building in the discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making an inspection or test the installation of electrical wiring, electrical devices and/or electrical materials contained therein. In cases of emergency, the inspector shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical supply and to disconnect any wire where the inspector determines the electrical current is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-43. - Approved materials. 
It shall be unlawful to install or use any electrical device, apparatus, or equipment designed for attachment to, or installation on any electrical circuit or system for heat, light, power, or fire alarm system that is not of good design and construction and safe and adequate for its intended use. The electrical inspector(s) shall have power to disapprove the use or installation of devices not fulfilling these requirements. Devices, apparatus and equipment listed by such generally recognized authorities as United States Bureau of Standards, or by qualified electrical testing laboratories such as: Electrical Testing Laboratories (ETL), Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) may be given the approval of the electrical inspector(s) unless explicitly disapproved by said authority for reasons of faulty design or poor construction involving danger to persons and/or property. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-44. - Stop work order; unlawful continuance. 
Upon notice from the code official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be granted to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which the work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue to work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this section and subject to enforcement action under section 9-1 of the Code and/or permit revocation. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-45. - Interference, withholding information, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any occupant or owner of property or premises where any electrical equipment is used or is to be used, to refuse to allow, to prevent, or to interfere with in any way the discharge of duties established hereunder, or to withhold or refuse to divulge, on request of the code official, the name of the person responsible for performing such work. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Secs. 9-46—9-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 9-61. - Electrical permit required. 
A person, shall not install, alter, maintain, service, or repair or allow the installation, alteration, maintenance service or repair of electrical equipment in or on any building, structure, or part thereof, or on any premises unless a permit is first obtained pursuant to the electrical code as adopted herein. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-62. - Additional work; new permit required. 
After a permit has been issued, and the fee deposited, no additional work shall be included. In cases in which additional work is to be installed, a new permit shall be secured and the required fee paid. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-63. - Additional permits. 
Additional permits shall be required as follows: 
(1)  If more than one (1) inspection is necessary on any violation notice; 
(2)  For special inspections required for the investigation of any ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-64. - Record and review. 
The department shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed under the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-65. - False information prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to present any false information in making application for any permit from the division of buildings and safety engineering, or for any person to use the name of another person in order to secure an electrical permit unless regularly employed by and directly authorized by the holder of such electrical contractor's license. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-66. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued in violation of the laws of the state, the city charter, this article, or any other ordinance, or as a result of false information, or willful misrepresentation of conditions, shall be subject to revocation at the direction of the director of buildings and safety engineering. The person holding the permit shall be notified to appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked, and failure to appear shall be deemed sufficient cause to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-67. - Failure to pass inspection; notice; corrections 
(a)  If any electrical equipment or wiring does not pass an inspection, the permit holder shall be notified in writing of the reasons for failure to pass such inspection. 
(b)  Any electrical equipment or wiring that does not pass inspection shall be corrected within a reasonable length of time, not to exceed ten (10) days. 
(c)  When such corrections have been made, that person shall notify the division of buildings and safety engineering at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time re-inspection is desired. 
(d)  Any permit holder failing to make the correction within the time specified herein shall be denied any further permits to do electrical work within the city until such corrections are made. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 9-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-570, § 1, adopted June 26, 2001, repealed § 9-68, which pertained to appeal of inspection determination. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 9-69. - Re-inspection. 
The electrical inspector(s) may, when specifically authorized by state law or separate municipal ordinance, make periodic re-inspections of all electrical wiring, equipment and materials, whether presently installed or hereafter installed, within any building located in the city. When the installation of any such wiring, equipment or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person, firm or corporation owning, using or operating the same shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to correct the dangerous or unsafe condition. All repair work shall be completed within fifteen (15) days, or if provided by the electrical inspector within a longer period as specified in the notice. The electrical inspector(s) is hereby authorized to disconnect or order, in writing, the discontinuance of electrical service to any wiring, equipment or material found to be defectively installed until the installation of such wiring, equipment or material has been made safe as directed by the electrical inspector(s). 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Secs. 9-70—9-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LICENSING REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 9-76. - License to install or alter wiring required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation or trade of master, journeyman or apprentice electrician in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical wiring equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat, power or medical purposes in or on any building or structure within the City of Warren without having first obtained a license and registration. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-77. - Specialty license exception. 
A person holding a valid electrical contractor's license, master electrician's license, electrical journeyman's license or apprentice electrician's registration shall not be required to hold any specialty licenses in order to perform specialty installations. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-78. - Contractors. 
The City of Warren shall permit electrical, fire and sign contractors lawfully licensed within the State of Michigan to install, alter or repair electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat, power or fire alarm system purposes within the corporate limits of the City of Warren upon proof of licensure and payment of registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-79. - Unlawful contracting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of electrical contractor, fire alarm contractor or sign specialty contractor and install, alter or repair electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat, power or fire alarm system in or about any building or structure located within the City of Warren without first having procured the appropriate contractor's license and registration. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-80. - Unlawful advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to use any words in any sign, display, business form or document, or advertising medium which indicates, or tends to indicate, that a person is qualified to supervise, install, repair, replace, remove, or service any electrical equipment which requires a permit or inspection hereunder from the division of buildings and safety engineering, unless such is published or displayed by authority of a licensed electrical, fire alarm, or sign specialty contractor, whose licensed name and license number is included in such media, and such shall be given prominence at least equal to that of the advertiser's name. 
(Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-570, § 2, adopted June 26, 2001, repealed §§ 9-80—9-104. Section 3 of said ordinance added provisions designated as §§ 9-76—9-85, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of Ord. No. 80-570.  
Sec. 9-81. - Apprentice supervision. 
All electrical work done by apprentice electricians shall be performed under the direct personal supervision of a journeyman or master electrician who shall be on the premises at all times when such apprentice electricians are performing such work. 
(Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-82. - Registration fees. 
The fees for registration of an electrical contractor, fire alarm contractor, sign specialty contractor, master electrician, journeyman electrician, fire alarm contractor, sign specialty contractor, master electrician, journeyman electrician, fire alarm specialty technician, and sign specialist shall be prescribed by section 9-120, "Electrical fee schedule." 
(Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-83. - Registration expiration and renewal. 
Registrations shall expire on December 31 of each year, and shall be renewed upon application, together with payment of the required fee. After March 1st, contractor, master, journeyman, technician and specialist registration not renewed shall be considered cancelled and may not be renewed except upon approval of the director of buildings and safety engineering. 
(Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-84. - Recognized licenses local and reciprocal. 
No license shall be recognized by the city unless such license is issued by the state or a municipality that has adopted an ordinance under Section 6, of the Electrical Administrative Act 217; or the Michigan Electrical Administrative Board. 
(Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Sec. 9-85. - Investigation, denial, suspension or revocation of registration. 
(a)  Investigation. The City of Warren, Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering shall have the authority to investigate the activities of a person licensed or registered under this ordinance or Public Act 217 which are related to the person's license or registration as an electrical, fire alarm, or sign contractor; master, or journeyman electrician; fire alarm specialty technician; sign specialist; electrician apprentice, or fire alarm specialty apprentice technician. The department may hold hearings and shall report its findings to the state administrative electrical board. 
(b)  Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. The issuance of a registration may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud or deceit in obtaining license or registration under the ordinance or act. 
(2)  The willful violation of a code. 
(3)  False advertising. 
(4)  A violation of this ordinance or rules; or public Act 217, except in the case of a minor violation. 
(5)  Failure to produce the identification card for a license or registration and at least one (1) piece of identification containing the individual's picture when requested by the electrical inspector. 
(6)  Recommendation by the Michigan Electrical Administrative Board or any other municipal board to suspend or revoke a registration issued by the City of Warren. 
(c)  Sanctions. Any of the following sanctions may be imposed upon a finding that there are grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation or a registration. 
(1)  Suspension of the registration issued under this ordinance. 
(2)  Revocation of the registration issued under this ordinance. 
(3)  Restitution. If restitution is required to be made by a registrant under this section, the registration may be suspended or revoked until the restitution is made. 
(4)  If it is determined that the registrant committed three (3) violations of this ordinance within a period of three (3) years, the registration shall be revoked and the city may permanently deny the person's reapplication for a registration of the class revoked. 
(Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01)  
Secs. 9-86—9-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 9-111—9-119. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-570, § 2, adopted June 26, 2001, repealed §§ 9-111—9-114, which pertained to the electrical examining and appeal board. See the Code Comparative Table.  
DIVISION 6. - PERMIT FEES 
 
Sec. 9-120. - Fee schedule. 
Fees for the issuance of electrical wiring and equipment permits, contractor registration and inspections required under this article shall be shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 80-570, § 3, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 80-607, § 2, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 9-121. - Refunds. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be canceled by the building official on the written request from the holder of such permit, provided such request is made within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit and prior to any inspection or other action taken under the permit, including any exercise of privileges granted by the permit. In the event any permit is canceled as provided above, the city treasurer, upon notification in writing from the building official, shall make a refund of eighty (80) percent of all fees paid in connection with the issuance of such unused permit. The city treasurer shall retain a minimum of thirty dollars ($30.00) of the fees paid on any canceled permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-560, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 80-607, § 2, 4-27-04)  
Secs. 9-122—9-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-573, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2001, amended Art. IV, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 9-126, 9-127. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Basic principles for plumbing systems for mobile homes, § 20-48; water and sewers, Ch. 41. 
State Law reference— Regulation of plumbing and licensing of plumbers, MCL 338.901 et seq.; local rules and regulations, MCL 338.904. 
 
Sec. 9-126. - Adoption of Michigan Plumbing Code. 
The Michigan Plumbing Code as found in Part 7 of the Department of Consumer and Industry Services Construction Code as adopted by the State of Michigan and which incorporates the International Plumbing Code, as amended and filed with Secretary of State, is hereby adopted by reference together with any and all amendments and is made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. The Code Official authorized by ordinance shall administer and enforce the code. The code is available for purchase and inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-573, § 1, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 9-127. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
The following provisions of the Michigan Plumbing Code adopted by reference are hereby revised to read as follows: 
(a)  Section P-101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Michigan Plumbing Code hereinafter referred to as "the code". 
(b)  Section P-113.2. Authorization of fee schedule. The permit fees for all plumbing permits and inspections shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by city council. 
(c)  Section 106.5.3. Fee refunds. Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be canceled by the building official on the written request from the holder of such permit, provided such request is made within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit and prior to any inspection or other action taken under the permit, including any exercise of privileges granted by the permit. In the event any permit is canceled as provided above, the city treasurer, upon notification in writing from the building official, shall make a refund of eighty (80) percent of all fees paid in connection with the issuance of such unused permit. The city treasurer shall retain a minimum of thirty dollars ($30.00) of the fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 80-573, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 80-607, § 3, 4-27-04)  
Secs. 9-128—9-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-574, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2001, amended Art. V, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 9-141, 9-142. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 9-141. - Adoption of Michigan Mechanical Code. 
The Michigan Mechanical Code as found in Part 9A of the Department of Consumer and Industry Services Construction Code as adopted by the State of Michigan and which incorporates the International Mechanical Code, as amended and filed with Secretary of State, is hereby adopted by reference together with any and all amendments and is made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. The code official authorized by ordinance shall administer and enforce the code. The code is available for purchase and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-574, § 1, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 9-142. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
That the following provisions of the Michigan Mechanical Code adopted by reference are hereby revised to read as follows: 
(a)  Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Michigan Mechanical Code hereinafter referred to as "the code". 
(b)  Section 106.5. Authorization of fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical permits and inspections shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by city council. 
(c)  Section 106.5.3. Fee refunds. Any permit issued under the provisions of this Article may be canceled by the building official on the written request from the holder of such permit, provided such request is made within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit and prior to any inspection or other action taken under the permit, including any exercise of privileges granted by the permit. In the event any permit is canceled as provided above, the city treasurer, upon notification in writing from the building official, shall make a refund of eighty (80) percent of all fees paid in connection with the issuance of such unused permit. The city treasurer shall retain a minimum of thirty dollars ($30.00) of the fees paid on any canceled permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-574, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 80-607, § 4, 4-27-04)  
Secs. 9-143—9-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CONDEMNATION AND ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR PREMISES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-625, § 2, adopted March 14, 2006, repealed Art. VI, in its entirety, which pertained to the property maintenance code. Section 4 of said ordinance, enacted provisions designated as a new Art. VI to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - CONDEMNATION 
 
Sec. 9-155. - Definitions. 
Notwithstanding section 9-37, for the purpose of this article, the following words have the meanings described below: 
Dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit means any house, building, structure, tent, shelter, trailer or vehicle, or portion thereof, (except railroad cars, on tracks or rights-of-way) which is occupied in whole or part as the home, residence, living or sleeping place of one (1) or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. Dwelling, includes, but is not limited to, a mobile home as defined in section 20-1 of this Code. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. Owner includes, but is not limited to, the owner of a mobile home and the owner of the mobile home park, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 80-756, § 1, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-156. - Grounds. 
Any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, shall be condemned and posted as unfit for human habitation by the code official, health officer or designated representative if the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, has any of the following defects or conditions: 
(1)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city; 
(2)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or unsanitary to the health, safety or general welfare of those living therein; 
(3)  Those having light, air or sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of any occupant; 
(4)  Those having inadequate means of egress as required by law; 
(5)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and cause bodily injury. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 2, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-157. - Placarding. 
(a)  Whenever a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit has been condemned in accordance with section 9-159, the code official, health officer or designated representative shall post, in a conspicuous place or places, a placard or placards bearing the following words: "Condemned As Unfit For Human Habitation." 
(b)  The code official, health officer or designated representative is the only person authorized to remove a condemnation placard or notice to vacate issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 2, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-158. - Vacating. 
Whenever it shall be found by the code official, health officer or designated representative that a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is unfit for human habitation the official shall order the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit vacated. A copy of the order shall be posted on the front of the dwelling at least ten (10) days before it shall be effective, unless the situation requires immediate action, in which case the effective time of the order shall be that which the code official, health officer or designated representative determines is reasonable and proper. A copy of the order shall be served in accordance with section 9-160. The dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit ordered vacated shall not again be occupied until a written statement is secured from the code official, health officer or designated representative stating that the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit has been made to comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 2, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-159. - Notice of condemnation. 
Whenever the code official, health officer or designated representative determines that a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is unfit for human habitation and posts it condemned, the code official, health officer or designated representative shall provide written notice of condemnation to the owner, agent, or occupant. For mobile homes, written notice of condemnation shall be provided to the owner of the mobile home, owner of the mobile home park, agent, or occupant. The notice of condemnation shall include the address of the property, the date of the inspection, the name of the inspector, the grounds for the determination as unfit for human habitation and a complete statement of the rights of the occupant or owner to a hearing before the hearing officer defined in section 9-169 and the procedure to request a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 2, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-160. - Service of notice of condemnation. 
The notice of condemnation shall be in writing and served upon the owner, agent, or occupant as the case may require. For mobile homes, written notice of condemnation shall be provided to the owner of mobile home, owner of the mobile home park, agent, or occupant as the case may require. Notice is properly served upon the owner (includes the owner of mobile home and the owner of mobile home park), agent, or occupant if served personally or in lieu of personal service, the notice may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner (includes owner of the mobile home and owner of the mobile home park) or occupant at the address shown on the tax records or title information from the secretary of state, if applicable. If service by certified mail is used, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit condemned. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 2, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-161. - Request for hearing. 
Any person affected by a notice of condemnation may have a hearing on the matter before the hearing officer defined in section 9-169 by filing a written petition with the hearing officer requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten (10) days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of the petition, the hearing officer shall set a time and place for hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show why the notice of condemnation should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be held not later than ten (10) days after the petition was filed, however, the hearing may be adjourned upon application of the petitioner and a showing of good cause. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 2, 5-9-17)  
Secs. 9-162—9-164. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR PREMISES 
 
Sec. 9-165. - Definition, dangerous building. 
Any building or structure, which has one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit does not conform to the fire code. 
(2)  A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood, or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirements of this article, the building code or other ordinance. 
(3)  A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached, dislodged or collapse and injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction. 
(5)  The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall or give way. 
(6)  The building, structure, or a part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, or flood; or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or other trespassers. 
(8)  A building or structure, including the adjoining grounds, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, arrangement, or is otherwise unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the code official, health officer or designated representative determine is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety, or general welfare of people living in the dwelling. 
(9)  A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(10)  A building or structure that remains unoccupied for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under Article 25 of the Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980, being MCL 339.2501 to 339.2515. For mobile homes, a building or structure that remains unoccupied for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent as permitted by law, the Mobile Home Commission Act, being MCL 125.2301 et seq., its code, and/or rules. For purposes of this subdivision, "building or structure" includes, but is not limited to a commercial building or structure. This subdivision does not apply to either of the following: 
a.  A commercial or industrial building or structure that has remained unoccupied for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days is not a dangerous structure if all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  The owner or agent notifies the department of property maintenance, that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period in excess of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The notice shall be given by the owner or agent not more than thirty (30) days after the building structure becomes unoccupied; and 
2.  The building, structure and adjoining grounds are maintained in accordance with this article, the Michigan Construction Code and all other applicable city ordinances, state statutes and regulations; and 
3.  Even if a building or structure is listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under Article 25 of the Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980, being MCL 339.2501 to 339.2515, the property shall be maintained so that there are no Warren Code of Ordinance violations whatsoever, including the registration requirement herein. For mobile homes, even if a building or structure is listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent as permitted by law or the Mobile Home Commission Act ("Act"), being MCL 125.2301 et seq., its code, and/or rules, the property shall be maintained so that there are no Warren Code of Ordinances violations including any registration or permit required. 
b.  A dwelling unit that has remained unoccupied for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days is not a dangerous structure if all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  The owner or agent of a vacant dwelling unit that remains unoccupied for a period in excess of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days has obtained a vacancy permit pursuant to chapter 28, article III. The vacancy permit shall be obtained by the owner or agent not more than thirty (30) days after the building structure becomes unoccupied; and 
2.  The building, structure and adjoining grounds are maintained in accordance with this article, the Michigan Construction Code and all other applicable city ordinances, state statutes and regulations; and 
3.  Even if a building or structure is listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under Article 25 of the Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980, being MCL 339.2501 to 339.2515, the property shall be maintained so that there are no Warren Code of Ordinance violations whatsoever, including any registration or permit required. For mobile homes, even if a building or structure is listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent as permitted by law or the Mobile Home Commission Act ("Act"), being MCL 125.2301 et seq., its code, and/or rules, the property shall be maintained so that there are no Warren Code of Ordinances violations including any registration or permit required. 
c.  A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or more shall not be a dangerous building if the owner has registered the secondary dwelling with the department of property maintenance not more than thirty (30) days after the dwelling becomes unoccupied; and the dwelling unit and adjoining grounds are maintained in accordance with all applicable city ordinances, state statutes and regulations. As used in this subparagraph, "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling such as a vacation home, hunting cabin, or summer home that is occupied by the owner or a member of the owner's family during part of a year. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord No. 80-645, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 80-705, § 1, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-166. - Definition, dangerous premises. 
Any premise which has any or all of the following defects shall be deemed a "dangerous premise": 
(1)  An accumulation of refuse, junk or debris to the extent that same has become a nesting place for rats or other rodents or is likely to cause sickness or disease to the public or is in any way detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(2)  An uncontrollable growth of noxious weeds or any accumulation of water or any other substance which injure the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-167. - Dangerous building, structure, premise, nuisance, abatement. 
Wherever any building, structure or premise is found to be dangerous as defined by section 9-165 or section 9-166, such dangerous building, structure or premise is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be abated. The abatement of nuisances may be by repair, maintenance or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-168. - Notice of dangerous building, structure or premise. 
(a)  The code official, health officer or designated representative shall issue a written notice of dangerous building, structure or premise to the owner, occupant or other party in interest. The notice of dangerous building, structure or premises shall include the date of inspection, the name of the inspection, the name of the inspector, the condition of the building, structure or premises, the repairs necessary to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance shall be abated. 
(b)  The notice shall be served personally; or in lieu of personal service may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner, occupant or other party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. For mobile homes, notice shall be served personally; or in lieu of personal service notice may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the mobile home, owner of the mobile home park, occupant, or other party in interest at the address shown on tax records or owner listed on the mobile home title filed with the Secretary of State, if available. If service by certified mail is used, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(c)  The notice shall specify the time and place of hearing to determine whether the building, structure or premise is dangerous within the definition of section 9-165 or section 9-166. The person to whom notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure demolished, made safe or the premise properly maintained. The notice shall be served at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-169. - Hearing officer. 
The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at the mayor's pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in construction and housing matters such as an engineer, architect, building contractor or inspector. A present employee of the city shall not be appointed as hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-170. - Hearing. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall take the testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property, and any interested party. Not more than five (5) days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe, or the premise be properly maintained. 
(b)  If the hearing officer determines that the building, structure or premise should be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent, or lessee to comply with the order. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-171. - Failure to appear or to comply. 
If the owner, occupant or other party in interest fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued by the hearing officer, the report and findings of the hearing officer together with a copy of the order shall be filed with the city council not more than five (5) days after noncompliance. In addition, the hearing officer shall request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order shall be served on the owner, occupant or other party in interest. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-705, § 2, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 80-732, § 1, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-172. - Public appeal hearing. 
Upon the failure to comply with the order issued by the hearing officer, the city council shall have a date for an appeal hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer scheduled not less than thirty (30) days after the initial hearing. The notice of appeal hearing shall state the time and place for the appeal hearing and be served on the appellant in the same manner provided by section 9-168. At the hearing the owner, occupant or other party in interest shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-705, § 3, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 80-732, § 1, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-173. - Decision of the city council. 
(a)  The city council shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order of the hearing officer. If the order is approved or modified, the city council shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, occupant, or other party in interest shall comply with the order within sixty (60) days after the date of the appeal hearing. 
(b)  In the case of an order of demolition, the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the hearing if the city council determines both of the following: 
(1)  The building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause; and 
(2)  The cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure. If the estimated cost of repair exceeds the state equalized value of the building or structure to be repaired, a rebuttable presumption that the building or structure requires immediate demolition exists. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-705, § 4, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 80-732, § 1, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 9-174. - Appeal of decision of the city council. 
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court pursuant to MCL 125.542 of the state housing code, by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within twenty (20) days from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-705, § 5, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 80-732, § 1, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17) 
State Law reference— Housing Law of Michigan Act, MCL 125.542.  
Sec. 9-175. - Reimbursement of costs. 
(a)  The cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or of maintaining the grounds, incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article shall be reimbursed to the city, by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last tax assessment records and/or records of the Secretary of State, where applicable. 
(b)  The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last tax assessment records and/or records of the Secretary of State, where applicable, shall be notified by the assessor or appropriate city department of the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within thirty (30) days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city shall have a lien on the property for all costs incurred to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated, where applicable, in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, P.A. No. 206 of 1893, being MCL 211.1 to 211.157. 
(c)  In addition to other remedies available, the city authorizes its legal department to bring an action against the owner of the building, structure or premise for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the premise or adjoining grounds. The judgment obtained may be enforced against the assets of the owner other than the building, structure or premise. The city shall have a lien for the amount of the judgment obtained against the owner's interest in all real property located in this state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building, structure or premise against whom judgment is obtained. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded. 
(Ord. No. 80-625, § 3, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 80-756, § 3, 5-9-17)  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-756, § 4, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed division 3, §§ 9-176—9-199, which pertained to vacancy permits for dwelling units and derived from Ord. No. 80-645, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 80-705, § 6, 7-10-12. 
 
Secs. 9-176—9-199. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-732, § 3, adopted September 8, 2015, repealed §§ 9-200—9-205, which pertained to nuisance abatement board of appeals and derived from Ord. No. 80-705, § 7, adopted July 10, 2012. 
State Law reference— Housing Law of Michigan Act, MCL 125.521c. 
 
Secs. 9-200—9-315. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENTIAL BUILDERS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Residential builders, MCL 339.2401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-316. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Registrant means any person registered under the provisions of this article. 
Residential builder means any person engaged in the construction of residential structures or a combination of residential and commercial structures who, for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, valuable consideration or other compensation, other than wages, undertakes with another or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake with another for the erection, construction, replacement, repair, alteration or any addition to, subtraction from, improvement, movement of, wrecking of or demolition of, a residential structure or combination of residential and commercial structure, or any person who erects a residential structure or combination of residential and commercial structure except for his own use and occupancy on his or her property, and who is licensed as such pursuant to article 24 of Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2401 et seq.). 
Residential maintenance and alteration contractor means any person who, for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, valuable consideration or other compensation, other than wages, undertakes with another for the repair, alteration or any addition to, subtraction from, improvement of, movement of, wrecking of or demolition of a residential structure or combination of residential and commercial structure, or building of a garage, or laying of concrete on residential property, except for his own use and occupancy, and who is licensed as such pursuant to article 24 of Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2401 et seq.). 
(Code 1967, § 6-402) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 9-317. - Registration certificate required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of or to act in the capacity of a residential builder and/or residential maintenance and alteration contractor within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a registration certificate from the director of buildings and safety engineering. 
(b)  No building registration certificate shall be issued to any person unless such person is licensed as a residential builder and/or residential maintenance and alteration contractor by the state. 
(c)  In order to safeguard and to protect present and future homeowners, the division of buildings and safety engineering is to inform residents upon request whether or not a certain builder or contractor has a valid license and is registered with the division. 
(Code 1967, § 6-401; Ord. No. 80-290, § 1, 7-26-83)  
Sec. 9-318. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  An authorized representative of the United States government, this state, or a county, township, city, village, or other political subdivision of this state; 
(2)  An owner of property, with reference to a structure on the property for the owner's own use and occupancy; 
(3)  An owner of rental property, with reference to the maintenance and alteration of that rental property; 
(4)  An officer of a court acting within the terms of the officer's office; 
(5)  A person other than the salesperson who engages solely in the business of performing work and services under contract with a residential builder or a residential maintenance and alteration contractor licensed under this article; 
(6)  A person working on one (1) undertaking or project by one (1) or more contracts, the aggregate contract price for which labor, material, and any other item is less than six hundred dollars ($600.00). This exemption does not apply if the work of a construction is only a part of a larger or major operation, whether undertaken by the same or a different residential builder or residential maintenance and alteration contractor, or in which a division of the operation is made in contracts of amounts less than six hundred dollars ($600.00), to evade this article; 
(7)  An electrical contractor who is licensed as such. This exemption applies only to the electrical installation, electrical maintenance, or electrical repair work performed by the electrical contractor; 
(8)  A plumbing contractor licensed as such. 
(Code 1967, § 6-403) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 339.2403.  
Sec. 9-319. - Builder's registration commission. 
There is hereby created in the city a builder's registration commission which shall consist of the director of buildings and safety engineering, who shall serve as its chairperson, the city attorney and the city assessor. 
(Code 1967, § 6-404) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-91 et seq. 
State Law reference— Residential builders' and maintenance and alteration contractors' bond, MCL 339.2402.  
Sec. 9-320. - Application for registration. 
Applicants for registration under this article shall file a written sworn application on forms furnished by the director of buildings and safety engineering, signed by the applicant, if an individual; by all partners, if a partnership; by all associates, if an association; and by the president, if a corporation. Such application shall be filed with the director of buildings and safety engineering and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The full name and permanent address of the applicant, both business and residence; 
(2)  Set forth the period of time, if any, during which the applicant has been engaged in the business; 
(3)  A description of the type of business entity, i.e., corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship; 
(4)  Names, home addresses and titles of all corporation officers, partners or sole owners; 
(5)  Applicant's state license, from which a copy may be made for the commission's records, provided that if the applicant has applied to the state for his or her license, but has not yet received same, applicant may obtain a certificate hereunder on condition that the license be obtained within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days; 
(6)  Such other information as to the identity or character of the applicant, or of any of the officers or members of any such applicant, as the director of buildings and safety engineering may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(Code 1967, § 6-405)  
Sec. 9-321. - Registration certificate; fees, term. 
(a)  The director of buildings and safety engineering, upon proper application, may issue a residential builder's registration certificate to any applicant who shall qualify therefor, which shall authorize the registrant to engage in the business of or to act in the capacity of a residential builder within the corporate limits of the city. The director of buildings and safety engineering may issue a residential maintenance and alteration contractor's certificate to any applicant who shall qualify therefor, according to his or her qualifications with respect to any one (1) or more of the following crafts and trades: carpentry, concrete work, garage building, swimming pools, floor laying, lathing, excavation and sewer installation, insulation work, plastering, roofing and siding, masonry work, sheet metal work, tile and marble work, house moving and raising and house wrecking. Such registration certificate when issued shall specify the particular crafts and trades for which the registrant has qualified. The builder's registration commission shall not require any applicant to pay more than one (1) registration fee, regardless of the number of crafts and trades for which he or she is registered. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a specialty contractor from taking and executing a contract involving the use of two (2) or more crafts or trades if the performance of the work in the crafts or trades other than in which he or she is registered is incidental and supplemental to the performance of work in the craft for which the specialty contractor is registered. 
(b)  If application for a registration certificate is made by any person whose certificate has been denied, suspended or revoked as a result of disciplinary action for violation of any of the provisions of this article or of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the builder's registration commission may require as a condition precedent to the issuance of a registration certificate to such applicant or the removal of suspension, that such applicant file or have on file with the commission a bond issued by an admitted surety insurer or cash in a sum to be fixed by the commission, based upon the magnitude of the operations of the applicant, not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in which the city shall appear as the insured. If the commission shall require the filing of such bond or the posting of such cash deposit, every person injured by the unlawful acts or omissions of such applicant may bring an action in a proper court on the bond or a claim against the cash deposit for the amount of the damage he or she suffered as a result thereof to the extent covered by the bond or cash deposit. The claim of any employee of the applicant for wages shall be a preferred claim against any bond or cash deposit required by order of the commission. 
(c)  The registration fee for a residential builder's certificate and the registration fee for residential maintenance and alteration contractor shall be as set forth in section 18-18, which fees shall be paid to the city treasurer. Each certificate shall be issued for a period of one (1) year; provided, however, that all certificates shall be renewable on March first of each year. All applications for renewal of certificates shall be made in proper form, accompanied with the proper fee, before the date of expiration, and proper submission of the renewal application shall automatically grant the applicant permission to operate pending the actual issuance or refusal of renewal certificates. Every registrant shall report to the director of buildings and safety engineering all changes of members and addresses of persons registered under this article within thirty (30) days after same shall occur. 
(Code 1967, § 6-406)  
Sec. 9-322. - Refusal to issue or renew registration, suspension, revocation, causes; notice, hearing, review. 
(a)  The builder's registration commission may, upon its motion, and may, upon the written verified complaint of any person, investigate the actions of any residential builder and/or residential maintenance and alteration contractor or any person who shall assume to act in such capacity within the city, and shall have the power to refuse to issue or to renew, or to suspend or to revoke, any certificate issued under the provisions of this article at any time. The following causes shall be grounds upon which the commission shall have the power to refuse to issue, renew, or suspend or revoke any certificate issued under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Suspension or revocation of registrant's residential builder's or residential maintenance and alteration contractor's license issued by the state, or failure to obtain or to renew such license; 
(2)  Abandonment without legal excuse of any construction project or operation engaged in or undertaken by the registrant or applicant; 
(3)  Diversion of funds or property received for prosecution or completion of a specific construction project or operation, or for a specified purpose in the prosecution or completion of any construction project or operation, and their application or use for any other construction project or operation, obligation or purpose; 
(4)  Failure to account for or to remit any money coming into registrant's or applicant's possession which belongs to others; 
(5)  Willful departure from or disregard of plans or specifications in any material respect and prejudicial to another, without consent of the owner or his or her duly authorized representative and without the consent of the person entitled to have the particular construction project or operation completed in accordance with such plans and specifications; 
(6)  Willful or deliberate disregard and violation of the building or other ordinances or regulations of the city or the building laws of the state; 
(7)  Misrepresentation of a material fact by an applicant in obtaining a registration certificate; 
(8)  Making any substantial misrepresentation, or making any false promise of a character likely to influence, persuade or induce; 
(9)  Advertising in any manner whatsoever that said residential builder or residential maintenance and/or alteration contractor is registered under this article; 
(10)  Changing business location without notification to the director of buildings and safety engineering within thirty (30) days from the date of change; 
(11)  Any conduct, whether of the same or of a different character than hereinbefore specified, which constitutes dishonesty or unfair dealings. 
(b)  The builder's registration commission may consider only those complaints which are presented to it in writing and verified under oath, and which are made within eighteen (18) months after completion, occupancy or purchase of a residential structure; provided, however, that complaints presented by the proper authorities charged with enforcement of the city ordinances, codes and regulations governing construction of residential structures shall be considered by the commission only if made by written verified complaint within sixty (60) days after completion, occupancy or purchase of the structure. 
(c)  The builder's registration commission shall, before refusing to issue or to renew, or before suspending or revoking, a registration certificate, and at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, notify in writing the applicant or registrant of any charge made, and shall furnish the applicant or registrant with a copy of the complaint and afford the applicant or registrant an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel in reference thereto. Such written notice shall be served by delivery of same personally to the applicant or registrant or by mailing the same by certified mail to the last known business address of such applicant or registrant. The hearing on such charges shall be at such time and place as the commission shall prescribe. The commission shall bring before it and take the testimony of any person in the same manner as in judicial proceedings in the civil courts. If the commission shall find that the applicant or registrant is guilty of any violation of any of the provisions of this article, the commission shall, as the case may be, refuse to issue or to renew the registration certificate of the applicant or registrant, or shall suspend or revoke same for such period of time as shall be determined by the commission. 
(d)  Any person whose registration certificate is suspended or revoked, or any person whose application for issuance or renewal of a registration certificate is refused, shall have the right of appeal to the city council, provide that a written request therefor is filed with the secretary or deputy secretary of the council within ten (10) days following such refusal, suspension or revocation by the builder's registration commission. The city council shall grant a hearing on such appeal and may affirm or reverse any action of the commission, and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1967, § 6-407)  
Sec. 9-323. - Administration and enforcement; rules and regulations, copies. 
It shall be the duty of the builder's registration commission to administer and provide for the enforcement of all the provisions of this article. The commission is hereby expressly vested with the power and authority to make and enforce any and all rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. Copies of all rules and regulations of the commission shall be sent to all registrants when the license or renewal thereof is delivered to the registrants. 
(Code 1967, § 6-408)  
Secs. 9-324—9-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MOVING BUILDINGS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference— Moving buildings or obstruction, MCL 247.188 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-341. - Compliance with building code and zoning ordinance required. 
The foundations and all other new portions or alterations to a building or structure being moved under this article shall be constructed in conformity with the terms and provisions of the building code, and the building or structure shall be located in a zone and placed upon a lot or parcel of land in conformity with the zoning ordinance; furthermore, all inspections required on a new building shall be made on any house which is to be moved onto any lot within the city prior to the time a permit is issued to move the house. 
(Code 1967, § 6-810)  
Sec. 9-342. - Water service. 
Every person who shall move any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall, prior to the moving of the building or structure, cause all public water to the building or structure to be shut off at either the curb stop or the corporation stop by notification to the division of water supply and causing the public water to such building or structure to be shut off. Such person shall, prior to the moving of the building or structure, cause all water pipes in the building or structure to be disconnected and removed to a depth of at least four (4) feet below the grade level of the land or premises from which the building or structure is to be moved, and shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the division of water supply any water meter located in the building and removed as a result of disconnecting of the water pipes pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 6-811) 
Cross reference— Water generally, § 41-21 et seq.  
Sec. 9-343. - Sewer service. 
Every person who shall move any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall, prior to the moving of the building or structure, cause all sewer pipes in the building or structure below the ground level to be disconnected and removed to a depth of at least four (4) feet below the grade level of the land or premises from which the building or structure is to be moved, and shall cap all sewer lines left upon the lands and premises with a concrete cap not less than one (1) foot in thickness. The concrete cap shall be installed in such manner as to prevent any sand or debris from entering into the sewer line remaining upon the land or premises after the removal of the building or structure therefrom, all of which shall be done as prescribed and approved by the division of buildings and safety engineering. 
(Code 1967, § 6-812) 
Cross reference— Sewers generally, § 41-56 et seq.  
Sec. 9-344. - Filling excavations, etc. 
Every person who shall move any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall, within seven (7) days after the removal of the building or structure, remove or cause to be removed all equipment and to clean all refuse, debris and waste of any kind or description from the land or premises from which the building or structure is moved, and shall within such period of time fill or cause to be filled any excavation left upon the land or premises after the removal of the building or structure unless such excavation shall be used for the erection of a new building commencing within thirty (30) days of the moving of the old building or structure. Any excavation required to be filled hereunder shall be filled even with the grade of such land or premises with earth, clay, sand or other solid filler. Until any excavation shall be filled or used for the erection of a new building in accordance with this section, any person who shall move any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall erect or cause to be erected substantial barricades at least three (3) feet in height around any such excavation. 
(Code 1967, § 6-813) 
Cross reference— Sewer dumping and regrading, Ch. 32.  
Sec. 9-345. - Routes, barricades, watchmen. 
The police commissioner shall specify the route over which the structure is to be moved and the time allowed for such moving. All reasonable effort shall be made in the moving so as to least obstruct any street, alley, boulevard or other public place, and if it becomes necessary to leave the structure thereon, or the moving is being made after sundown, there shall be erected around the structure and all equipment a safe and sufficient barrier amply provided with red lanterns or flares. Also, a watchman shall be on duty from sundown until sunrise. Further, the applicant shall submit to the director of buildings and safety engineering proof of notification to any utility company having wires or lines over or along the proposed route to be affected by such move and that arrangements have been made with such utility companies on or along the proposed route during the time of moving. 
(Code 1967, § 6-809)  
Secs. 9-346—9-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HOUSE MOVING BOARD[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-361. - Created. 
There is hereby created a house moving board of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 6-801)  
Sec. 9-362. - Composition. 
The house moving board shall consist of three (3) members: the director of buildings and safety engineering, who shall be chairperson; the director of buildings and safety engineering; and the planning director. Any member is hereby authorized to designate the assistant director in their respective departments to act for and in their stead on such board. 
(Code 1967, § 6-801)  
Sec. 9-363. - Meetings; purpose. 
The house moving board shall hold meetings, at the call of its chairperson, at such time and place as shall be designated by him or her for the purpose of considering applications for permits for the moving of houses or other residential structures as provided herein. Such meeting shall be called without an unreasonable delay after the application for such permit is made. 
(Code 1967, § 6-803)  
Sec. 9-364. - Procedure. 
The house moving board shall adopt rules and regulations relating to its procedure. 
(Code 1967, § 6-802)  
Secs. 9-365—9-375. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 9-376. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of moving houses or other residential structures into, upon or across any street, alley, boulevard or other public place without first having obtained a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 6-804)  
Sec. 9-377. - Application. 
Application for a license to engage in the business of moving houses or other residential structures shall be made to the city clerk on a form furnished for that purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 6-805)  
Sec. 9-378. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 6-805)  
Sec. 9-379. - Investigation; approval; revocation. 
The city clerk shall refer the application to the division of buildings and safety engineering for the purpose of investigating the training, experience and qualifications of the applicants to determine their fitness to take part in any of the operations of the business, and shall certify his or her recommendations to the city clerk who may issue, or refuse to issue, such license, or revoke any license issued, if he or she finds the party is not fit or qualified or is not a suitable person to engage in such operation. 
(Code 1967, § 6-805)  
Sec. 9-380. - Insurance. 
The applicant under this division shall file with the city clerk a public liability and property damage insurance policy, with form approved by the city attorney, naming the applicant and city as the assured and providing for the payment of any liability imposed by law upon such applicant and/or city to the extent of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for injury to or death of any one (1) person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injuries to or death of more than one (1) person, and for damages to property in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Code 1967, § 6-805)  
Secs. 9-381—9-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 9-401. - Required. 
No person shall move or cause to be moved any house or other residential structure of a larger size than fifty (50) square feet into, upon or across any street, alley, boulevard or other public place in the city without first having secured a permit therefor in the manner prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 6-806)  
Sec. 9-402. - Application. 
Application for a permit to move a house or other residential structure shall be made by a licensed mover to the division of buildings and safety engineering as provided in the building code of the city. If approved as complying with all the ordinances applicable thereto, and if the division finds that under the facts the applicant has sufficient knowledge, experience, equipment and facilities to properly conduct such moving, such application shall be forwarded to the board forthwith. 
(Code 1967, § 6-807)  
Sec. 9-403. - Investigation; action by council. 
(a)  The house moving board shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as it deems necessary in regard to any application for a permit to move a house or other residential structure. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to, a thorough physical inspection of the structure, consideration as to whether the structure complies with the building code, the housing code, the zoning ordinance, and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, and whether its relocation will be injurious to the contiguous property and surrounding neighborhood. In an effort to avoid undue damage or injury to trees along the designated route, the house moving board shall also obtain a report from the division of forestry to determine whether there are trees along the route that may be affected. After conducting the hearing as hereinbefore provided, the house moving board shall, within a period of seven (7) days, forward to the city council, through the mayor, its written recommendations as to whether a permit shall be issued. The city council, at its next regular meeting, shall consider the recommendation and shall either approve or disapprove the permit applied for. 
(b)  All houses or other residential structures which are proposed to be moved to a location within the city shall conform, insofar as is possible, to the general type, age, construction and architectural style of the majority of the residential buildings in the area adjacent to, and in the neighborhood of, the site upon which the house or residential structure is proposed to be moved. 
(Code 1967, § 6-808)  
Sec. 9-404. - Issuance; fee. 
Upon the approval of the application for a permit, the designation of the route and proof of notification of any utility company, the division of buildings and safety engineering, upon the payment by the applicant of a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), shall issue such permit. The permit shall designate the route to be used in such moving and the time in which such move shall be contemplated. 
(Code 1967, § 6-809)  
Secs. 9-405—9-415. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - WRECKING BUILDINGS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-416. - Water service. 
Every person who shall wreck any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall, prior to the completion of such wrecking operation, cause all public water to the building or structure to be shut off at either the curb stop or the corporation stop by notification to the division of water supply and causing the public water to the building or structure to be shut off as aforesaid by the employees of the division. Such person shall, prior to the completion of such wrecking operation, cause all water pipes in the building or structure to be disconnected and removed to a depth of at least four (4) feet below the grade level of the land or premises upon which the building or structure is being wrecked, and shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the division of water supply any water meter located in the building and removed as a result of disconnecting of the water pipes pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 6-820) 
Cross reference— Water generally, § 41-21 et seq.  
Sec. 9-417. - Sewer service. 
Every person who shall wreck any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall, prior to the completion of such wrecking operation, cause all sewer pipes in the building or structure below the ground level to be disconnected and removed to a depth of at least four (4) feet below the grade level of the land or premises upon which the building or structure is to be wrecked, and shall cap all sewer lines left upon the lands and premises with a concrete cap not less than one (1) foot in thickness. The concrete cap shall be installed in such manner as to prevent any sand or debris from entering into the sewer line remaining upon the land or premises after the completion of the building or structure thereon, all of which shall be done as prescribed and approved by the division of buildings and safety engineering. 
(Code 1967, § 6-821) 
Cross reference— Sewers generally, § 41-56 et seq.  
Sec. 9-418. - Refuse, debris, excavations. 
Every person who shall wreck any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall, within the period of time specified for the completion of the wrecking operation, remove or cause to be removed all equipment, refuse, debris and waste of any kind or description from the land or premises upon which the wrecking operation was carried on, and shall within such period of time fill or cause to be filled any excavation left upon the land or premises after the wrecking of the building or structure unless the excavation shall be used for the erection of a new building or structure within thirty (30) days from the actual completion of such wrecking operation. Any excavation required to be filled hereunder shall be filled even with the grade of such land or premises with earth, clay, sand or other solid filler. Until any excavation shall be filled or used for the erection of a new building in accordance with this section, any person who shall wreck any building or structure under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall erect or cause to be erected substantial barricades at least three (3) feet in height around any such excavation. 
(Code 1967, § 6-822) 
Cross reference— Garbage and rubbish generally, Ch. 16.  
Secs. 9-419—9-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 9-431. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of wrecking buildings or structures in the city without first having obtained a license as provided in this division and having complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 6-814)  
Sec. 9-432. - Application. 
Application for a license to engage in the business of wrecking buildings or structures shall be made to the city clerk on a form of application furnished for such purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 6-815)  
Sec. 9-433. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 6-815)  
Sec. 9-434. - Investigation; approval; revocation. 
The city clerk shall refer the application under this division to the director of buildings and safety engineering who shall make an investigation of the training, knowledge, experience and equipment of any applicant to determine the fitness of such applicant to engage in the business of wrecking buildings or structures. The director of buildings and safety engineering may approve the issuance of such license if he or she shall determine that the applicant is fit and qualified to engage in such operations or may disapprove the issuance of such license, or revoke any license issued, if he or she shall determine that the applicant is not fit or qualified to engage in such operation. Upon the refusal to issue a license or the revocation of a license after issuance, the applicant or former licensee shall have the right of appeal to the license appeal board. 
(Code 1967, § 6-815)  
Sec. 9-435. - Insurance. 
(a)  Before the issuance of any license under this division, the applicant shall file in the office of the city clerk the following: 
(1)  Due proof of the issuance of public liability and property damage insurance naming applicant and the city as the assured and providing for the payment of any liability imposed by law upon such applicant and/or the city arising from the wrecking of any buildings or structures under applicant's license from the city in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for injury or death to one (1) person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury or death to more than one (1) person and for damage to property in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(2)  Due proof that applicant is covered by workers' compensation insurance. 
(b)  Such policy or policies of insurance required in subsection (a)(1) shall expire concurrently with the applicant's license and new proof of such insurance and also of workers' compensation insurance shall be filed when making application for any renewal of the license. The policy or policies of insurance required in subsection (a) shall contain a provision for continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. Any insurance company whose policy has been filed pursuant to this section may file written notice in the office of the city clerk of its intention to terminate and cancel such insurance and give notice thereof to the licensee, whereupon the license of such licensee shall be deemed cancelled and null and void until such time as due proof of the issuance of a new policy or policies of insurance as required by this section shall have been filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 6-816)  
Secs. 9-436—9-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 9-451. - Required; prohibitions. 
No person shall engage in the business of wrecking any building or structure under the name of any other person licensed under the provisions of this article. No licensee under this article shall obtain a permit for the wrecking of any building or structure for the benefit or use of any person not licensed under this article, nor shall any licensee utilize or accept the services of any person not licensed under this article as an independent contractor in the wrecking of any building or structure. The wrecking of any building or structure shall be carried on only by the licensee or his or her employee to whom the permit for wrecking a building or structure has been issued and no person shall conduct or carry on wrecking operations under a permit issued to some other person. 
(Code 1967, § 6-817)  
Sec. 9-452. - Application. 
Application for a permit to wreck a building or structure shall be made by any licensee under this article or by any other person hereinafter defined as an owner, prior to the commencement of wrecking operations to the city clerk upon forms provided therefor who shall forthwith refer such application to the director of buildings and safety engineering for approval. 
(Code 1967, § 6-818)  
Sec. 9-453. - Investigation; approval. 
(a)  The director of buildings and safety engineering shall investigate the location of the building or structure to be wrecked, the method of wrecking proposed to be used by applicant, and determine that applicant proposes to take proper and adequate safeguards for adjoining properties and the public, for the removal of the salvage materials. The director of buildings and safety engineering may, if he or she shall determine from such investigation that applicant shall and will satisfactorily perform such wrecking operations under the requirements of this section, approve the issuance of such permit. The director of buildings and safety engineering may, if he or she shall determine that applicant will not satisfactorily perform such wrecking operation under the requirements of this section, refuse the issuance of such permit. The applicant shall have the right of appeal to the license appeal board for the granting of such permit, and if the board shall approve, then the permit shall be issued. 
(b)  Upon the approval of the application for such permit, the director of buildings and safety engineering shall specify the time within which such wrecking operation shall be completed and shall notify the city clerk of such approval. The permit shall specify the time within which such wrecking operation shall be completed. 
(Code 1967, § 6-818)  
Sec. 9-454. - Fee. 
The fee for a permit under this division shall be prescribed in Chapter 18, section 18-18, regulating license fees. 
(Code 1967, § 6-818; Ord. No. 80-521, § 1, 10-14-97)  
Sec. 9-455. - Exceptions for minor buildings. 
No permit for the wrecking of any building or structure shall be issued to any person not licensed under the provisions of this article, except that a permit may be issued for the wrecking of a minor building or structure to the owners of the premises upon which such minor building or structure shall be located. The work or operation of wrecking under a permit issued to an owner shall be performed or executed by the employees or members of the owner's family acting under his or her supervision and direction and shall not be done by any independent contractor unless such independent contractor shall be licensed to carry on the business of wrecking buildings or structures under this article. For the purpose of this article, a minor building or structure shall be defined as any masonry building not over one (1) story in height and five thousand (5,000) cubic feet in volume above the grade line, or any frame or veneer building not over two (2) stories in height and twenty-five thousand (25,000) cubic feet in volume above the grade line. For the purposes of this article, an owner means any person holding legal title to the land upon which such building or structure to be wrecked is located by deed or by land contract. 
(Code 1967, § 6-819)  
Chapter 10 - CABLE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public utility services, Ch. 15; public utility franchises, § 15.6; limitations on the granting of franchises, § 15.7. 
State Law reference— Consent for construction in rights-of-way by cable television companies required from municipalities, MCL 247.183. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE FRANCHISE REGULATORY ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 80-583, adopted March 12, 2002, provides, "Section 1. Comcast Cablevision of Warren ("Grantee") requested to renew its cable franchise in the City of Warren. 
Section 2. Comcast Cablevision of Warren has demonstrated the legal, technical and financial qualifications, during the prior franchise period, to maintain and operate a cable television business. 
Section 3. The City of Warren determined that the public interest would be served by maintaining competition in the City and providing residents with a choice of cable providers. 
Section 4. The City of Warren therefore renews Grantee's non-exclusive franchise to operate a local cable television business within the City of Warren for no longer than 15 years ("Franchise"). 
Section 5. This franchise shall encompass and Grantee shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 10, Article I of the Warren Code of Ordinances, Ordinance No. 80-512, entitled the Cable Franchise Regulatory Ordinance ("the Ordinance") and the Cable Television Franchise Agreement made between Grantee and the City of Warren ("the Agreement"). The Ordinance and the Agreement are incorporated by reference and made a part of the Franchise. 
Section 6. The Mayor and City Clerk are authorized to execute the Cable Television Franchise Agreement on behalf of the City of Warren. 
Section 7. By executing the Agreement by Grantee, Grantee will accept the Franchise, including provisions of the Ordinance and the Agreement, and all exhibits attached thereto. 
Section 8. This Ordinance shall take effect on April 4, 2002, and shall constitute a contract between the City of Warren and Grantee." 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Intent. 
The city is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the city. This article is intended to encourage competition in cable television, promote the growth and development of cable systems which are responsive to the needs and interests of the community, and to provide for the orderly and systematic development of cable systems within the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and vice-versa. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning or the meaning assigned by the U. S. Cable Communications Policy Act, as amended, 47 U.S.C. 521, et. seq. ("the Federal Cable Act"), or by the Federal Communications Commission, as may be amended from time to time. 
Cable service shall mean the total of the following: 
(1)  The transmission to or from subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection and use of such video programming or other programming service. 
Cable system means a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths which may include associated signal generation reception, signal transmission, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals on one (1) or more television broadcast signals. 
(2)  A facility that services subscribers without using any public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Cable Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the Federal Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services. 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
Cable cast means the distribution of programs (both from broadcasting sources and original programs) through the cable system by means of coaxial cable or other electrical conductors or fiber optical transmitters. 
Channel or cable channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system, or as otherwise defined by the FCC or federal or state law. 
City or grantor shall mean the City of Warren, Michigan and reference to the city in the franchise shall include its authorized officer, employee or commission acting within the scope of apparent authority on behalf of the city. 
Drop or cable drop means the cable that connects the subscriber terminal to the nearest feeder cable of a cable system. 
Facilities shall mean any part or whole of the plant, works, systems, improvements or equipment of a grantee, including poles, guys, anchors, fiber, wires, underground conduits, circuits and other property used or installed in connection with the cable system or cable services. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission, and shall include any successor or additional Federal governmental body with authority superior to the city with regard to the regulation of any activity authorized by the franchise. 
Franchise means a non-exclusive authorization awarded by ordinance for the construction, maintenance, and operation of a cable system and related cable system equipment for the purpose of providing cable service as provided for in this article and in the franchise agreement. 
Franchise agreement or agreement means a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
Franchise fee means a fee as specified in the franchise to be paid by grantee to the city. The term "franchise fee" shall exclude: 
(1)  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services or upon businesses or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators; 
(2)  Capital costs required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for system expansion, upgrade, improvement, maintenance, and repair, or payments or costs required by the franchise to support public, educational or governmental programming; 
(3)  Requirements or charges incidental to awarding or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, securities, funds, letters of credit, insurance indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages. 
Grantee means any and every holder of a franchise granted pursuant to this article, under a granting ordinance, and its lawful successors, transferees or assignees. 
Gross revenue shall mean revenues derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service as more specifically set forth in the franchise agreement. 
Headend means the equipment at the antenna site in a master antenna or cable system. The point of origination that collects all the signals and sends them to the subscribers. 
Installation means the connection of the cable system to subscriber's terminal. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, limited liability company, corporation or governmental entity. 
Public, Governmental or Educational (PEG) programming or local programming means the total of: 
(1)  Channel capacity as may be designated at the discretion of the city for noncommercial public, educational or governmental programming; and 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
Rights-of-way means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public authority or by others and located within the city limits; streets, roads, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the city shall permit to be included within the definitions of street from time to time. 
Service area or franchise area means the entire geographic area within the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
Signal means any transmission of radio frequency energy or of optical information. 
Subscriber or user means any person who pays for service and who is provided the use of a grantee's cable system, channels, equipment or facilities. 
Trunk or trunk line means the main line of the cable system that carries signals from the headend to other extremities of the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 80-561, § 2, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-3. - Franchise required. 
(a)  No person shall install, construct, maintain, operate or transact local business on a cable system in the city nor shall any person provide cable service or acquire ownership or control of a cable company in the city without such person having first obtained a franchise from the city in the form of an ordinance granting a franchise to the person, which shall include, at a minimum, compliance with the specifications of this article. 
(b)  No person shall use, occupy or traverse the rights-of-way or any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above, or under the surface of the ground, for the purposes of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a cable system or facilities therefor or for the purpose of furnishing a cable service without such person having first obtained a franchise from the city in the form of an ordinance granting a franchise, which shall include, at a minimum, compliance with all the specifications of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this article are minimum requirements of a franchise. A grantee must enter into a franchise agreement with the city, which may establish other specifications or requirements, including, but not limited to, billing, customer service standards, security fund, interconnections, studios or other signal origination facilities, channels to be equipped, construction timetable, and support for local programming as deemed adequate to meet community interests and desires. 
(d)  This article shall apply to any existing cable system operating pursuant to a franchise awarded by the city which the grantee uses to transact local business as a cable system, except as otherwise provided. 
(e)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive, and the city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. The grant of authority for use of the city public rights-of-way does not establish priority for use over other franchise holders, permit holders and the city's own use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-4. - Extent of grant of franchise. 
A franchise granted by the city shall encompass the following purposes: 
(1)  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain and remove cable facilities in, on, over, under, upon, along, and across public rights-of-way within the city for the delivery of cable services. If necessary, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private property shall be that of the grantee. 
(2)  To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services within the city. 
(3)  To set forth the obligations of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-5. - Construction with franchise and other laws. 
(a)  Any grantee shall comply with all rules, regulations, or provisions of law applicable to the provision of cable service as may be set forth in, and from time to time amended, the regulations or statutes of the United States, FCC, or State of Michigan. 
(b)  This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state and local laws. Whenever any duly authorized federal or state agency shall hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this article, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to amend this article or to adopt and enforce such other ordinances, rules and regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police powers, so long as such amendments are reasonable. 
(d)  If any provision of the franchise is held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any law, rule or regulations, said provision may be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of the franchise, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforcement of all other provisions. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rule or regulations said provision shall return to full force and effect and shall be binding on the parties. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-6. - Franchisee application process. 
(a)  Any request for an initial franchise must be submitted on an application in such form as may be prescribed by the city. The application must be submitted by a non-refundable application fee in the amount established by the city. 
(b)  The application shall include information as the city may deem necessary to evaluate the legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the applicant to provide cable service in the city. 
(c)  Any untrue or misleading statement of material fact or omission of a material fact shall be grounds for rejection of an application 
(d)  In determining whether a franchise shall be issued, the city shall take into consideration the criteria set forth below, together with such other factors as the city may deem relevant: 
(1)  Capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate equipment and fixtures. 
(2)  Benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of competition such as lower rates and improved service. 
(3)  The aesthetic effect of the installation of further above-ground fixtures. 
(4)  The demonstrated legal, financial, technical and business capability of the applicant to erect, maintain and operate the proposed system for the duration of the franchise term. 
(5)  Level of service and frequency of complaints in other communities served by the applicant. 
(6)  The proposed system design including channel capacity and ability to provide a broad range of services in conformity with the highest quality of standards of the cable industry. 
(7)  The applicant will satisfy the city's local regulatory requirements and the community's cable interests and needs. 
(e)  The franchise shall be granted or denied only after the council has held a public hearing on such request after due notice of the time and place of such hearing has been given to the applicant and the public. 
(f)  The city may require any new grantee to be responsible for underground trenching and costs associated therewith if, in the city's sole discretion, the right-of-way in a particular area cannot accommodate above-ground facilities. 
(g)  The applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in connection with the proposed franchise, including, without limitation, the technical, legal, and financial evaluation, administrative review, and document preparation. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-7. - Term and effective date of franchise. 
A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term of years not to exceed fifteen (15) years, commencing on the effective date set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-8. - Franchise territory; geographical coverage. 
(a)  Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee shall serve the entire franchise area and shall offer service to all residences in the franchise area, within a reasonable time and in accordance with construction plans and service schedules acceptable to the city. 
(c)  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service areas, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within at least seven (7) business days from the date of request provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to the subscriber within such period on reasonable terms and conditions, the installation is located within one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-9. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay a franchise fee in the amount of five (5) percent of its gross revenues, as defined in the franchise agreement. Franchise fees shall be in addition to any other tax, charge, fee, or payment due to the city by the grantee. 
(b)  All payments due from grantee to the city shall be made quarterly. 
(c)  Each payment shall be accompanied by a financial statement setting forth the basis for the computation and specifically showing the gross revenues to support the period covered by the payment, and for the year. 
(d)  The city shall have the right, upon thirty (30) days written notice, to inspect the grantee's records to verify the accuracy of the amounts payable under the franchise. The right of audit and re-computation of any and all amounts payable under the franchise shall always be accorded to the city. The grantee shall provide to the city only those records and reports which pertain specifically to the cable system and facilities and operations under this franchise and only the financial records of the revenues earned by the grantee from the facilities and operation of the cable system within the city. The books and records shall be made available to the city at its offices. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this article or for the performance of any other obligations of the grantee, provided, however, that a payment shall be considered final upon completion of any audit. 
(f)  In the event that any franchise payment or re-computed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the article or franchise agreement, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the then-current prime interest rate as publicly announced by the Detroit office of the NBD Bank, or its successor, in effect on the due date, plus one percent for the period the payment was due. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-10. - Franchise non-transferable. 
(a)  The grantee shall manage the cable system and the provision of cable services within the city. It shall not directly or indirectly contract for, subcontract or assign in whole or in part, the management of the cable system or the provision of cable services, except for construction as noted elsewhere. 
(b)  There shall be no sale, transfer, lease, assignment, sublet or disposal, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, or change in control in or of the franchise or cable system, or any of the rights or privileges granted, without the prior consent of the city. 
(c)  A change in control, transfer, sale, lease, assignment, sublet or disposal, for purposes of this section ("transfer"), includes any merger, consolidation and/or the formation of a joint venture or limited or general partnership of the grantee, the sale, assignment or transfer of any shares or interest in the grantee which results in a change in the control of the day-to-day operation of the cable system, change in the ownership of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the voting stock is acquired by another person or persons acting in concert, or change in ownership or control of a majority interest. 
(d)  The parties to the transfer shall make a written request to the city for its approval of the transfer. The written request shall be accompanied by information required by FCC rules and shall be presented on a form as prescribed by the FCC. 
(e)  The city shall have one hundred twenty (120) days from receipt of the information referred to in this section to act upon the request for approval, unless otherwise provided by federal law or the parties agree to an extension. If the city fails to render a final decision on the request within that time, the request shall be deemed granted, unless the presumption of approval is no longer required by federal law at the time of the request. 
(f)  During the review period, the city may hold a public hearing for purposes of considering public comments on the proposed transfer. Grantee and the prospective transferee shall have at least fourteen (14) days advance written notice of such hearing, and shall have the opportunity to participate fully in the hearing. 
(g)  A decision of the city upon request for a transfer shall be in writing and subject to review and appeal as may be provided under federal law. 
(h)  In reviewing a request for a transfer, the city may request additional information as deemed necessary to inquire into the technical, legal, and financial qualifications of the prospective transferee, and the grantee shall assist the city in so inquiring. Any delay in providing the city with such material shall extend the one hundred twenty (120) days or other agreed-upon period for reviewing the transfer by the period of such delay. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its approval. However, the foregoing shall not require the city to consent to any transfer or change in control where it does not find adequate evidence that the prospective transferee has the necessary legal, technical or financial requirements to carry out the terms of the franchise. 
(i)  Any prospective transferee shall execute an undertaking that it will assume and be bound by all the provisions, terms, and conditions of the franchise and all applicable federal, state and local laws and, further, that the transferee shall be liable and obligated under this article and the agreement. 
(j)  The grantee shall comply (where applicable) with any other of the Federal Cable Act's provisions and the FCC rules and regulations concerning the sale or transfer of a cable system. 
(k)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no consent or approval by the city shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any person or entity controlling, controlled by or under the same control as the grantee; provided, however, that the grantee gives the city at least fifteen (15) days advance notice of such transfer or assignment, and such person or entity executes an undertaking as provided under section 10-10(i) above. 
(l)  The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may, at the option of the council, terminate the franchise and accelerate all of the obligations and rights thereunder. The franchise may be terminated without further proceedings as provided in this article, subject to the continuity of service and purchase rights as noted elsewhere in this article or the agreement. 
(m)  The prospective transferee shall submit an initial, non-refundable deposit in an amount determined by the city with any request for a transfer, and shall reimburse the city for all of the city's reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with the transfer which exceed the deposit, including but not limited to the costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the prospective transferee, consultants, notice and publication cost, and document preparation expenses. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-11. - System design and requirements 
(a)  Grantee shall construct, maintain, operate and improve its cable system in accordance with the accepted standards of the cable industry, and in conformity with the performance standards which may be established by the FCC. 
(b)  Grantee shall provide subscribers with high quality video and audio signals which are free from distortion or interference. 
(c)  Grantee shall maintain as a minimum throughout the term of the franchise the number of channels and broad programming categories specified to be initially activated in the franchise agreement. Grantee shall identify and respond to changing community interests and desires in programming and services, where economically and technically feasible. 
(d)  A grantee shall at all times provide cable television services as defined by the Federal Cable Act. 
(e)  The cable system shall transmit or distribute to all television and radio receivers of all subscribers without causing cross-modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems or the reception of other television or radio receivers. 
(f)  The cable system shall be designed for and operated on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. 
(g)  The franchise agreement shall set forth the design and construction standards for the system, the construction timetable, location of all facilities, including headends, hubs and wiring. The grantee shall provide in its timetable a construction schedule that will allow the activation of service to the greatest number of residents in the shortest period of time. 
(h)  In the event that grantor shall annex further territory as authorized by law, then the grantee shall extend energized trunk cable to the portions of the annexed territory within the time feasible to make such extension. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-12. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Prior to the commencement of any construction of the cable system or facilities, including the erection or installation of towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, manholes, or fixtures, the grantee shall first submit to the city engineer, for review and written approval, a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if requested or required, together with a map indicating the proposed location of such facilities. Grantee shall not commence construction nor erect or install any tower, pole, guy, anchor, underground conduit, manhole, or fixture until approval therefore has been received from the city engineer. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Grantee shall construct the cable system and facilities using material of good and durable quality and all work involved in the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the cable system and facilities shall be performed in a safe, orderly, thorough and reliable manner. 
(c)  Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain the cable system and facilities in compliance with and in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards. 
(d)  Grantee shall at all times comply with the National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); the Michigan Occupations Safety and Health Administration, any standards issued by the FCC or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto, and applicable regulations of public utilities operating in the city. 
(e)  The cable system and facilities shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in the city as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the city. 
(f)  All cable and facilities shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering and safety considerations. 
(g)  All cable, wires and other facilities shall be installed at a depth or in such manner so as not to interfere with water or main, gas, sewer pipe, traffic signal, street light, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street, and other cables or wires occupying the rights-of-way, and shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley. 
(h)  Grantee shall provide adequate barriers, lights, signals and warnings to properly guard any opening or obstruction in, or disturbance of any property to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such rights-of-way and shall be properly and promptly repaired, all in a manner specified and approved by the city engineer. 
(i)  Grantee shall identify the cable system and facilities by color code, stamping, engraving, tags, stickers, or other appropriate method approved by the city engineer to distinguish the facilities from other systems, utilities, and facilities, or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its cable and wires before the cables and wires are installed, and to distinguish grantee's facilities from that of other facilities within the rights-of-way. 
(j)  The grantee shall participate in and have all facilities marked by the Miss Dig Program. 
(k)  The grantee shall provide the city with the name and phone number of a representative the city may contact on a 24-hour basis in the event of an emergency or problem. 
(l)  In areas where transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities providing telephone and electric service are underground, any grantee shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground, to the maximum extent feasible and permitted by existing technology and conditions, subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(m)  In the event the utilities subsequently relocate their facilities underground, or the city provides notice to the utilities and other cable providers to relocate facilities underground, grantee shall likewise reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground at grantee's cost, within 60 days of such notice or relocation. Any cable provider granted an initial franchise after the adoption of this article may be required to locate underground pursuant to section 10-6(f). 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-13. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of the grantee shall be so located, constructed, installed, and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon streets, easements and other public rights-of-way or upon private property. 
(b)  Grantee shall remove any part of the facilities creating a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property. 
(c)  Grantee shall make a diligent effort to co-locate by obtaining space in existing conduit and on existing utility poles and to make joint installation of new fiber optic cable and conduit with other cable or facilities occupying the rights-of-way, for the purpose of minimizing disruption of the public rights-of-way. Any joint use or interconnection of fiber optics, conduits or other facilities shall not relieve any person from its franchise fee or other financial obligations. Grantee shall provide the city with notice of such co-located facilities. 
(d)  The grantee shall, at its own cost, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, remove, raise, or lower from the rights-of-way, any of its property or facilities when required to do so by the city because of street or other public excavation, construction, repair, traffic conditions, public safety, street closing; street construction or resurfacing, installation of sewers, water pipes, power or signal lines, traffic signal, or any other improvement, construction or repair related to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(e)  The grantee shall, on the request of any person other than the city holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than seven (7) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. Any interruption in service occasioned by the temporary removal, raising or lowering of the grantee's facilities in accordance with this section shall not subject the grantee to any penalty provided under the franchise. Any interruption in service occasioned under this subsection shall be done, as far as is practicable, outside of prime time (i.e. 7 to 11 p.m.). 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-14. - Conditions of pole use. 
(a)  The grantee shall not place, or cause to be placed, poles or other equipment in such a manner as to interfere with the rights of adjoining property owners without securing their written approval in advance, or with any gas, electric or telephone utilities fixtures or property, nor shall the grantee place, or cause to be placed, said poles or equipment in the rights-of-way except with the written approval of the city engineer, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Nothing in the franchise shall be construed as authorizing the grantee to erect or maintain new poles in areas serviced by existing poles. The grantee shall obtain written approval from the city engineer, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld before erecting any new poles or installing underground conduits where none exist at the time the grantee seeks to install its cable system. 
(c)  The grantee agrees to enter into only non-exclusive agreements for the use of utility poles with all utility companies whose poles shall be used in or affected by the construction of the cable system. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to install and maintain at no charge upon the poles of grantee, any wire and pole fixtures, including traffic control or police and fire alarm devices, that do not interfere or compete with the cable operations of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-15. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  The grantee shall, at its own cost, restore and replace any private or public property disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by or on account of its activities to as good as the condition said property was in immediately prior to the said disturbance, damage or injury. If any such property cannot be restored, replaced or reconstructed, the grantee shall reasonably compensate the property owner for any damages caused by grantee. 
(b)  In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any repair or restoration work required herein or in the franchise agreement, after written notice thereof by the city, or if the grantee does not diligently proceed to commence work within such period, and diligently complete the work within a reasonable period thereafter, or if the work must be completed in less than the required period in cases of emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety and welfare, the city, at its option, may cause such work to be done. Grantee shall reimburse the city for the costs of any work done within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized list of such administrative and overhead costs. At its option, the city may pursue remedies in accordance with section 10-27(a)(2) through (6) herein. 
(c)  The grantee may trim trees and other vegetation to prevent their branches from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. All trimming shall be done at the expense of grantee in the manner consistent with arborist practices and the rules and regulations of the department of parks and recreation. The grantee shall obtain the permission of the owner to trim trees outside of easements. 
(d)  Grantee shall remove and clean on a daily basis any debris caused by construction, tree or vegetation trimming, or by any of its other operations as a grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-16. - Technical standards. 
(a)  The system shall at all times meet not less than minimum FCC Technical Standards established by the FCC under Subpart K, Part 76 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as from time to time revised or amended. 
(b)  Upon request, grantee shall provide to the city written reports of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to the FCC standards and requirements. 
(c)  RF leakage shall be monitored according to FCC regulations and shall meet FCC requirements. 
(d)  Grantee shall develop and adhere to a preventive maintenance policy directed toward maximizing the reliability (mean-time between malfunctions) and maintainability (mean-time to repair) of the cable system to subscribers at or above the performance standards set forth herein. 
(e)  Grantee shall maintain in constant readiness equipment capable of providing standby-power for the headend and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of four (4) hours. 
(1)  Said equipment shall be constructed so as to revert automatically to a standby mode when alternating current power returns. 
(2)  Grantee shall comply with all utility and other safety regulations to prevent a standby generator from powering the utility line. 
(f)  Antenna structures, if any, used in the cable system shall comply with construction, marking and lighting of antenna structures, required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-17. - Emergency alert system. 
(a)  Grantee shall install as part of its cable system, and shall operate through the franchise term, an emergency alert system (EAS). The EAS shall be in accordance with the requirements imposed by the FCC, if any, including, without limitation, the requirements that cable systems transmit a visual EAS message on at least one channel (47 C.F.R. sec. 11.51 (g)(3)) and that cable systems also provide video interruption and an audio EAS message on all channels, with the audio message further stating which channel is carrying the visual message (47 CFR Sec. 11.51 (g)(2)). 
(b)  In establishing the EAS system pursuant to this section, the grantee shall: 
(1)  Designate a channel (which may be the government channel) which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video; 
(2)  Inform customers of the designated emergency channel at least daily on at least one channel (which may be the government channel) of the multi-channel system; 
(3)  Maintain all channel video blanking capability able to be activated remotely by security measures deemed mutually agreeable by the city and the grantee; 
(4)  Test the emergency override system not less than every three (3) months; 
(5)  Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency alert override system; and 
(6)  Maintain the capacity to permit the city in time of emergency to override by remote control all channels simultaneously consistent with the federal regulations as stated in 47 CFR sec. 11.55. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-18. - Standard of service; local re- quirements. 
(a)  Grantee shall comply with the consumer protection and customer service standards established by the FCC, as from time to time amended, and any additional standards set forth in the franchise agreement with such grantee or this article. 
(b)  Grantee shall maintain a reasonably convenient customer service office or bill payment location which shall be open during all usual business hours. Grantee shall have a publicly listed local telephone number or toll-free number and be so operated to receive subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall be brief and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system (preferably between midnight and 6 a.m.). A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints resulting in service calls their disposition, and all service interruptions. 
(c)  The grantee shall maintain a suitable repair force of technicians in order to respond to subscriber complaints or requests for service within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint or request. 
(d)  There shall be no charge for disconnection or discontinuation of service. 
(e)  Grantee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who requests disconnection. No period of notice prior to requested termination of service may be required of subscribers by the grantee. The subscriber must be asked when the disconnecting is to become effective. 
(f)  If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the end of a prepaid period, a proportionate portion of any prepared subscriber service fee, using the number of days as a basis, shall be refunded to the subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-19. - Interconnection. 
Grantee shall, if economically and technically feasible, interconnect with any other cable system located within the city and in any adjacent community under reasonable terms and conditions, upon request of the city. The intent of such interconnection is to enable each cable system to carry and cable cast the governmental or educational programming of the other cable system. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-20. - Parental lock-out. 
The grantee shall make available to all subscribers, upon written request, a "parental guidance" or "lock-out" device which shall permit the subscriber, at his or her option, to eliminate reception of any or all channels. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-21. - Rates and charges. 
The city may regulate rates for the provision of cable services and service charges to the extent permitted by law. If subject to rate regulations, the grantee and city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No rates or charges for cable service that are subject to rate regulation shall be effective until grantee files the rates and charges with the city clerk. 
(2)  The city shall comply with the rules of the Federal Communications Commission regarding the regulation of rates and the procedures regarding confidential business information. 
(3)  After the grantee submits its existing rates for the or proposed increase in these rates, the clerk shall publish a public notice of these rates and costs giving interested parties, including the grantee an opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of the clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(4)  Any grantee that willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed at the grantee shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture of up to two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per day up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any single act as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-22. - Program content restrictions. 
In addition to providing basic cable television service consisting of broadcast, locally originated, access and character-generated signals, the grantee may offer subscribers optional services on a per-program or per-channel basis (pay cable). The grantee may not, however, program or in any way display material not protected by the U.S. Constitution such as obscene programming. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-23. - Insurance. 
(a)  On or before the commencement of operations, grantee and any contractor hired by grantee, shall obtain and shall keep effective during the term a franchise, policies of liability, worker's compensation, property and automotive insurance from companies authorized to do business in Michigan and with an A or better rating by A.M. Best Company. The franchise agreement shall state the form, amounts and further conditions of insurance coverage. 
(b)  All required insurance coverage shall provide for thirty (30) days notice to the city in the event of material alteration or cancellations of such coverage prior to the effective date of such material alteration or cancellation. 
(c)  Grantee shall file with the city prior to the commencement of construction either certified copies of these insurance policies or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying that the policy is in force providing the policy number; effective and expiration dates, names of insured and additional insured, type and amount of coverage limits. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-24. - Construction, performance bonds, security fund; letter of credit. 
Grantee shall, within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the franchise, file the requisite corporate surety bonds, security fund and/or letter of credit in form acceptable to the city attorney and as deemed necessary to guarantee the faithful performance of grantee's obligations under the franchise, and for the purpose of recovering damages, losses or costs incurred from the failure of grantee to perform its obligations. The form, amounts and conditions of such instruments shall be established in the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-25. - Records required and grantor's right to inspect. 
(a)  Grantee shall keep complete and accurate book of accounts and records of the business and operation under and in connection with the cable system and the franchise. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to review all records pertaining to the grantee's operation within the city of Warren at grantee's local business office or by mail; provided, however that financial audits are subject to section 10-99(d). 
(c)  The city shall, upon request, be provided with a copy of any report relating to the construction, maintenance or operation of the cable system, facilities or the city's regulatory responsibilities under the agreement or ordinance, including, but not limited to any report, statement or data submitted to the FCC or another Federal or State agency. 
(d)  Grantee shall file with the city engineer a current "as built" map showing the location of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment in the city used by it in providing cable in a standardized format compatible with the city's computerized data system. The map shall be submitted each year unless no changes have occurred in the previously submitted map. 
(e)  An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by grantee of all subscriber complaints regarding the grantee. Complete records of grantee's actions in response to complaints shall be kept for three (3) years, and shall be made available to the city upon request. 
(f)  Upon request, grantee shall submit to the city such information and reports as deemed reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the franchise agreement and ordinance, and in such form as the city may reasonably request. 
(g)  Upon request, grantee shall provide to the city copies of all documents, pleadings, and applications, and any responses thereto, filed by grantee with federal or state agencies or courts, which relate to the franchise. 
(h)  The city shall protect the confidentiality of any information constituting proprietary information and so designated by grantee as confidential or proprietary, and shall withhold such information from public disclosure to the extent permitted under the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, M.C.L.A. sec. 15.243(1). To the extent possible, grantee will provide the city with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on the grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted. 
(i)  Upon reasonable demand, grantee shall permit the city to make inspections of any of the grantee's facilities situated within or outside of the city during normal business hours upon seventy-two (72) hours notice or, in the event of an emergency, at any time. 
(j)  All reports and records required under the franchise shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee and within thirty (30) days of the request. Records shall be maintained for a period of not less than three years preceding the date of any request, except as otherwise provided in this article or the agreement. 
(k)  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation knowingly made by the grantee in any report required under the franchise or in any notices to subscribers and users shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies available at law. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-26. - Hearing and determination of complaints. 
(a)  Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without the intervention of the city. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with the city. 
(b)  In the event the intervention of the city is requested, the city, shall upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person or subscriber of a grantee, have authority to hear and determine all complaints concerning the charges, rules, regulations, practices, quality of service, reception, construction, and operation of the cable system. The grantee shall cooperate with the city in resolving any complaint informally, to the extent such complaint may be resolved without formal hearing. 
(c)  In the event a complaint is not resolved informally, the city may conduct a hearing on the complaint. The city shall give all interested parties, including grantee, at least twenty (20) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. grantee shall comply with the decision of the city to resolve the complaint, so long as the decision is reasonable. 
(d)  In the event the parties are unable to reach a resolution, the city and grantee may, by mutual agreement (both as to whether to hire and whom to hire), employ the services of technical, financial or legal consultants, as arbitrators. All reasonable fees of the consultants shall be borne equally. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-27. - Procedures to remedy franchise violations. 
(a)  In the event.that the city determines that the grantee has violated any provision of the franchise, or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the city may require the violation be remedied in the following manner: 
(1)  The city shall first notify grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or first-class mail, and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than five (5) days in the case of construction delay or problem, or the failure of grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the city or deliver an instrument required under the franchise. In the event of a system outage involving ten (10) percent or more of subscribers, correction shall occur within ten (10) days. In all other cases, correction shall occur within thirty (30) days. 
(2)  If grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the city shall then give notice of not less than thirty (30) days of a public hearing to be held in the matter. Such notice shall specify the violations to have occurred. 
(3)  At the hearing, the city shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
(4)  In the event the city finds the grantee has not corrected the violation or has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from the city and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, the city may elect to impose one or more of the following remedies, provided however, the grantee shall not be subject to duplicate monetary penalty for the same violation: 
a.  Cure the violation and recover the cost thereof, plus reasonable administrative fees from the security funds established in the franchise agreement; 
b.  Invoke any penalty permitted under this article; 
c.  For repeated violations of consumer service standards of this article or the franchise agreement, which have materially degraded the quality of service, the city may request grantee to issue rebates or credits or other compensation such as promotional items of comparable value, in an amount to be determined by grantee. Credit shall be reasonably related to the nature of the degradation of service and measured by the period of the degradation, to provide monetary relief substantially equal to the reduced quality of service resulting from grantees failure to perform; 
d.  Assess liquidated damages amount as may be included in the franchise agreement; and 
e.  Initiate procedures to revoke in accordance with the ordinance. 
(5)  For purposes of this section the recovery of costs or to cure a violation and the assessment of penalties shall not be regarded as duplicate monetary penalty. 
(6)  In the event grantee is required to restore property, the city may provide grantee with notice of the violation in accordance with section 10-15 of the article. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-28. - Revocation. 
Any franchise, unless otherwise allowed by law, is revocable prior to its expiration for cause as provided hereinafter. Any franchise is revocable for cause by the city council prior to its expiration where the grantee has failed substantially to comply with any material provision or requirement of this article or the franchise agreement, or repeatedly violates non-material violations. The council shall give a written notice containing full particulars as to the provision or requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow such grantee sixty (60) days to comply. At the expiration of such sixty (60) days, the city council may hold a public hearing upon ten (10) days notice to the person granted a franchise. Said hearing shall be public with the grantee being permitted to fully participate therein including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded and at the conclusion thereof, the city council, if it reasonably finds that the grantee has not substantially complied with any material provision or requirement of this article or the franchise agreement, or has repeatedly violated nonmaterial violations, may terminate and revoke the franchise, subject, however, to the continuity of service, purchase rights of city and property disposition provisions of this article and the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-29. - Right to purchase. 
Upon termination, revocation, non-renewal or surrender of any franchise, or should any grantee wish to otherwise dispose of any portion of the cable system or facilities within the city, the city retains the first rights and option to purchase the cable system or facilities, or any such portion of the cable system or facilities, or any or all of the cable system and facilities, on the terms set forth in the franchise agreement. The city shall be under no obligation to purchase all or any part of the system or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-30. - Continuity of service. 
In the event of purchase by the city or a change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the city in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. A grantee shall cooperate with a buyer, transferee or assignee of an agreement in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-31. - Removal of franchise property. 
(a)  Upon the termination or revocation for cause of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, should the city determine that it does not desire to purchase the system or any part thereof, the franchise property shall be removed in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of the termination, revocation, or surrender, grantee shall file with the city its schedule and timing of removal, which shall be subject to the approval and regulation by the city. Removal shall be completed no later than twelve (12) months from the date of approval of the plan by the city, and any affected private or public property shall promptly be restored to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public service, at grantee's expense. Any cable, conduit and other facilities, including but not limited to, towers, poles, wires, aerial or non-buried cables, fixtures, amplifier boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and cable attached to or suspended from poles, and any subscriber equipment and drops or other facilities from the rights-of-way; provided, however, that the grantee shall not disturb any underground conduit, manholes or other facilities constructed underground of other persons. As determined in the sole discretion of the city, grantee may abandon underground franchise property so long as it does not unreasonably interfere with the use of street or public rights of way or with the use of any public utility, prospective grantee, or other party entitled to current or prospective use of easement areas. Any property not removed by a grantee, remaining after the twelve month period shall be deemed abandoned, and, at the option of the city, the city shall take possession, title and control of all or any part of the cable facilities, with no payment to grantee; or such cable facilities shall be removed by the city and the grantee shall be liable for all costs and removal and restoration or property. 
(c)  Grantee shall apply for and obtain any permits, licenses or approval and pay any fees or deposit such security required by applicable ordinance prior to the commencement of work, and shall complete such work in compliance with local ordinances, and shall restore the streets and premises to the same condition they were prior to the commencement of the work. All such work provided under this article, including restoration shall be complete within the one year period. 
(d)  In the event that, during the term of this franchise, where the franchise is not terminated or revoked, but a part of the cable facilities are deemed abandoned, the director of public service may order any such part of the facilities removed within ninety (90) days, or longer for good cause shown. If such facilities are not removed and/or property restored within the time period, the city may cause such work to be done pursuant to section 10-15(b). 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-32. - Force Majeure; grantee's inability to perform. 
Any delay, preemption, or other failure to perform caused by factors outside of grantee's control, including, acts of God, riots, strikes, power failure or loss of other utility facilities which grantee proves are necessary for the operation of the cable system, explosions, emergencies declared by federal or state government, governmental administrative or judicial order or regulation, and natural disasters, shall not result in a default of the franchise. Force Majeure also covers work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which grantee's cable and/or equipment if attached, but does not cover the failure of grantee to obtain necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation or maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise due diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. Grantee shall exercise reasonable efforts to cure any such delays and the cause thereof, and performance under the terms of the franchise shall be excused for the period of time during which such factor continues. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-33. - Receivership, foreclosure, bankruptcy. 
(a)  Any franchise may be terminated and canceled without further proceedings one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver, trustee in bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors to take over and conduct the business of a grantee, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such period. This shall not prevent such receiver or trustee from applying for a transfer or assignment under section 10-10. 
(b)  Grantee shall notify the city in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. If duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the judicial sale of the plant, property or facilities of a grantee, with or without the appointment of a receiver of a trustee, including or excluding the franchise, such franchise as granted may be terminated and canceled upon thirty (30) days' written notice of termination served upon the grantee and the purchaser thereof, unless within such 30 day period, the purchaser shall apply to the city for a transfer or assignment to it of the same as provided in section 10-10. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-34. - Priority of use. 
Any right or privilege granted to any person to use or occupy any street, alley, public rights-of-way or public place shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of such property. Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting in any way the city in the lawful exercise of the police power, and the grant of a franchise to any person as provided in this article shall confer no right, privilege or exemption not specifically presented herein. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-35. - Surrender of other franchises. 
By the application for and acceptance of a franchise, the grantee agrees that upon subsequent addition of areas to the city, either by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, any and all franchises and/or licenses held by it to provide a cable service or to install, construction, maintain or operate a cable system in such areas shall be surrendered and any rights or privileges in the rights-of-way to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable system or to furnish a cable service in such areas as may subsequently be added to the city by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, shall thereafter be subject to and authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-36. - Rights reserved to the city. 
(a)  In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the city under the franchise, grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved any provision of any law or regulation. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise or any obligation or requirement of the grantee set forth in this article or the agreement. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall grant to grantee any right of property in city-owned property, nor shall grantee be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than or in any fashion other than in the city's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
(d)  Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable provisions of other city ordinances of general applicability made pursuant to the police power of the city, the city charter, and any amendments thereto, whether made prior to or after the inception of the franchise. 
(e)  Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to additional rights of the city: 
(1)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of programming and products and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(2)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof. 
(3)  To inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and applicable ordinances and codes, and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-37. - Right of privacy. 
(a)  Grantee shall comply with the privacy provisions of the Federal Cable Act, as amended, and any other applicable provisions of law, judicial law, rules or regulations. 
(b)  The grantee shall not, nor shall grantee knowingly permit any person, agency, or entity, without the subscriber's consent, to tap, or to arrange for the tapping, or any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, routine operation of the system, polling with audience participation, judicial order, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewer behavior cannot be identified. 
(c)  In the conduct of providing its services or pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take any and all necessary action to prevent an invasion of a subscriber's right to privacy or other personal rights as such rights are defined by applicable laws. The grantee shall not without lawful court order utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber. 
(d)  The grantee and any of its agents or employees, shall not sell or otherwise make available to any unaffiliated third party, lists of subscribers' names, addresses, or phone numbers, or any list which identifies, by name, the viewing habits of subscribers, or personalized data pertaining to a subscriber's use of any of the grantee's services, except as may be permitted by the Federal Cable Act. For purposes of this section, "personalized data" shall mean the name, address, phone number of an individual subscriber directly associated with data obtained on his or her use of specific services provided by or through the grantee. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent, as a normal incident of commercial enterprise, the sale or availability of "non-personalized" or "aggregate data" which is not personalized data as defined herein. Unaffiliated third party means any corporation, person or entity who does not own or control, is not owned or controlled by or is not under common ownership or control with grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-38. - Rights of residents. 
(a)  Except with respect to individual-subscriber bona fide credit risks, grantee shall not deny service, access or otherwise discriminate against any group of potential residential subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which the group resides. 
(b)  Grantee shall not allow its cable service and other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by grantee, nor shall the cable system interfere with, obstruct, or hinder, in any manner, the operation of the various utilities, telecommunications providers or other cable providers serving the residents. 
(c)  No cable line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed into the subscriber's premises without prior consent of the owner or lawful occupant, and no entry upon private property may be permitted for the maintenance, repair, etc. of any such wire, line or other facilities, including tree trimming, without the express consent of the property owner, except as permitted under applicable law, by agreement with subscribers. All service must be performed under easement rights with the prior consent and knowledge of the resident. 
(d)  Grantee may not take actions which would diminish or interfere with the privilege of any tenant occupant of any such building to use or avail him or herself of master or individual antenna equipment. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-39. - Unauthorized connections. 
(a)  No person shall tap, tamper with or cause to be tapped, tampered with or connected any wire or device, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, to any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of a grantee without authorizations from the grantee owning or controlling said wire, cable conduits, apparatus or equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any physical connection to any franchised cable system operating in the city that is not authorized by the cable system. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy, remove, obstruct or interfere with any part of any cable system operating in the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any modification to system equipment or to any system-connected equipment so as to cause any uncompensated franchised cable system to deliver any level of service for which the operator has not received compensation. 
(e)  The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this article for violations of this section are in addition to the penalties and remedies for theft of cable service provided under Federal and state law. 
(f)  The provisions of section 10-26 (a)—(d) shall not apply to any complaints concerning any matter covered in this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-40. - Severability. 
The various parts, sections and clauses of this article are declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 80-561, § 2, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-41. - Headings. 
Section headings as set forth in this article are for convenience only and shall not be a part of this article nor be used to construe any provision more broadly or narrowly than its text would indicate. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 10-42. - Penalty. 
(a)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article or the agreement for any particular provision or section, violations of this article may be subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the violation continues, or may be punishable as a civil infraction by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the violation continues. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense except that all similar violations occurring on the same day shall constitute one violation, provided, however, grantee shall not be subject to duplicate monetary penalty for the same violation. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this article or the agreement, the city may enjoin or abate any violation of the franchise or pursue any additional or other legal or equitable remedies available under the franchise or by law. 
(Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, 6-24-97)  
Secs. 10-43—10-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1 and 3, adopted July 25, 2000, completely repealed the provisions of former Art. II of this chapter which pertained to general provisions regarding the City of Warren Cable Communications Regulatory Ordinance and encompassed §§ 10-51—10-80. Ord. No. 80-561 has replaced former Art. II of this chapter with former Art. V of this chapter and renumbered §§ 10-151—10-164 of former Art. V, as 10-51—10-64 of Art. II as currently set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 10-51—10-80, derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 7-601—7-629; Ord. No. 80-291, § 1, adopted August 9, 1983; Ord. No. 80-296, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 1984; Ord. No. 80-339, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 26, 1987; and Ord. No. 80-512, § 1, adopted June 24, 1997 
 
Sec. 10-51. - Introduction. 
This article shall be known as the Telecommunications Regulatory Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-52. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise stated, the terms and phrases used in this article shall have the following meaning: 
City means the City of Warren, Michigan. 
Franchise means a non-exclusive, limited authorization for the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunication system on, under, over or across the public rights-of-way of the city and to transact local business thereon. 
Grantee is any holder of a telecommunications license or franchise granted under this article, or its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
License is a written agreement granted by resolution to use the public rights-of way, easements, highways, streets, alleys, and other places in the city for fiber optics, wires, poles, pipes, conduits or other telecommunications equipment, but not to transact local business. 
Person is any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or other entity. 
Subscriber is any person who contracts with the grantee for, or is in any manner provided with, telecommunication services. 
Telecommunications equipment means the fiber optics, cables, wires, conduits, poles, access manholes, devices and appurtenances used or to be used to provide telecommunications services. 
Telecommunications services includes regulated and unregulated services offering to subscribers the transmission of two-way interactive communications and associated usage under the Michigan Telecommunications Act of 1995 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
Telecommunications system is a system used or to be used to provide telecommunications services including public or private line video, data or voice service to another person, using or crossing a street, highway, alley, right-of-way, easement or other public place in the city. Telecommunications systems shall not mean cable programming regulated under the Cable Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. section 521, et seq. ("Cable Act"). 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-53. - City approval required. 
(1)  No person shall install, construct, maintain or otherwise operate telecommunications equipment or telecommunications system in the city [without a] telecommunication license granted by resolution of council. 
(2)  No person shall transact local business on a telecommunication system or telecommunication equipment without a franchise granted by ordinance, subject, however, to any limitation provided by constitution or law. 
(3)  Before offering or providing any telecommunication service, the grantee shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses necessary to provide telecommunication services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, and shall submit to the city, upon the written request of the city, evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses. 
(4)  No franchise or license shall be granted until the grantee files a completed application on the form provided or approved by the city, payment of the formation fee as specified on the application, and the city and grantee enter into a written agreement containing the conditions to be imposed on the grantee. Approval may be denied for failure to demonstrate legal, technical, business, financial qualifications; failure to agree upon the terms and conditions to be imposed for use of the right-of-way; and/or, where denial serves the public health, safety and welfare. 
(5)  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a waiver of any codes, ordinances or regulations of the city or the city's right to require grantee or persons utilizing the telecommunication service to secure appropriate permits or authorizations for such use. No fee or charge may be imposed upon a grantee for any such permit or authorization, other than the standard fees or charges generally applicable to all persons for such permits or authorizations. Such standard fee or charge shall not be offset against the annual license fee or franchise fee a grantee is required to pay to the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-54. - Non-exclusive issuance. 
The city may grant one or more licenses and franchises for telecommunications services, systems or equipment in the city subject to this article. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or licenses as it deems appropriate. Additional franchises or licenses shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate or damage any rights previously granted to any other grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-55. - Authorization from city. 
No grant of franchise or license shall be valid unless authorized by ordinance or resolution, respectively, adopted by the council and until the city and grantee enter into a written agreement containing the terms and conditions on which the franchise or license shall be granted, an executed copy of which shall be filed with the city clerk, and all fees have been paid and the bond, insurance and/or letter of credit or other requirements of the franchise agreement are satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-56. - Compensation. 
The franchise or license agreement required by section 10-54 shall, without limitation, provide for the payment of compensation to the city for use of rights-of-way, easements, streets, alleys, highways, and other public places, and shall provide for the services and facilities to the city, as public interest may require, subject to the limitation of any applicable constitution, federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-57. - Franchise or license fee. 
In recognition of the unique nature of telecommunications franchises, a franchise or license fee shall be determined through a negotiated fee procedure provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-58. - Filing of current map and subsidiary plats. 
The owner(s) or operator(s) of all franchised and licensed telecommunications systems or telecommunication equipment in the city shall file with the department of public service and city engineer a current map and subsidiary plats showing the exact location of transmission and distribution facilities and equipment of the system in the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-59. - Construction and maintenance of equipment. 
All facilities and equipment of any franchised telecommunications system operating in the city shall be constructed and maintained at a state-of-the-art level in accordance with the applicable requirements and specifications of the National Electrical Code, the National Building Code, shall participate in Miss Dig, and shall comply with applicable rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission, Federal Communications Commission, and all other pertinent ordinances and codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-60. - Transfer of franchise or license. 
Any franchise or license granted by the city hereunder is to be held in personal trust by the grantee and may not be sold, transferred, assumed, assigned or sublet in any manner either directly or indirectly, without the prior consent of the council. The definitions of and limitation upon transfers, assumptions or assignments shall be provided in the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-61. - Indemnification. 
A grantee shall save, indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any injury, claim, demand, suit, judgment, execution, liability, debt, damages or penalty arising our of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, any act or omission of the grantee in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of the telecommunication system, and equipment or of granting a license or franchise. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-62. - Insurance. 
A grantee shall at all times during the life of a license or franchise carry and require its contractors and subcontractors to carry out public liability, property damage, worker's compensation, and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as shall be determined by the city as set forth in the agreement. All required insurance shall provide for thirty-day notice to the city in the event of material alteration or cancellation of such coverage prior to the effective date of such material alteration or cancellation. Failure of the grantee to provide appropriate insurance certificates to the city within sixty (60) days after the execution of a license or franchise shall render the license or franchise null and void. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-63. - Construction and performance guarantee. 
A grantee shall, prior to construction and within an amount of days after the execution of a license or franchise, set forth in the agreement, file with the city a performance and construction bond and/or letter of credit in the form and in the amount set by the terms of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 10-64. - Severability. 
If any part of this ordinance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such part shall be deemed a separate and distinct provision, and the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 80-495, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 80-561, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-00)  
Secs. 10-65—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-552, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 2000 has amended article III of this chapter by renaming it and amending several of the sections contained herein. This article III was formerly titled "Cable Television Commission." 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Communications commission; qualifications, number of members. 
There shall be created a communications commission consisting of five (5) members who shall be residents of the City of Warren. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. No member shall simultaneously hold any position as an elected or appointed officer or employee or serve on any board, commission, or committee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-347, § 1(7-629), 5-27-86; Ord. No. 80-552, § 1, 1-25-00)  
Sec. 10-92. - Terms of office. 
The members of the commission shall serve a term of three (3) years. Members of the cable television commission shall serve as the communications commission until their terms expire, and their successors are appointed. A commissioner, whose term of office has expired, may continue to hold office until a successor has been appointed. Any vacancy shall be filled as provided above for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 80-347, § 1(7-630), 5-27-86; Ord. No. 80-552, § 1, 1-25-00)  
Sec. 10-93. - Duties and powers of the commission. 
In addition to any other responsibilities provided in this chapter or that the mayor may delegate to it from time to time, the commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Review and advise the mayor and council on applications for a cable or telecommunications franchise or other form of approval, at the request of the mayor. 
(2)  Monitor and advise the mayor and council on a grantee's performance and compliance with the franchise or other approval. 
(3)  Advise the mayor and council on matters that may constitute grounds for transfer, revocation, renewal, amendment, or extension of a grantee's franchise or other approval. 
(4)  Determine general policy related to cable programming on city channels and to the services provided subscribers on the city channels. 
(5)  Review records or reports that a grantee is required or requested to submit under the franchise or other approval. 
(6)  Advise the mayor and council on the conduct of financial audits of the payments received from the grantees. 
(7)  Advise the mayor and council on technological developments, franchisee system performance, cable equipment and operational expenditures, local programming quality and standards, subscriber service standards, and policies concerning right-of-way occupancy and telecommunications laws. 
(8)  Review, investigate, and resolve disputes involving grantees and subscribers as provided by this chapter or by agreement. 
(9)  Advise the mayor and council on the regulation of rates and services in accordance with applicable law. 
(10)  Submit an annual budget request to the mayor during the annual budget process. 
(11)  Encourage and supervise the interconnection systems. 
(12)  Conduct review sessions with the cable grantees that shall be open to the public as provided by this chapter or by agreement. 
(Ord. No. 80-347, § 1(7-631), 5-27-86; Ord. No. 80-552, § 1, 1-25-00)  
Sec. 10-94. - Communications department; communications director. 
There shall be created a communications department, which shall be responsible for the local television programming and production operations on behalf of the city. The administrative head of the communications department shall be the communications director who shall be responsible for the programming that is aired on the local channels, administration of the department, and shall assist with the fulfillment of the commission's duties in section 10-93. The mayor shall appoint the communications director, and shall send the appointment to the city council in a manner consistent with 7.6(a) of the City Charter. 
Programming shall include the live broadcast of city council's regular meeting and, at a minimum, the rebroadcast of the meeting the day after the meeting convened, at 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and the second day after the meeting convened, at 3:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 80-552, § 1, 1-25-00; Ord. No. 80-624, § 1, 2-28-06)  
Sec. 10-95. - Budgetary consideration. 
(a)  The commission shall submit to the controller, the first Monday of February of each year, an itemized estimate of its expected income and expenditures during the next fiscal year. 
(b)  Members of the commission may be compensated a per diem stipend for meetings at a rate established in its budget. 
(Ord. No. 80-347, § 1(7-633), 5-27-86; Ord. No. 80-552, § 1, 1-25-00)  
Sec. 10-96. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-552, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 2000, repealed in their entirety the provisions of former § 10-96 which pertained to factors to the cable television coordinator, staff and use of public channels and derived from Ord. No. 80-347, § 1(7-634), adopted May 27, 1986.  
Secs. 10-97—10-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-513, § 4, adopted June 24, 1997, renumbered existing §§ 10-101—10-110 to §§ 10-111—10-120. 
 
Sec. 10-111. - Definitions. 
Inferior signal quality: A problem concerning picture or sound quality other than a service interruption. 
Normal business hours: Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and Saturdays 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding holidays. 
Normal operating conditions: Those service conditions which are within the control of the company, including but not limited to special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. Those conditions which are not within the control of the company include, but are not limited to, power or telephone network outages, natural disasters, civil disturbances, severe or unusual weather conditions, and major upgrades increasing channel capacity or capability (i.e. electronic or fiber optic upgrades). 
Service interruption: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
System outage: Any service interruption affecting at least ten (10) percent of the subscribers of the local system. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-112. - Office hours and telephone availability. 
(a)  The company shall maintain a local or toll-free telephone line capacity which will be available to subscribers on a twenty-four-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
(b)  Under normal operating conditions, ninety (90) percent of all incoming calls shall be answered by a customer service representative within thirty (30) seconds, measured on a quarterly basis. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. 
(c)  All incoming customer service lines, under normal operating conditions, shall not be simultaneously busy more than an accumulative period of three (3) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
(d)  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by an answering service or, upon thirty (30) days' notice to subscribers, by an automated response system or answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(e)  The company shall maintain a customer service and bill payment location which shall be adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints, and shall be open at a location in the City of Warren from Monday to Friday 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding holidays. On Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and on weekdays from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., excluding holidays, the company shall maintain open office hours at its main office at 6095 Wall Street, Sterling Heights, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-113. - Installations, outages and service interruptions. 
(a)  The company shall maintain an emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a twenty-four-hour basis, seven (7) days a week, including holidays. 
(b)  The company shall, under normal operating conditions, respond to each of the following subscriber requests for service no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  For a service interruption: "Same day" service response and repair, Monday—Saturday, for all complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments received prior to 12:00 noon. In no event shall the response and repair time for calls received subsequent to 12:00 noon exceed twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time of receiving a subscriber's request for service. 
(2)  For a system outage: Within two (2) hours, including weekends and holidays, after receiving knowledge of such malfunction. 
(3)  For inferior signal quality: Within forty-eight (48) hours including weekends and holidays, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
(4)  [Standard installations.] Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard" installations are those that are located one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system. 
(5)  For any other service problem: Within seven (7) business days of receiving a request for repair or adjustment to cable equipment or installation and hanging or damaged wires or lines, or any other service-related problem. 
(c)  The company shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a trained and competent technician arrives at the service located, is provided access, and begins work on the problem. 
(d)  The company shall make every effort to complete work and restore service within one (1) service response. For technically difficult problems and/or if the problem is caused by the cable system, the company shall determine the nature of the problem within forty-eight (48) hours of beginning work and shall resolve the problem and all cable system-related problems within three (3) business days, unless technically impossible. 
(e)  The company shall schedule an appointment for installations and services either at a specific time, or, at maximum, within a specified four-hour time block during normal business hours. 
(f)  The company may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(g)  If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the company shall contact the customer. The appointment shall be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. The company shall not cancel this appointment. 
(h)  For installations performed between April 15 and November 1 of each calendar year, the company shall, at its sole expense, cause all drops required to be properly buried no later than thirty (30) days of the installation. For installations made between November 2, and April 14, drops shall be buried no later than ninety (90) days after April 15 of the calendar year. 
(i)  All officers, agents, or employees of the company or its contractors or subcontractors that have customer contact shall wear on their outer clothing a photo identification card bearing their name and photograph. The company shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the company or its major subcontractors that have customer service contact shall be clearly identified as working for the company. 
(j)  No charge shall be made to the subscriber for the repair or replacement of defective company-owned equipment provided by the company to the subscriber. 
(k)  The company shall interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Good cause shall mean reasons such as plant maintenance, repairs or replacement of obsolete, old or damaged system equipment, or system upgrades. Scheduled interruptions for major system upgrades shall be preceded by notice to subscribers. Insofar as possible, interruptions shall occur between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., although an exception shall be made for scheduled system upgrades preceded by notice to the subscriber. 
(l)  The company shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, listing the time, date and nature for 1) all service calls that result in a service call, 2) all service responses and disposition, and 3) all service interruptions. Such log shall be kept periodically available, and, upon request, shall be submitted to the cable commission for the preceding forty-five (45) days. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-114. - Customer communications. 
(a)  The cable operator shall provide written instructions and information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually thereafter to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
(1)  Products and services offered; 
(2)  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
(3)  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
(4)  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
(5)  Channel positions of programming carried on system; 
(6)  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city; 
(7)  Bill payment and service location addresses, telephone numbers, and office hours including specified weekend and evening hours. 
(b)  Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the company shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the preceding paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-115. - Subscriber bills. 
(a)  Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized with itemization including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(b)  In case of a billing dispute, a cable operator must respond to a written subscriber complaint within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  No late payment charge shall be imposed upon a subscriber unless at least thirty (30) days have elapsed after the due date specified on the bill. The company may not specify a due date on the bill that is earlier than the first day of the monthly period to which the bill is attributable. 
(d)  Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than: 
(1)  The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or 
(2)  The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
(e)  Credits will be issued no later than the customer's next billing-cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-116. - Subscriber complaints. 
(a)  The company shall receive, act upon and resolve subscriber complaints, except for initial billing disputes and service calls, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  The company shall establish written procedures prescribing the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The company shall file a copy of these procedures with the city clerk. 
(2)  Any complaints from subscribers shall be investigated and acted upon as soon as possible, but at least within three (3) business days of their receipt. The company shall keep a log of all complaints received describing the nature of each complaint, the date and time it was received, the disposition of the complaint and the time and date thereof. This log shall be made available for inspection of the city for the period of one (1) year preceding any request. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to review the company's response to subscriber complaints in order to determine the company's compliance with the franchise requirements. In the event of an unresolved dispute between the company and a subscriber, it shall be the right of the cable commission to mediate a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-117. - Additional service standards; exceptions. 
(1)  Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by the company to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement, and the company shall comply with such standards in the operation of the cable television system. In addition, any national or local service standards that may be adopted by federal or state law in the future providing for a higher level of protection for subscribers than provided by this article, shall be deemed adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prevent or prohibit: 
(a)  The City of Warren and the company from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this ordinance; 
(b)  The City of Warren from enforcing, through the end of the franchise term, pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this ordinance; 
(c)  The City of Warren from enforcing any consumer protection law; or 
(d)  The establishment or enforcement of any ordinance or regulation concerning customer service requirements that exceed, or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this ordinance 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-118. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The company shall file with the Warren City Clerk, on a quarterly basis, a notarized statement certifying compliance with these customer service standards, and to ensure compliance with the telephone answering standards, the company shall attach a written record of the times and dates of all incoming telephone calls, answering response time, and busy signal time. 
(b)  The cable commission shall be responsible for monitoring compliance with this article. Upon any determination that the company has violated any provision of this article, the cable commission shall provide the company with five (5) days' notice to establish its compliance with any or all of the standards required above. The company shall provide sufficient documentation to permit the city to verify the compliance. 
(c)  A repeated and verifiable pattern of non-compliance with this article, after the company's receipt of due notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
(d)  For any verified violation of this article, the cable commission may in its discretion assess liquidated damages not to exceed an amount up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) each day the company is in violation. The total amount of liquidated damages assessed may not exceed the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any one (1) day. Such assessment of liquidated damages shall not constitute a waiver by the city of any other right or remedy it may have under any state or federal law or this cable franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-119. - Repealer. 
This ordinance is intended to supplement and strengthen the customer service and related provisions set forth in the city's existing cable franchise ordinance. Accordingly, only those portions, if any, of existing ordinances which conflict and cannot be reconciled with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Sec. 10-120. - Severability. 
If any part of this article is for any reason held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, said portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-470, § 1, 11-9-94)  
Secs. 10-121—10-150. - Reserved.  
Chapter 11 - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND COST RECOVERY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; ambulances, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Emergency preparedness act, MCL 30.401 et seq.; governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an organization that will insure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency and disaster. 
(b)  The office of emergency services will be the coordinating agency responsible for city-wide emergency preparedness; it will provide the means through which the city council and the mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this chapter and Act No. 390, Public Acts of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.). 
(c)  This chapter will not relieve any elected officials or municipal departments of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 
(Code 1967, § 2-701)  
Sec. 11-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Disaster means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snow, ice or wind storm, wave action, oil damage, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action. Riots and other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this term unless they directly result from, and are an aggravating element of, the disaster. 
District coordinator means the state police district emergency services coordinator or his or her authorized representative. 
Emergency operations plan means the city emergency operations plan which has been prepared under this chapter to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the city. 
Emergency services shall have a broad meaning to include preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and man-made disasters, and to include civil defense. 
Emergency services forces means all disaster relief forces; all agencies of the municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees; and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this chapter or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this chapter. 
Emergency services volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
Local coordinator means the police commissioner or any authorized representative that may be appointed by the police commissioner to coordinate the emergency service program for the city. 
State of disaster means a declaration by executive order of proclamation by the governor under the provisions of Act 390, Public Acts of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.), which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local, and inter-jurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply. 
(Code 1967, § 2-702) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, MCL 30.402.  
Sec. 11-3. - Organization for emergency services. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the city. The mayor, as executive head of the city government, shall be the head of the emergency services forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the local coordinator. 
(b)  The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An office of emergency services established within the police department. The office of emergency services shall be administered by the police commissioner who will be known as the local coordinator, office of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to, emergency services activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be by the mayor. 
(c)  All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and other agencies of the city government designated by the mayor as emergency services forces shall cooperate with the local coordinator in the formulation of the emergency operations plan, and they shall assist the local coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 2-703)  
Sec. 11-4. - Local coordinator. 
(a)  The police commissioner shall serve as the local coordinator. He or she shall avail himself or herself of the training needed to coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments and individuals within the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
(b)  Assistant local coordinators shall be designated to work with the local coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant coordinators shall be selected and shall serve as follows: 
(1)  There shall be one (1) such assistant coordinator appointed from each city department as designated by the department head, with the approval of the mayor, as part of the emergency services forces. 
(2)  If the local coordinator is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations, assistant local coordinators shall assume these duties in the order of designation by the mayor, acting upon the recommendation of the local coordinator. 
(Code 1967, § 2-704) 
State Law reference— Local coordinator, MCL 30.409.  
Sec. 11-5. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified herein. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the mayor invoke such power and authority, he or she shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the city council to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the city council unless specifically provided herein. 
(b)  Whenever the mayor deems that any condition in the city is beyond the control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, he or she may request the governor to declare a state of disaster exists therein by instructing the local coordinator to contact the district coordinator with Section 14, Act 390, Public Acts of 1976 (MCL 30.414). 
(c)  The mayor, with the approval of the city council, is hereby empowered and has the authority: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for disaster purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster; 
(3)  To assign and make equipment available for duty, the employees, property or equipment of the city relating to firefighting; engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services; police, transportation, construction, and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the city; 
(4)  In the event of a foreign attack upon this state, to waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(d)  The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(e)  The mayor, with the approval of the city council, may make regulations permitting the director to assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in subsections (b) and (c). 
(f)  When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the mayor may, until the city council convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental and expenditure of existing funds, and the council is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(Code 1967, § 2-705)  
Sec. 11-6. - Powers and duties of local coordinator. 
(a)  The local coordinator shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the city. He or she shall maintain liaison with county, state and federal authorities, and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to insure the most effective emergency operations. 
(b)  His or her duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Development of the city emergency operations plan, and any other appropriate disaster plans, for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(2)  Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency purposes; 
(3)  Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster; 
(4)  Conducting practice alerts and exercises to insure the efficient operation of the city's emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the city with emergency regulations, procedures and operations; 
(5)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs; 
(6)  Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters; 
(7)  Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters; 
(8)  Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at the county level and adjacent municipalities. 
(Code 1967, § 2-706)  
Sec. 11-7. - Volunteers. 
(a)  Each department, commission, board, or other agency of city government may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such city department, commission, board or agency in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as emergency services volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, commission, board or agency head for such volunteers. 
(b)  The local coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the city has no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in emergency activities. The local coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for workers' compensation purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 2-707)  
Sec. 11-8. - Rights of city employees. 
City employees assigned to duty as a part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall retain all of the rights, privileges and immunities of city employees, and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-708) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 30.411(1)(b).  
Sec. 11-9. - No governmental or private liability. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. As such, neither the city nor agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association nor trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, acting in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of the activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or during an authorized practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1967, § 2-709) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 30.411(2), (3), (6).  
Sec. 11-10. - Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1967, § 2-710) 
State Law reference— Temporary ordinances or rules, MCL 30.412(2).  
Sec. 11-11. - Violations of orders, rules and regulations; false identification. 
It shalt be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any emergency services forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency services forces of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. 
(Code 1967, § 2-711)  
Sec. 11-12. - Price gouging during an emergency. 
When an emergency is declared by the mayor or city council, it shall be unlawful for any person within the City of Warren to charge more than the average retail price for any goods sold. The average retail price is defined as a price that is similar to prices being charged during the ninety (90) days immediately preceding the emergency, or a mark-up that is a larger percentage over wholesale cost than was being added to wholesale cost prior to the declared emergency. 
(Ord. No. 80-540, § 1, 12-22-98)  
ARTICLE II. - COST RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 11-13. - Purpose. 
The remediation and response to medical emergencies or extraordinary emergencies consume city funds that would otherwise be available to sustain standard city emergency response services. It is in the public interest to have an article that would authorize the collection of medical emergency costs and other emergency response costs from the responsible party. This would include emergencies associated with downed or damaged electrical, water and gas utility lines and facilities, accidents, fireworks, medical marihuana growth or manufacturing, harboring of dangerous or exotic animals, environmental or hazardous material discharges, fires, explosions, collapses, or other dangerous or imminent events that involve technical rescue, or hazardous mat response services. This article is intended to provide the base for recovering the costs of responding, investigating, and/or restoring public order and safety, as a result of medical and extraordinary emergencies and incidents, and to pursue payment from the responsible parties. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-14. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the words and phrases stated below will have the meanings: 
City. The City of Warren, or any officer, employee, board, commission or agent, acting within the scope of actual or apparent authority. 
Emergency response costs. The actual and necessary costs attributed to an emergency response, except as may be limited by policy adopted by the governing body. Costs include any labor, equipment, or material associated with the investigation, removal, repair, abatement, mitigation, monitoring, cleanup, analysis, collection and sampling, or attorney fees, and: 
a.  Compensation of employees or officers, or agents, including overtime, and fringe benefits; 
b.  Transportation costs; 
c.  Administrative overhead costs; 
d.  Equipment, apparatus, material, and/or tool costs; 
e.  Replacement costs for equipment and tools damaged, lost or contaminated beyond reuse or repair during the emergency response; 
f.  Rental or leasing of equipment specifically for the emergency incident; 
g.  Decontamination of equipment contaminated during response; 
h.  Medical costs of any employees, agents or officers incurred as a result of the emergency response; 
i.  Disposal or treatment costs; 
j.  Hazardous material incident response labor, material and equipment expenses; 
k.  Technical rescue personnel, material and equipment; 
l.  Testing and laboratory costs of sample collection and analysis; 
m.  Costs of clean-up, storage, disposal or treatment of hazardous materials, and equipment and materials that become contaminated during the response; 
n.  Costs of contractual or specialized services required for the response; 
o.  Costs to be paid to another governmental agency or unit responding to the incident. 
p.  Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the emergency response. 
q.  Costs to investigate and prepare reports of a fire incurred by the Fire Department; 
r.  Costs to collect the Recoverable Costs, including attorney fees; 
s.  Medical service rendered to, and received by, a confined person during the course of his or her confinement with the city, or at the city's or a court's direction, including, without limitation, transportation to and from a medical treatment facility, and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or not requested by the confined person, if such costs are not paid directly to the medical facility or practitioner by the confined person or his or her insurance carrier. 
Emergency response means the personnel, equipment, tools and materials, and services, utilized or deployed by the city, including, without limitation, firefighters, police officers, supporting personnel, engineers, traffic control devices, vehicles, ambulances, barricades, consultants and professional services, emergency medical services, removal or rescue services or teams in connection with the response, search, investigation, mitigation, clean-up, remediation or restoration to, of, or following, an emergency incident, as defined below or as otherwise deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Emergency response shall include all such activities conducted at the request of another governmental agency whether within the City of Warren or outside the city boundaries in connection with an intergovernmental agreement. 
Responsible party. Any individual or entity, including without limitation, any corporation, firm, partnership, association, limited liability company, agency, business, public or private utility, video service or telecommunications provider or owner or manager of telecommunications equipment, professional, agency or governmental entity, joint venture, partnership or any other person or entity responsible for, contributing to or proximately causing, and emergency incident or necessitating the emergency response. This definition will include any owner, manager, lessee or lessor of property who is responsible for, or contributes to an emergency incident; any registered owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any motor vehicle, the operation of which resulted in an emergency incident, or a passenger thereof whose actions were a proximately cause of an emergency incident; any public or private utility or any owner, installer, or manager of a cellular tower, telecommunications equipment, or related facilities; a person owning, maintaining or operating a railroad; a bank, mortgagee or other lien holder which acquired legal or equitable rights to the property. Responsible party shall include their heirs, estates, successors, assigns and legal and personal representatives, receivers, and principals and officers. 
Emergency incidents shall mean any of the following occurrences: 
1.  Water, sewer, gas and electrical utility emergencies. Any failure, disruption, rupture, disabling, destruction, collapse, fire, damage, explosion, or downing of any pipeline, utility pole, wires or lines, or device used in the transmission of electricity, gas, electronic signals, water, or sewage; or the emission, leak or discharge, outage or hazard arising out of or related to any gas, electrical, communication, cable or other utility service, whether accidental or non-accidental or causes by natural or unnatural causes. 
2.  Telecommunications emergencies. Any explosion, fire, hazard, unsafe emission, or release of any harmful substance, material, or radioactive frequency, from a utility, including batteries or generators, or telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, video-ready access device boxes or shelters, and any telecommunication device or facilities, such as pole-top antennae, distributive antenna systems or fixed wireless systems, cellular towers, underground or aerial fiber (collectively, telecommunications facilities). Telecommunications emergency will include the installation, maintenance or operation or presence of telecommunications facilities. 
3.  Explosions, collapse, or railroad disasters. Any explosion or collapse of any home, building or other structure, railroad derailment, or any other explosion or collapse of any other nature or from any other cause, which destroys, damages, or encroaches public or private property or pedestrian or vehicular access. 
4.  Medical treatment of confined persons. City costs incurred as a result of medical services provided to persons while held in custody, confined, or incarcerated by the city, including, but not limited to: individuals who are i) under arrest, ii) incarcerated; iii) imprisoned; iv) escaped from confinement, including escape while being transported during the course of confinement or while held in confinement by a judge; v) while under supervised release; vi) on medical furlough; vii) residing in a half-way house or mental health facility; viii) living under home detention; or ix) confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or rule (confined person), for medical, including, without limitation, costs of accompanying the person to or from a medical or psychiatric treatment facility or medical or psychiatric practitioner. 
5.  Unusual animal situations. Ownership, keeping or harboring or exotic, non-household, or dangerous animals, reptiles, spiders, insects, pests, rodents, or fowl, other than household pets, and/or violations of chapter 2 of this Code, or allowing or creating conditions that attract pests, rodents, insects, non-household animals. This shall include the escape any of such animals, insects, pest, rodents, fowl, reptiles or spiders. 
6.  Animal disposition. Any voluntary release of a pet or animal for the disposition or care of that animal or pet to the City of Warren Police Department, or abandoning an animal or pet by releasing from his or her care without arranging for another owner or caregiver of the animal or pet. 
7.  Any obstruction, removal, defacement, damage, restriction from access of a fire hydrant or fire department connections for the pressurization of fire suppression system located on public or private streets, access lanes or private property. When feasible, the fire department will provide a notice and opportunity to remove the obstruction or encroachment, and upon failure to comply, the fire department may have the necessary work performed, and the recoverable costs will be sought from the responsible party. 
8.  Illegal or preventable fires. A fire caused i) by a knowing and intentional violation of a federal, state or local law or regulation, including, without limitation, an arson fire; ii) in violation of a 'no burning' or 'no outdoor fire' ban without a permit; iii) by the negligent or uncontrolled operation, use or ignition of a fire pit, bonfire or open burning container or barbecue, including the use of a barbecue in a garage or outdoor structure; or iv) by the ignition, discharge or launch of legal or illegal fireworks. 
9.  Hazardous material incidents. The emission, release, eruption, or improper transportation, disposal, storage, use, or treatment, of any substance or material, in any form, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious, or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any other substance or substances, on to any public or private property or utility easements, roads, public or private easements, soil or air, and which constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, animals, or the environment. 
10.  Technical rescue. Complex search and/or rescue incidents requiring specially trained personnel and special equipment to complete the mission. Technical rescue incidents include, without limitation, vehicle and machinery rescue, collapse rescue, trench rescue, water rescue, rope rescue, confined space rescue, wild or vicious animal search and rescue, dive search and rescue, and other search and/or rescue operation requiring specialized operations. 
11.  Fire investigation and administration costs. All costs to investigate and prepare reports of an arson or fire. 
12.  Illegal sewer discharge. Any discharge or migration of a substance, composition in or to a public sewer that violates any ordinances, or any federal to state law, regulation or standard. 
13.  Any response by the fire department, entity operating at the request of the fire department, or any other responder as set forth in the national incident management system (Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5), to any call or request for assistance, including medical emergencies, from any person, property owner, government agency, emergency service provider, or other entity. 
14.  Any explosion, injury, damage, fire, harmful release, emission, or hazard directly or indirectly caused by the storage, growth, disposal, manufacturing, processing or cultivation or medical marihuana or any other controlled substance or equipment associated with such medical marihuana or any other controlled substance. 
15.  The activation of an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement or emergency responders when i) no crime has occurred or been attempted; or ii) no fire, hazard or emergency has occurred; or the activation of an alarm on a car or premises in that continues for more than ten (10) minutes without any attempt to abate the alarm by the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-15. - Reimbursement required. 
Responsible parties shall reimburse the city for all recoverable costs attributed to its emergency response to any emergency incident. When an emergency response directly benefits one (1) person or property, each person or property benefitted shall be jointly or severally liable for the payment of the costs of the emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-16. - Cost recovery allowed. 
The city shall have the authority to assess and collect all of its costs and expenses incurred as a result of its response, search, investigation, remediation and restoration of any emergency incident, and any other hazardous or emergency or extraordinary incidents, circumstances or occurrences. Cost recovery for hazardous materials response may be pursued in a civil action, pursuant to the natural resource environmental protection act (MCL 324.20135). 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-17. - Cost recovery procedures. 
The recoverable costs of the city shall be, either individually, or jointly and severally, charged against the responsible party or parties. Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the emergency response the primary responding department head will determine all costs incurred by the city, and will mail or have mailed by an authorized billing agent, by first-class mail, an invoice to the responsible party or parties with a detailed statement of the costs. The time for mailing the invoice may be delayed by the period reasonably necessary to determine all costs, for reasons including, but not limited to, incomplete remediation or testing, criminal prosecution, or insurance investigation. If the costs are not paid within thirty (30) days of the notice, a late fee of one (1) percent for each month may be assessed, unless the delay is the result of a pending criminal prosecution or payment schedule arranged through a court proceeding or insurance company. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-18. - Recoverable costs. 
The recoverable costs shall be a charge against the responsible party. The charge shall constitute a debt of that person and is collectible for the city for incurring those costs. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-19. - Right to appeal. 
Any party receiving an invoice for recoverable costs may appeal all or a portion of the amount by filing a written request for an appeal with the secretary of the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of the invoice. The request must be accompanied by a written explanation as to why the invoiced amount should not be charged to the party. The council, by a majority vote, may affirm the charges, or waive any or all of the charge. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-20. - Remedies. 
If an appeal which is not received within the time specified, or if the party does not pay the amount determined appropriate by the council, within thirty (30) days of its determination: 
(a)  The city attorney may proceed to initiate a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the monies owed. 
(b)  The responsible person shall be deemed to be in default to the city, until full payment is received by the city. 
(c)  To the extent allowed by law, any unpaid assessment may be assessed against the responsible party's real estate, after thirty (30) days' advance notice prior to the lien being recorded against the real estate; or 
(d)  Any unpaid assessment may be referred by the fire commissioner, or his or her designee, for collection by a bad debt agency or billing agent. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-21. - Additional remedies. 
In addition to the remedies set forth in this article, the city may concurrently or independently pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate action, proceeding or case in a court or public agency, as permitted by ordinance or state or federal law, rule or regulation, to collect the recoverable costs from the responsible party; provided, however, reimbursement of the recoverable costs that are actually received through any other remedy shall be deducted from the total amount pursued under this article. The remedies provided in this article shall be cumulative and shall supplement and not supersede any remedy provided by another ordinance, law or regulation. In conjunction with the remedies provided in this article, the city may pursue an order of restitution in any criminal prosecution or seek reimbursement of some or all of the charges available from the responsible party's insurance provider. In the case of utility emergencies, the recoverable costs may be obtained from an escrow held by the division of engineering according to the policy determined by the administrative head of the division of engineering, or set-off from any fund held by the City of Warren that may be due the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-22. - Severability. 
Should any provision or part of this article be declared by any court or public agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining parts and provisions of the article shall remain valid and enforceable, and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-23. - Preemption. 
To the extent any provision of this article conflicts with or is preempted by any provision of federal or state law, rule or regulation, such state or federal provision shall be deemed to control, and is incorporated by reference and may be enforced in connection with the enforcement or this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 11-24. - Savings clause. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy be lost, impaired or affected by this article. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to diminish, affect, impair or waive any governmental immunity provided to the City of Warren, or its officers or employees or agents under the Governmental Liability for Negligence Act, MCL 691.1401, et seq., or to create any special relationship to any person receiving the benefit of an emergency situation response. 
(Ord. No. 80-760, § 3, 8-8-17)  
Secs. 11-25—11-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 11.5 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
ARTICLE I. - PROHIBITION OF THE USE OF COAL TAR AND OTHER HIGH PAH CONTENT SEALANT PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 11.5-1. - Purpose. 
An ordinance to enforce the prohibition of the use of coal tar and other high PAH content sealant products within the City of Warren. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the community through prohibiting the use of sealant products or substances containing >0.1% Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) by weight, including coal tar-based dealer in the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 80-767, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-18)  
Sec. 11.5-2. - Definitions. 
The following terms and phrases, when used within this article shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Asphalt-based sealer means a petroleum-based sealer material that is commonly used on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces. 
City means the City of Warren. 
Coal tar means a byproduct of the process used to refine coal. 
Coal tar sealant products means a surface-applied sealing product containing coal tar, coal tar pitch, coal tar pitch volatiles, RT-12, Refined Tar or any variation thereof, including those substances assigned the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers 65996-92-1, 65996-93-2, 65996-89-6, or 8007-45-2 or related substances containing more than 0.1% PAHs, by weight. 
High PAH content sealant product means a surface-applied product containing steam-cracked petroleum residues, steam-cracked asphalt, pyrolysis fuel oil, heavy fuel oil, ethylene tar, or any variation of those substances including those substances assigned the chemical abstracts service number 64742-90-1, 69013- 21-4 or related substances containing more than 0.1% PAHs, by weight. 
PAHs means Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons. A group of organic chemicals formed during the incomplete burning of coal oil, gas, or other organic substances that is present in coal tar and known to be harmful to humans, fish, and other aquatic life. 
(Ord. No. 80-767, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-18)  
Sec. 11.5-3. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person or entity shall apply a coal tar or other high PAH content sealant product or substance on any surfaces within the City of Warren. 
(b)  No person or entity shall allow a coal tar or other high PAH content sealant product to be applied upon property that is under that person's ownership or control. 
(c)  No person or entity shall contract with any commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or any other person for the application of any coal tar or other high PAH content sealant product to any driveway, parking lot, or surface within the City of Warren. 
(d)  No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or other similar individual or organization or entity shall direct any employee, independent contractor, volunteer, entity or other person to apply any coal tar or other high PAH content sealant product to any driveway, parking lot, or any other surface within the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 80-767, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-18)  
Sec. 11.5-4. - Asphalt-based sealcoat products. 
The provisions of this article shall only apply to coal tar or other high PAH content sealant products in the City of Warren and shall not otherwise affect the use of asphalt-based sealer products within the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 80-767, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-18)  
Sec. 11.5-5. - Severability. 
The sections of this article are severable, and if any section, clause, or provision of this article is declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the same will not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 80-767, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-18)  
Sec. 11.5-6. - Penalties. 
Any person or entity that knowingly violates any of the provisions of this article will be responsible for a civil infraction punishable by the following: 
(1)  For residential application: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second offense and twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the third offense. 
(2)  For commercial application: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense, twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the second offense and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the third offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-767, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-18) 
State Law reference— Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act 451 of 1994, as amended; found at MCL 324.101 et seq. and The Home Rule City Act 279 of 1909, as amended; found at MCL 117.1 et seq.  
Chapter 12 - FILMING  
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to require registration for all filming activities that are conducted within the city and are not exempt from registration under section 12-5. The intent is to ensure that still photographers and motion picture, television, commercial and non-theatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations for filming activities within the city so long as those activities are consistent with public safety and the protection of property. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Applicant means the person, organization, corporation, association or other entity registering to film in the City of Warren. 
Film coordinator means the person or office designated to maintain the filming registration and coordinate filming activities in the City of Warren. 
Filming activity means the staging, shooting, filming, videotaping, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television programs, commercial and non-theatrical film productions. 
Film registration means the procedure required to engage in filming activities in the City of Warren which is designed to ensure public safety and the protection of property. 
News purposes means a filming activity conducted for the purpose of reporting on persons, events, or scenes which are in the news for newspapers, television news, and other news media. 
Public street means any street, highway or road located within the city, publicly maintained and open for use by the public for vehicular travel. 
Still photography means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial still photographs. 
Student filming activity means filming activity conducted to fulfill a course requirement by a student enrolled at a public or private school. 
Studio means a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-3. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 12-4. - Registration required. 
No person, organization, corporation, association or other entity, shall engage in any filming activity without first registering with the film coordinator using the registration form required by the city. The registration of filming activity does not constitute or grant permission to use or occupy private property or property owned, leased or controlled by the city. An applicant shall obtain the private property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of the private property. Use of city-owned property shall comply with article III. The approved registration form shall be kept at the filming location and upon request must be shown to a city inspector or other city representative acting under the direction of a department head. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-5. - Registration exemptions. 
(1)  The following activities may be conducted without registration and are exempt from compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter provided that the activity will not require the closure of a public street, or substantially impede vehicular traffic thereon: 
(a)  Filming activities conducted for news purposes. 
(b)  Filming activities conducted at studios. 
(c)  Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceedings. 
(d)  Filming activities conducted solely for private or family use. 
(e)  Commercial still photography or staging thereof, when conducted to the exclusion of any other filming activity when all of the following conditions apply: 
1.  The still photography or staging, will not be conducted on a public street or other city property; and 
2.  The still photography or staging, will not require the parking of more than two (2) motor vehicles on any public street within the city. 
(f)  Filming activities conducted by or for the city. 
(g)  Student filming activities. 
(2)  If any of the above-listed activities require the closure of a street or will substantially impede traffic, registration is required and compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-6. - Registration deadline. 
Filming activities shall be registered with the film coordinator in advance of the date the film activity is to begin. Registrants are encouraged to register at the earliest advance date possible in order to facilitate coordination between city departments. In the event there are other services requested such as public safety services, road closure, parking lot use, use of city-owned property, a fire permit or fire safety services, other permits or applications may be required. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-7. - Registration form. 
All filming activity registrations shall be on a form furnished by the film coordinator signed by the applicant or agent thereof. The form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information concerning the activities to be conducted within the city: 
(a)  Name and address of production company, and title of project. 
(b)  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant. 
(c)  Name, address, and telephone number of contact person in charge of filming on location. 
(d)  Filming location(s), dates and approximate daily schedule of proposed filming activity. 
(e)  Description of scenes to be filmed including details of any hazardous filming activity employing firearms, explosives, the use of open flame, other pyrotechnical effects, animals, stunts, filming of moving motor vehicles, watercraft or aircraft. 
(f)  Description of the types and number of motor vehicles which will be parked on public streets, and description of any equipment to be placed on public property. 
(g)  Special assistance that is requested such as, street closure, traffic control, emergency services and fire services. 
(h)  A parking plan and base camp location. 
(i)  Submission of insurance certificates certifying compliance with insurance requirements. 
(j)  A location release form signed by the private property owner. 
(k)  An application to use city-owned property, if applicable. 
(l)  Temporary road closure permit, if applicable. 
(m)  Such other information as the film coordinator may require. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Secs. 12-8—12-11. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - USE OF CITY-OWNED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 12-12. - Application to use city-owned property; form. 
In addition to registering the filming activity, if the activity will be conducted on city-owned property or a street closure is requested, an application to use city-owned property shall also be filed using the form furnished by the film coordinator. Included with all applications to use city-owned property shall be the following documentation using forms furnished by the film coordinator: 
(a)  Registration form. 
(b)  Certificate of insurance. 
(c)  Indemnity and hold harmless agreement. 
(d)  Any required building or fire permit. 
(e)  Any required city, county or state (MDOT) road closure permit. 
(f)  Agreement to reimburse the city for the cost of all services requested, including but not limited to: police, fire, public works, parks and recreation, use of city-owned parking lots, parks or street closure expenses. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-13. - Approval of application to use city-owned property. 
A complete application filed with all required documentation, shall be approved or denied within three (3) business days of receipt of the application unless the proposed filming activity requires extensive review by other city departments. The application shall be approved by the film coordinator unless it is determined that any of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  The filming activity will substantially disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles in the proposed area. 
(b)  The location of the filming activity will substantially interfere with street maintenance work or a previously authorized excavation permit. 
(c)  The proposed location and the filming activity will substantially interfere with other previously authorized activities, contracts or safety of the public or employees while on city property. 
(d)  The proposed location and the filming activity will substantially interfere with municipal functions or the scheduled maintenance of city buildings or grounds. 
(e)  The filming activity creates a substantial risk of injury to persons or damage to property. 
(f)  The applicant refused to reimburse the city for all costs and expenses the city anticipates it will incur due to the proposed filming activity. 
(g)  The applicant failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
(h)  The particular filming activity would violate federal, state, or local law including licensing or permit requirements. 
When the grounds for denial can be corrected by imposing reasonable conditions, the film coordinator may impose such conditions rather than denying approval. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-14. - Conditions to application approval. 
The film coordinator may condition the approval of an application to use city-owned property by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place, manner and duration of filming activities as referenced on the "Terms and Conditions" section of the application, such conditions include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Requirements for the presence of city employees at the applicant's expense, due to the particular filming activity. 
(b)  Requirements for the posting of no parking signs, placement of traffic control devices, and use of traffic and crowd control monitors at the applicant's expense. 
(c)  Requirements concerning posting of the boundaries of the filming activity, and providing advance notice to property owners/businesses. 
(d)  Requirements for the cleanup and restoration of public streets and city property used for the filming activity. 
(e)  Restrictions concerning the use of city employees, vehicles or equipment for the filming activity. 
(f)  Requirements that the applicant pay all fees, and obtain all permits and licenses required for the filming activity under local, state and federal law. 
(g)  Restrictions on the use of firearms, explosions, and other noise creating or hazardous devices which disturb the public peace. 
(h)  Restrictions on the use of stunts involving pyrotechnics, open flame, vehicle crashes or other hazardous materials. 
(i)  Requiring official uniforms worn by actors to be covered up when the actors are not on camera. 
(j)  Restrictions concerning the use of city logos, insignias, badges or decals for filming purposes. 
(k)  Restrictions on the daily hours the filming activity may be conducted within the city. 
(l)  Requiring the city to receive proper acknowledgement for any assistance provided in making feature, television, or commercial productions. 
(m)  Requirements concerning affirmative action and nondiscriminatory practices for employment. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Secs. 12-15—12-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-20. - Notices prior to filming. 
The applicant shall provide written notice to residents and businesses in proximity to filming locations no less than three (3) business days prior to commencing with the filming activity using the notice form provided by the city. The city shall provide a list of addresses for the geographic area required. The film coordinator shall determine the required geographic area where notice shall be provided considering the following: 
(a)  The location of the filming activity and the zoning districts of the surrounding area; 
(b)  The extent of traffic and crowd control measures that will be implemented; 
(c)  The closure of streets or other public property; 
(d)  The use of stunts involving pyrotechnics, open flame, vehicle crashes, or other hazardous materials; 
(e)  Filming activities that may disturb the public peace; 
(f)  The time of the scheduled filming activities. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-21. - Insurance required. 
Due to the wide variety of the types of filming activity, standard insurance provisions may be inadequate, therefore, anyone conducting filming activities in the City of Warren shall procure and maintain for the duration of the film activity insurance in the forms, types, and amounts prescribed by the city's insurance manager. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-22. - Reimbursement of costs. 
The city shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred by the city due to the filming activity. Reimbursable expenses shall include costs of street closure, personnel expenses for all city employees providing services during the filming activity, such as police, fire, public works, costs for placement of traffic control signs, blockades, use of city-owned parking lots or other city-owned property for the filming activity. Upon registration of a film activity, the applicant shall submit an acknowledgment that the applicant is responsible for reimbursement for all actual expenses incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-23. - Temporary street closure. 
Upon registration of a filming activity, a request may be made that the city authorize a temporary street closure. Approval of a permit for temporary street closure for filming activity may be granted by the police commissioner or his or her designee. Application for a permit shall be submitted with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) cash bond to insure cleanup of debris and a copy of the applicant's certificate of insurance as required by section 12-21. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-24. - Use of city parks. 
Upon registration of a filming activity, a request may be made to use a city park by filing an application to approve filming activity on city property. Such approval may be granted by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-25. - Pyrotechnics. 
During the filming of any special effect or stunt requiring the use of pyrotechnics or any material deemed hazardous, including but not limited to fireworks, open flames, or explosives, the applicant must obtain a fire permit by the Warren Fire Department. The fire department shall determine the need for fire suppression personnel or equipment while pyrotechnics are on location. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-26. - Cleanup. 
Upon completion of the filming activity, all materials and debris shall be entirely removed and the property shall be cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the filming activity, unless the property owner agrees to retaining any alterations. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-27. - Registration or application denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The film coordinator may deny, suspend or revoke any registration or application if the applicant or any agents, employees or contractors of the applicant fail to comply with any requirements of this chapter or determines that the registration or application was false in any material detail. Notice of the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation shall be provided in writing by the film coordinator. 
(b)  Hazard suspension. If an officer assigned to the filming site by the police department or the fire department, such officer is authorized to suspend the film registration, application approval or permit when the filming activity poses an immediate hazard to persons or property and the location manager will not, or cannot, prevent the hazard after being instructed to do so by the officer. The grounds for the suspension shall be provided in writing within one (1) business day of the suspension. An appeal of the suspension shall be conducted in the manner specified in section 12-28. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-28. - Appeal. 
(a)  A denial, revocation, suspension, condition, or insurance requirement of the film coordinator may be appealed to the mayor. The appeal shall be filed not later than five (5) business days after the date written notice of the decision is made. Failure to file timely appeal shall result in a waiver of the right to appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the mayor or his or her designee. 
(b)  The mayor, or designee, shall hold a hearing no later than five (5) business days after the filing of the appeal, and shall render his or her decision not later than two (2) business days after the appeal hearing. The decision of the mayor, or designee, may be appealed to the city council at its next available meeting. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 12-29. - Violation; penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-678, § 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Secs. 12-30—12-40. - Reserved.  
Chapter 13 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-466, adopted Sept. 13, 1994, amended former Arts. I and II of Ch. 13, relative to general provisions and the fire prevention code to read as herein set out. Further, said ordinance redesignated former Art. III as Div. 3 of Art. II and also added a Div. 4 to said article. The provisions of former Arts. I and II derived from Code 1967 §§ 4-301, 4-303—4-305, 4-307, 4-309—4-314, 4-316, 4-317 and 8-218 and 8-219; and Ord. No. 80-322, adopted May 27, 1986; Ord. No. 80-337, adopted May 12, 1987; Ord. No. 80-367, adopted Jan. 10, 1989; Ord. No. 80-390, adopted April 9, 1991. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate construction of buildings to prevent fires, § 3.1(b)(2)(i); public safety, § 7.16 et seq. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; emergency preparedness, Ch. 11; fire safety for mobile homes, § 20-47; fire extinguisher for mobile homes, § 20-68; false alarms, § 22-24; interference with fire emergency alarm systems, § 22-25; kindling fires restricted in parks, § 23-11; public improvements for fire hydrants in subdivisions, § 35-104; fire extinguishers required for parking lots and stations, § 37-597; water connections with street mains for fire prevention, § 41-29. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Purpose. 
This article entitled the Fire Prevention Code, is adopted in order to establish minimum regulations to govern the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 1, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-2. - Application of International Fire Code. 
(a)  Adoption. The International Fire Code, adopted by the State of Michigan and incorporated into the Michigan Building Code, as amended and filed with the Secretary of State, together with all appendixes as listed in subsection (b), and any and all amendments set forth in Article II, shall be the applicable minimum regulations governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards as if fully set forth in this section. All additions, deletions and changes are adopted in Article II of this chapter. The code official as authorized by ordinance shall administer and enforce the International Fire Code and all appendixes to the Code as incorporated, and all additions, deletions and changes as set forth in Article II of this chapter. The Code is available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Appendixes. All appendixes as attached to the International Fire Code are listed below and adopted as if set forth fully herein: 
Appendix A. Board of Appeals; 
Appendix B. Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings; 
Appendix C. Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution; 
Appendix D. Fire Apparatus Access Roads; 
Appendix E. Hazard Categories; 
Appendix F. Hazard Ranking; 
Appendix G. Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 1, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-524, § 1, 11-12-97; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-663, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 80-704, § 1, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 13-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Warren. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(c)  Wherever the words "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" or "fire marshal" are used in the Fire Prevention Code and in this article, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal. 
(d)  Wherever the term "fire official" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall also be held to mean "fire inspector." 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 13-4. - Permits required by International Fire Code. 
Those provisions contained in section 105 of the International Fire Code as adopted by reference, requiring the issuance of certain permits are hereby repealed except those specifically enumerated in this chapter. This provision repealing all permit issuance requirements pertains only to the actual issuance of the permit and does not in any way repeal or otherwise effect the regulations contained therein or the ability to inspect for compliance with the International Fire Code regulations as adopted and incorporated. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 1, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-5. - Modifications. 
When there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Fire Prevention Code, the Fire Prevention Division Chief shall have the authority to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code or amendments upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent. The chief shall ensure that the spirit of the code is observed, public safety is secured and substantial justice done. A record of the decision of the chief and a statement as to the reasons for the approval or disapproval shall be kept on file in the fire department and a copy sent to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 13-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, repealed § 13-6, which pertained to fees. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 13-7. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of Article I is a misdemeanor which shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 11, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 13-8. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, amended the title of Art. II to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-9. - In general. 
This article contains amendments to and modifications of the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted by reference in section 13-2, further, any provisions of the International Fire Code in conflict with the provisions specifically set forth in this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 2, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-10. - Fixed pipe dry chemical fire extinguishing systems. 
Any self service fuel dispensing facility that has installed a fixed pipe dry chemical fire extinguishing system, shall maintain the system in proper working order, unless removed. In the event the fixed pipe dry chemical fire extinguishing system becomes inoperable or is removed, all components to the system shall be entirely removed. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 2, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-11. - Parking on fire lanes or fire routes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor vehicle to park, stand or stop or allow such motor vehicle to be parked, stood or stopped on any portion of a fire lane or fire route, either public or private, where signs have been installed prohibiting the parking, standing or stopping of motor vehicles, except when in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 2, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 13-12. - Removal or tampering fire equipment; blocking or obstructing fire hydrant with snow, ice, dirt or litter. 
Section 901.8 of the International Fire Code, as amended, shall be amended as follows: 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or entity to obstruct, remove, tamper with, or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant, fire detection and alarm system, fire suppression system, or other fire appliance required by code or city ordinance except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when approved by the fire official. 
(1)  Fire Hydrant. Placing of snow, ice, dirt or litter. 
No person, firm, corporation, or entity shall place, sweep, push, plow, shovel or cause to be placed, swept, pushed, plowed or shoveled, any snow, ice, dirt or leaves of any kind that blocks or obstructs any fire hydrant. 
(b)  Whenever a fire appliance is removed as permitted by code or ordinance, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and unapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(c)  This section shall not apply any actions performed by City employees in the performance of their work. 
(Ord. No. 80-718, § 1, 2-26-14) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 13-12 by Ord. No. 80-718, Ord. No. 80-704, § 2, adopted June 26, 2012, repealed § 13-12 in its entirety. The former § 13-12 pertained to monitoring and derived from Ord. No. 80-466, § 2, adopted Sept. 13, 1994.  
Sec. 13-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, repealed § 13-13, which pertained to turnaround required. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 13-14. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of Division 1 of Article II is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 2, 11-12-97; Ord. No. 80-527, § 11, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 13-15. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVE DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, adopted June 25, 2019, in effect repealed div. 2, §§ 13-16—13-28 and enacted a new div. 2, §§ 13-16—13-29.1, as set out herein. The former division pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80-702, § 1, adopted June 26, 2012; and Ord. No. 80-710, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 25, 2013. 
 
Sec. 13-16. - Preamble. 
The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act 256 of 2011, effective January 1, 2012, as amended from time to time, legalized the sale of consumer fireworks in Michigan, and delegated to local communities limited control over the use and discharge of the fireworks. The City of Warren recognizes that fireworks endanger property, can cause physical injury, and disrupt the peace and quality of neighborhoods and commercial districts. The City of Warren endeavors to reconcile the rights that this Act confers upon sellers and consumers with the rights of the citizens and families to reside in a safe, harmonious community. The following ordinance is adopted to incorporate certain amendments to the Act, primarily provided by Public Acts 634 and 635 of 2018, and to impose conditions on the time, place and manner of use, discharge and ignition of fireworks deemed to be within the purview of local regulation and within the interest of the public, health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-17. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article, whether capitalized or not, will have the following meaning: 
Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act 256 of 2011, and any amendments to the Act which may be from time to time adopted. 
APA standard 87-1 means 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland. 
Articles pyrotechnic means the pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks, but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 C.F.R.172.101. 
Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in the APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low impact fireworks. 
Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects. 
Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, of non-toxic or non-explosive emissions, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks, as used in this Article, shall include consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, sky lanterns and special effects. 
Low impact fireworks means ground sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.18, and 3.5, except as provided below. 
Minor means an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Novelties means the term defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap; 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (1) are used, that are constructed so that the hand can not come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion; 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth (?) inch in diameter; 
(4)  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than twelve (12) pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; 
(5)  Toy smoke devices; and 
(6)  Handheld sparklers. 
Person means any individual, agent, legal representative, association, charitable organization, church, non-profit organization, unincorporated organization, labor organization, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or any legal entity or commercial organization. An individual shall include a minor as defined in this article. 
Sky lantern means any airborne paper lanterns constructed from oiled rice or other paper/materials on a frame, and contain a small candle, fuel cell or other similar lighting mechanism/device composed of a waxy or otherwise flammable material. When lit, the flame heats the air inside the lantern causing the lantern to rise into the air. 
Except as otherwise provided, other terms used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Act, or, if not defined in the Act, under the APA standards. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-18. - Prohibited fireworks. 
(a)  Consumer fireworks. A person shall not use, ignite, or discharge consumer fireworks within the geographical boundaries of the City of Warren. 
(b)  Exceptions. Consumer fireworks may be ignited, discharged, or used in the city: 
(1)  Between 11 a.m. on December 31 until 1 a.m. on January 1; 
(2)  Between 11 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day on each of those days; 
(3)  Between 11 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on June 29 to July 4 on each of those days; 
(4)  Between 11 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday; and 
(5)  Between 11 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day on each of those days. 
(c)  A person shall not discharge consumer fireworks on any day in violation of the Act, this article or any other city ordinance. 
(d)  Consumer fireworks shall not be discharged, ignited or used on church property, school property, property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks. 
(e)  Low impact. Low impact fireworks may not be discharged during the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 11 a.m. and may not otherwise be discharged in violation of this article or the Act, or any other ordinance. 
(f)  The use, ignition, launch or sale, retail display of offer for sale, of sky lanterns is prohibited. The sky lanterns may be allowed for special occasions upon approval of a display permit as provided in this article, provided the sky lanterns are used only in accordance with strict conditions as may be imposed by the fire marshal. 
(g)  Illegal fireworks. Any use, possession or discharge of any fireworks that is prohibited and/or not approved by the State of Michigan or the state fire marshal, or that which contains a prohibited chemical, component, compound or composition under the APA 87-1 Standard, or any federal or state law or regulation, is prohibited at all times and places, regardless of how it is labeled. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-19. - Minors. 
(a)  A minor shall not use, discharge or ignite any consumer fireworks, at any time, nor on any day. 
(b)  A minor shall not use, discharge, or ignite any low impact fireworks or novelty fireworks, unless under supervision of a parent or guardian, and the use, discharge and ignition is within permitted hours and does not violate the provisions of this article and the Act. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-20. - Public property. 
No fireworks, including consumer fireworks, low impact fireworks or novelty fireworks shall be discharged, used, or ignited on any public property, including public streets, public alleys, public parks, roads, sidewalks, easements and rights-of-way on any day. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-21. - General restrictions. 
(a)  Fireworks, including consumer fireworks, shall not be ignited within twenty (20) feet of an open flame, a burner, gasoline, ignited gas or electric grill, or any combustible or flammable item or compound, or in any enclosed structure, garage, tent, or shed, or under any canopy or overhanging cover, of any nature. 
(b)  Any use of fireworks that disrupts the peace of the public, which may include deposits of litter or debris caused by fireworks, is prohibited, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Act. 
(c)  No person shall, either individually or in concert with another person, cause damage to any private or public property by the use, discharge or ignition of any fireworks. Any violation of this provision is subject to any penalty imposed under the Act, except that damage to public property under control of the city or damage to any private property not protected under the Act is a misdemeanor or subject to any higher offenses available under state law. 
(d)  No consumer fireworks may be ignited, launched, or discharged within thirty (30) feet of any house, structure, building, vehicle, or landscaping. Landscaping may include, without limitation, any tree, bush, flowers, vegetable garden, or gazebo. 
(e)  No person shall at any time discharge or ignite any low impact fireworks within fifteen (15) feet of another person's property, without the owner's permission. 
(f)  No individual shall use, ignite or discharge consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks while under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance and/or a synthetic marijuana or other illegal substance. Alcoholic liquor means that term as defined in Section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1d, or any subsequent provision amending or replacing that provision. Controlled substance means that term as defined in Section 8b of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1d, or any subsequent provision amending or replacing that definition. Synthetic marijuana or other illegal substances are as determined under the Public Act 180-183 of 2012, and the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.2451. A violation of this provision shall result in the seizure, removal and storage of the fireworks at the expense of the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-22. - Applicability of general ordinances. 
Nothing in this article or in the Act shall preclude the enforcement of ordinances or laws of general applicability at any time or on any day regardless of whether the conduct or offense is secondary or incidental to the use, discharge or ignition of fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-23. - Compliance with the act and securing of applicable zoning approvals required. 
Any person selling, distributing or transporting fireworks shall otherwise comply with the Act, and is required to obtain the approvals that are necessary under the applicable provisions of the Code of Zoning Ordinances of the City of Warren or the Act. Failure to secure applicable zoning or other approvals is subject to penalty as provided in this article and/or Code of Zoning Ordinances of the City of Warren or the Act. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-24. - Seizure and removal of fireworks. 
Any fireworks that are possessed, sold, distributed or displayed in violation of the Act or the Code of Zoning Ordinances of the City of Warren are subject to seizure and removal by the police department or fire department, at the expense of the responsible person, in addition to other penalties as provided in this article or by other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-25. - Imminent danger or threat. 
Notwithstanding the Act, any use, discharge or ignition of fireworks that is presenting an imminent danger or threat to the public health, safety or welfare, as deemed by a police officer or the fire marshal, or his or her designee, shall be prohibited, and the fireworks may be immediately seized. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-26. - Prohibition. 
Any person who ignites, discharges or uses any consumer firework, low-impact fireworks, or novelty firework in a manner that is intended to harass, scare, or injure livestock is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-27. - Violation of order. 
Any violation of a no-burning order that may be imposed by the fire commissioner pursuant to the Public Act 636 of 2018 is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-28. - Penalties. 
(a)  Except for sections designated as a misdemeanor in this article or in other city ordinances of general applicability as may be enforced, a person who violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). From each violation of Section 13-18, five hundred dollars ($500.00) of the fine collected shall be remitted to the police department. 
(b)  Any violation of provision designated as a misdemeanor under this article may be punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or up to ninety (90) days in jail, plus costs. 
(c)  A violation of the Act shall be subject to the penalty imposed under the Act. 
(d)  A violation of any other city ordinance that may be enforced shall be subject to the penalty imposed by that ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-29. - Seizure and cost recovery. 
(a)  All fireworks used, discharged and ignited, and possessed in violation of the Act and this article are subject to seizure. Any costs incurred by the city to seize and store the fireworks shall be paid by the responsible person. 
(b)  Any costs the city incurs to respond and remediate any damage to private or public property or injury to another person shall be paid by any person responsible for the damage or injury. The city may pursue any legal remedies to collect such costs. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
Sec. 13-29.1. - Display fireworks. 
No display fireworks shall be ignited, used or displayed at any time unless approved in advance by the city council, upon application made to the city clerk on a form provided by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulation. At a minimum, the applicant be adequately insured and bonded, the applicant has submitted a security plan, safety compliance plans, and pay the application fee in an amount to be determined by the city council. A permit for display fireworks is supplemental to any other requirement for such display under the ordinances, including a license under Section 18-18, and zoning approval under Chapter 37 of the Code of Zoning Ordinances. In addition to other penalties for zoning violations, a violation of this act is a misdemeanor punishable by up to ninety (90) days in jail and/or a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). An exemption is allowed for fireworks displayed at a city event that is sponsored and approved by the City of Warren or one (1) of its commissions or boards, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 80-777 , § 1, 6-25-19)  
DIVISION 3. - RECOVERY OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE RELEASE COSTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to this chapter. 
 
Sec. 13-30. - Purpose. 
This article provides procedures for the recovery of those costs incurred by the city in responding to a hazardous substance release, including responses within the city by the South Macomb Incident Response Team (SMIRT). 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 4, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-31. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Hazardous substance response costs are the costs incurred by the city in responding to a hazardous substance release and includes but is not limited to: the actual costs of incident evaluation, monitoring, containment, mitigation, isolation, cleanup, removal or other activities taken in incident abatement, labor including fringe benefits, equipment use and operation, materials used, material disposal, analysis, and any other costs incurred to prevent, minimize or mitigate injury to the public health, safety and welfare. 
Hazardous substance response means the services provided by the city through the fire department, and other support personnel and departments, to a hazardous substance release in protection of the public's health, safety and welfare. 
Hazardous substance means one (1) or more of the following, but does not include fruit, vegetable, or field crop residuals or processing by-products, or aquatic plants, that are applied to the land for an agricultural use or for use as an animal feed, if the use is consistent with generally accepted agricultural management practices developed pursuant to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, Act No. 93 of the Public Acts of 1981: 
(1)  Any substance that poses an unacceptable risk to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment, considering the fate of the material, dose-response, toxicity, or adverse impact on natural resources. 
(2)  Hazardous substance under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Public Law 96-510. 
(3)  Hazardous waste as defined in part 111 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), P.A. 451 of 1994. 
(4)  Petroleum as described in part 213 of the NREPA. 
Hazardous substance release includes, but is not limited to, any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing of a hazardous substance into the environment including the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles containing a hazardous substance. 
Investigation costs are the costs incurred by the city in investigating a hazardous substance release and includes but is not limited to the actual costs of labor including fringe benefits, any equipment, materials or analysis required to perform a thorough investigation. 
(Ord. No. 80-421, § 2, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 80-466, § 4, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-605, § 1, 4-13-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-32. - Hazardous substance response cost responsibility. 
Any person who is responsible pursuant to the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, P.A. 451 of 1994, for a hazardous substance release, shall be responsible for all actual response and investigation costs incurred by the city or the South Macomb Incident Response Team (SMIRT). 
(Ord. No. 80-421, § 2, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 80-466, § 4, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-605, § 2, 4-13-04)  
Sec. 13-33. - Hazardous substance response cost billing. 
Following a response necessitated due to a hazardous substance release, the city shall send a bill to the responsible party for the hazardous substance response and investigation costs. All hazardous substance response costs shall be due and payable within thirty (30) calendar days of billing date. 
(Ord. No. 80-421, § 2, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 80-466, § 4, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 13-34. - Effect of payment. 
The payment of hazardous substance response and investigation costs shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge or reduce any civil or criminal liability of the person billed for the actual costs of a hazardous substance release. 
(Ord. No. 80-421, § 2, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 80-466, § 4, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 13-35. - Action to recover response costs. 
In the event that the responsible party fails to make payment to the city for the hazardous substance response or investigation costs within thirty (30) calendar days, the city may initiate legal action in the appropriate court to recover the response costs due and owing, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 80-421, § 2, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 80-466, § 4, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 13-36. - Emergency response plan inspection costs. 
The city shall recover costs incurred in inspecting a facility to prepare a required emergency response plan pursuant to the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, 42 USC 11003 as specified in division 7 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-605, § 3, 4-13-04)  
Secs. 13-37, 13-38. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - KEY BOXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, amended the title of Div. 4 to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 13-39. - Purpose. 
Experience shows that when a fire occurs in a building, the Warren Fire Department is faced with entry into the structure to locate, confine control and extinguish the fire. In many cases entry into the structure must be made by force, which is time consuming and demands extra energy to be exerted by fire fighting personnel. In order to expedite entry into the building and to aid the fire department responding, the installation and use of a key box may be required. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 5, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-40. - Key boxes required. 
(a)  Requirement . In addition to the provisions of Section 506 of the International Fire Code, a key box approved by the fire prevention division of the city fire department shall be installed and maintained on all buildings, except that a key box is not required for any building that the Michigan Residential Construction Code applies to. 
(b)  Issuance of a certificate of compliance . No certificate of compliance shall be issued to any building required to have a key box, as set forth in subsection (a), until it is demonstrated that a key box approved by the fire prevention division of the city fire department, has been installed as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 5, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-524, § 4, 11-12-97; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-704, § 3, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 13-41. - Location of key boxes. 
The location of the key box shall be approved by the fire prevention division of the city fire department. The fire department code official shall use one (1) or more of the following criteria to approve the location of the key box: 
(a)  The key box may be located at or near the recognized public entrance. 
(b)  The key box may be located adjacent to the alarm enunciator panel. 
(c)  When the occupancy is serviced by a fire sprinkler system, the key box may be located above the fire department connection. 
(d)  The key box shall be connected to the N.F.P.A. 72A Fire Alarm Control Panel when provided. Wiring for the connection shall be supervised as required by N.F.P.A. 72A. The key box shall be connected in such a manner that tampering or opening of the box shall produce a supervisory signal. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 5, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-704, § 4, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 13-42. - Key box contents. 
The key box shall contain keys that are labeled and identified as follows: 
(a)  The main entrance door, except that main entrance keys are only required for mixed occupancy and strip shopping centers where there is a system control valve or a fire alarm system panel; 
(b)  The alarm room; 
(c)  All mechanical rooms and sprinkler control rooms; 
(d)  The fire alarm control panel; 
(e)  The electrical rooms; 
(f)  Any special keys to reset pull-stations or other fire protective devices; 
(g)  The fire department elevator keys; 
(h)  Any other rooms that are specified by the Fire Prevention Division of the Warren Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 5, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-43. - Compliance. 
All new or remodeled structures must comply with the requirements of this article prior to occupancy. Required approvals and specifications shall be obtained during the plan review process. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 5, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 80-704, § 5, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 13-44. - Applications. 
Application for a key box shall be made on forms provided by the Fire Prevention Division of the Warren Fire Department. Applications may be obtained from the Fire Prevention Division. 
(Ord. No. 80-466, § 5, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-704, § 6, adopted June 26, 2012, repealed § 13-45 which pertained to key box installation and derived from Ord. No. 80-466, § 5, adopted Sept. 13, 1994; and Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2003.  
Sec. 13-46. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of Division 4 of Article II is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 11, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 13-47—13-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OPEN BURNING 
 
Sec. 13-51. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Approved container shall mean a container made of non-combustible construction, with sides of sufficient height to contain the fuel source and the sparks or hot embers that may be emitted horizontally during the fire. 
Bonfire shall mean an outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes. 
Enclosed chamber shall mean that only during the time of combustion are apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys, necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas, open. 
Open burning shall mean the burning of any materials where products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-52. - Residential open burning prohibited; exception. 
Open burning on residential property is prohibited, except an outdoor fire in an approved container utilized for cooking food for human consumption is allowed pursuant to the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-53. - Open burning of waste materials prohibited. 
Open burning of waste materials of any kind, including but not limited to leaves, paper products, painted wood, plastic and styrofoam is prohibited on residential property. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-54. - Fuel for residential outdoor cooking fires. 
Fuel for a residential outdoor fire shall be limited to natural gas, propane (LPG), commercially available charcoal or charcoal briquets. The fire shall not be utilized for waste disposal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-55. - Attendance at residential outdoor cooking fires. 
Any residential outdoor fire shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. At least one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating, two portable fire extinguishers with a minimum 2-A rating each, or dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck shall be immediately available for extinguishment. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-56. - Location of residential outdoor fire. 
Residential outdoor fires in approved containers shall be located no less than fifteen (15) feet from any structure. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-57. - Hours of residential outdoor fire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn an outdoor fire on residential property between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-58. - Excess smoke prohibited. 
No residential outdoor cooking fire shall produce an excess amount of smoke. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-59. - Bonfires. 
Bonfires on residential property are prohibited. Bonfires on nonresidential property shall comply with the regulations contained in the International Fire Code as adopted. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 5, 11-12-97; Ord. No. 80-704, § 7, 6-26-12)  
Secs. 13-60—13-64. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FIRE ALARM SYSTEM MALFUNCTIONS 
 
Sec. 13-65. - Purpose. 
When an automatic fire detection system is activated, the city fire department responds to protect the lives and property of the citizens of the city. This rapid response requires the city fire department to place numerous emergency vehicles on the street which inherently increases the dangers to members of the city fire department and to the citizens of the city. Although the city fire department supports and encourages the use of automatic fire detection systems to discover a fire in its early stages, multiple malfunctions of these systems results in increased dangers and unnecessary expense. In order to recoup the cost of responding to false alarms, the following regulations are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 6, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-66. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Alarm system shall mean an assembly of equipment and devices or a single device arranged to signal the presence of a hazard or a situation requiring urgent attention which the fire department may be summoned directly or indirectly to respond, including but not limited to a system designed for the detection of fire, smoke or heat within a building or structure. 
Alarm originator shall mean the person, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company who requested the installation of the alarm system, or who has either an ownership interest in the premises, a leasehold interest or occupies the premises. In the event the premises are owned or occupied by a partnership or corporation, each partner of the partnership, and each officer and director of the corporation shall be deemed an originator. 
False alarm shall mean any alarm activation or other report of a fire, or potential fire condition which is registered at or reported to the city fire department not resulting from a fire or potential fire condition. The false alarm does not include an alarm caused by tornadoes, storm, or other violent condition beyond the control of the lessee, their agents or employees or other extenuating circumstances as determined by the city fire department. 
False alarm response costs shall mean all actual response and investigation expenses incurred by the city in responding to a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 6, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-67. - False alarm fees. 
An alarm originator shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in responding to the third or subsequent false alarm in any twelve (12) month period. Following the third response to a false alarm, the city shall send a bill to the alarm originator for the false alarm response costs. All false alarm response costs shall be due and payable within thirty (30) calendar days of the billing date. In the event the alarm originator furnishes the city with proof of repair by a licensed alarm system contractor within thirty (30) days of the false alarm, the false alarm fees shall be waived. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 6, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-68. - Effect of payment. 
The payment of false alarm response costs shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge or reduce any civil or criminal liability of the person billed for the actual costs of responding to the false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 6, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-69. - Action to recover costs. 
In the event that the responsible party fails to make payment to the city for the false alarm response costs within thirty (30) calendar days, the city may initiate legal action in the appropriate court to recover the response costs due and owing, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 6, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-70. - Fire suppression and alarm testing, inspection and repair. 
(a)  Notice. In order to prevent unnecessary response by the city fire department due to a false alarm activated by testing, inspection or repair service, before conducting any test, inspection or repair of a fire suppression system or an alarm system, the person or company conducting the test, inspection or repair shall notify all of the following persons: 
(1)  The city fire department. 
(2)  The city emergency dispatch center. 
(3)  All building occupants. 
(4)  All facilities that receive supervisory alarm signals and trouble signals. 
(b)  Costs. If a test, inspection or repair of a fire suppression system or an alarm system activates a false alarm which results in a response by the city fire department, the person or company performing the test, inspection or repair to the system shall be deemed the alarm originator and the city shall send a bill to the alarm originator for the false alarm response costs. The false alarm response costs shall be due and payable within thirty (30) calendar days of the billing date. 
(Ord. No. 80-704, § 8, 6-26-12)  
Secs. 13-71—13-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTION FEES 
 
Sec. 13-75. - Hotel/motel license inspection. 
All fire inspections of hotel/motel guest rooms conducted pursuant to section 17-42 of these ordinances shall be charged the following fee: 
Hotel/motel fire inspection per guest room ..... $5.00 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 7, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-76. - Certificate of occupancy inspection. 
All fire inspections conducted for a certificate of occupancy for existing commercial and industrial buildings shall be charged the following fee: 
Fire inspection for certificate of occupancy ..... $55.00 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 7, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-77. - Fire department plan review. 
A fee shall be charged for all building plan reviews conducted by the fire department payable upon submission of the plans for approval. The fee shall be calculated as follows: 
Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) valuation and an additional one dollar ($1.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) valuation (or fraction thereof) over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with a minimum of five dollars ($5.00) and a maximum of one hundred seventy dollars ($170.00) for commercial and industrial building permits. 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 7, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-78. - Fire alarm or fire control system inspection. 
A fee shall be charged for the inspection of all fire alarms and fire control systems as follows: 
(1)  First pull station, sounding device, tamper switch, smoke detector, door release or flow switch ..... $25.00 
Each additional ..... 5.00 
(2)  Master of annunciator panels per panel ..... 25.00 
(3)  Chemical or gas fire control system ..... 40.00 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 7, 11-12-97)  
Sec. 13-79. - Phase 1 environmental inspection. 
A phase 1 environmental inspection shall include a search of all the fire department data bases which shall include, the Haz-Mat files, the inspection reports and past fire department response records. A nonrefundable fee shall be charged for each phase 1 environmental inspection conducted per address or site requested as follows: 
Phase 1 environmental inspection per address or site ..... $150.00 
(Ord. No. 80-524, § 7, 11-12-97; Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 13-80. - Emergency response plan inspection. 
A fee shall be charged for any inspection required to prepare an Emergency Response Plan pursuant to section 13-36 as follows: 
Emergency response plan inspection: 
Initial extremely hazardous substance on site ..... $750.00 
Each additional extremely hazardous substance on site ..... 375.00 
(Ord. No. 80-590, § 1, 11-12-02)  
Secs. 13-81—13-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - FLAMETHROWERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— International Fire Code, Chapter 3, Section 308, Open Flames; MCL 600.4702. 
 
Sec. 13-90. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by prohibiting assembly, storage, possession, and use of flamethrowers. Flamethrowers pose a significant risk of starting fires, damaging property, and/or causing physical injury. Flamethrowers also may disrupt the peace and quiet of residential neighborhoods. Flamethrowers are especially dangerous given the city's high population density in residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 80-733, § 1, 9-8-15)  
Sec. 13-91. - Definition. 
As used in this section: 
Flamethrower.  Any handheld device capable of emitting a burning stream of combustible or flammable liquid or gas a distance of more than three (3) feet. Blow torches or other devices that are only capable of emitting a flame three (3) feet or less are not flamethrowers. 
(Ord. No. 80-733, § 1, 9-8-15)  
Sec. 13-92. - General prohibition. 
Except as listed in section 13-93, a person is prohibited from assembling, storing, possessing, or using a flamethrower in the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 80-733, § 1, 9-8-15)  
Sec. 13-93. - Exception. 
The general prohibition on assembling, storing, possessing, or using a flamethrower in the City of Warren does not apply to: 
(a)  An officer, employee, or member of the armed forces, law enforcement, fire department, federal, state, or local government who is both: 
(1)  On duty; and 
(2)  Acting within the scope of his or her employment. 
(Ord. No. 80-733, § 1, 9-8-15)  
Sec. 13-94. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates this division is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration for not more than ninety (90) days, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(b)  The police or fire departments may seize any flamethrower that is stored, possessed, or used in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 80-733, § 1, 9-8-15)  
Secs. 13-95—13-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - OPEN FLAME COOKING DEVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— International Fire Code, Chapter 3, Section 308, Open Flames. 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by prohibiting open-flame cooking devices in residential garages or other enclosed or partially enclosed accessory structures. Open-flame cooking devices used inside enclosed or partially enclosed accessory structures may start fires, cause explosions, or otherwise inflict physical injury or property damage. 
(Ord. No. 80-774 , § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 13-102. - Definition. 
As used in this section: 
Open-flame cooking device. Any device that uses an open flame to prepare or cook food, including but not limited to charcoal and propane burners and grills. 
Residential garage. A building or part of a building which is associated with a residential dwelling and, when constructed, was intended to be used to store motor vehicles. This includes garages that are attached to the residential dwelling and freestanding structures. 
(Ord. No. 80-774 , § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 13-103. - General prohibition. 
Except as provided in section 13-104 below, a person is prohibited from using an open-flame cooking device inside a residential garage or other enclosed or partially enclosed accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 80-774 , § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 13-104. - Exception. 
An enclosed or partially enclosed accessory structure specifically intended for using an open-flame cooking device that has all required permits and permissions from the city for that use, is exempted from the general prohibition listed in section 13-103. 
(Ord. No. 80-774 , § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 13-105. - Penalty. 
A person violating this division is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and reasonable court costs of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days; or both. 
(Ord. No. 80-774 , § 1, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 13-106—13-110. - Reserved.  
Chapter 14 - FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a); authority to regulate foods and drugs, § 3.1(b)(2)(b). 
State Law reference— Food laws, MCL 289.81 et seq.; food service sanitation, MCL 333.12901 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 12, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 14-2—14-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESTAURANTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Food service sanitation, MCL 333.12901 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-16. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Employee means any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served. 
Itinerant restaurant means a restaurant operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other similar gathering. 
Restaurant means a restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand/shop, soda fountain, coffee house, fast-service, drive-in and all other eating or drinking establishments in which food and drink is prepared for direct consumption through service on the premises or elsewhere, as well as any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for the public. It does not include those establishments exempted by MCL 333.12901(c) as amended. 
Utensils means any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils, containers, or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during storage, preparation or serving. 
(Code 1967, § 3-801; Ord. No. 80-517, § 1, 8-26-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-17. - License required. 
No person shall operate, conduct or maintain a restaurant or an itinerant restaurant in the city without first procuring a license and paying the required fee. 
(Code 1967, § 3-802) 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 14-18. - Application for license; fee. 
Application for a license shall be made to the city clerk in the form and manner required by the clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article and Code. The fee shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-803)  
Sec. 14-19. - Fire and health inspection required. 
No license shall be issued by the clerk under this article without an investigation of the premises where the proposed business is to be operated, conducted or maintained, by the fire commissioner or any inspector designated by him or her and the health officer, and unless these officials signify their approval of the application, in writing, upon the face thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 3-804)  
Sec. 14-20. - Sanitary requirements. 
All restaurants shall comply with the following items of sanitation: 
(1)  Floors. The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth, and shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(2)  Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All walls and ceilings of any room in which food or drink is stored or prepared shall be finished in light color. The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a smooth, washable surface up to the level reached by splash or spray. 
(3)  Doors and windows. When flies are prevalent, all openings into the outer air shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. 
(4)  Lighting. All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared or in which utensils are washed shall be well lighted. 
(5)  Ventilation. All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well ventilated. 
(6)  Toilet facilities. Each restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with the laws and regulations of the state. In restaurants hereafter constructed, toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food, drink or utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, and well lighted and ventilated. Handwashing signs shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees. 
(7)  Water supply. Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the water supply shall be adequate, and of a safe, sanitary quality. 
(8)  Lavatory facilities. Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided, including hot and cold running water, soap, and sanitary towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without first washing his or her hands. 
(9)  Construction of utensils and equipment. All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks, and other equipment or utensils used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used; provided, that solder containing lead may be used for jointing. 
(10)  Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment. All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods, and sinks, shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects, and other contaminating material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once. 
All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each usage. All multi-use utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose. 
No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous substance shall be used for the cleaning or polishing of utensils. 
(11)  Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single-service utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored therein in a clean dry place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. 
(12)  Disposal of wastes. All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles, in such manner as not to constitute a nuisance. Garbage and trash shall be placed in plastic bags prior to being placed in receptacles. The plastic bags must be sealed and must be airtight. Receptacles shall be covered and kept free of flies and rodents. 
(13)  Refrigeration. All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit except when being prepared or served. Waste water from refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of. 
(14)  Wholesomeness of food and drink. All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and frozen desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the individual original containers in which they were received from the distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device, provided that this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be served from the original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources, and if shucked shall be kept until used in the containers in which they were placed at the shucking plant. 
(15)  Storage, display and serving of food and drink. All food and drink shall be stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage, and other contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be used. 
(16)  Cleanliness of employees. All employees shall wear clean outer garments and shall keep their hands clean at all times while engaged in handling food, drink, utensils or equipment. Employees shall not expectorate or use tobacco in any form in rooms in which food is prepared. 
(17)  Linens, lockers, premises, etc. The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of litter or rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees' clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 3-805; Ord. No. 80-324, § 1, 7-22-86)  
Sec. 14-21. - Unwholesome food or drink; examination, condemnation. 
Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined by the health officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The health officer may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated. 
(Code 1967, § 3-806)  
Sec. 14-22. - Inspection of restaurants. 
At least once every six (6) months the health officer shall inspect every restaurant located in the city. The person operating the restaurant shall upon request of the health officer permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall permit copying any or all records of food purchased. 
(Code 1967, § 3-807)  
Sec. 14-23. - Food handlers permit required. 
No person who is affected with, or is a carrier of, any infectious disease in a communicable form shall be employed in handling food or food utensils in any restaurant or itinerant restaurant. No person shall employ any person to handle food or food utensils in any restaurant unless such employee shall first procure a food handlers permit from the health officer and file same with his employer before entering upon his or her duties. The health officer shall not issue such permit to any person unless the permittee has been examined by a duly licensed physician who shall report his or her findings on the form and in the manner prescribed by the health officer. No permit shall be valid for more than one (1) year; no permit shall be renewed without submitting to another medical examination as aforesaid. Such permit shall be revoked by the health officer at any time the holder thereof could not qualify for a new permit if requested so to do. Refusal to submit to another medical examination, if requested by the health officer for good cause, shall constitute adequate reason to revoke any permit. 
(Code 1967, § 3-808)  
Sec. 14-24. - Duty to report to health officer. 
(a)  If any licensee has any reason to believe that any employee has contracted an infectious, contagious or communicable disease, it shall be his or her duty to exclude such employee from the licensed premises and immediately notify the health officer of this fact. If any employee has reason to believe he or she has contracted any infectious, contagious or communicable disease, or if the employee suffers a cough or skin eruption or other suspicious symptom which persists for more than fourteen (14) days, it shall be his or her duty to immediately notify his or her employer and the health officer. 
(b)  The health officer shall immediately exclude such employee from the premises until an investigation is made and shall in addition take such other action as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the public. 
(Code 1967, § 3-809)  
Sec. 14-25. - Suspension of license; reinstatement, revocation. 
After any inspection of the licensed premises as herein provided, the health officer shall suspend any license if it is found that any of the provisions of this article have not been complied with or have been violated. Written notice of such suspension and the reason therefor shall be delivered to the licensee either in person or by mail addressed to the licensed premises. Any suspended license shall be revoked at the expiration of ten (10) days unless the licensee shall file with the health officer an application for reinstatement of the license. Upon the filing of such application, the health officer shall make another inspection and, if it is found that the condition causing the suspension of license has been cured or rectified, the license shall be reinstated. 
(Code 1967, § 3-810)  
Secs. 14-26—14-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FAST SERVICE AND DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS 
 
Sec. 14-36. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Drive in restaurant shall mean any establishment where food, frozen desserts and/or beverages are sold to the consumer and where motor vehicle parking space is provided and where such food, frozen desserts and/or beverages are intended to be consumed in the motor vehicle parked upon the premises or anywhere on the premises outside of the building as well as in the building. 
Fast service or drive-in restaurant shall mean any establishment where food, desserts, and/or beverages of any kind is/are sold and/or served to the public and where such food, desserts, and/or beverages is/are served to the public directly over a counter and/or exterior or interior convenience window or other opening or both, for consumption by the public within the premises and/or in or around vehicles parked on or passing through the restaurant premises. It does not include those establishments exempted by MCL 333.12901(c) as amended. 
Waste material shall mean paper cups, straws, napkins, garbage, beverages and all other waste matter intended for disposal which, if not placed in a proper receptacle, tends to create a nuisance by rendering property unclean, unsafe and unsightly. 
(Code 1967, § 3-811; Ord. No. 80-517, § 2, 8-26-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-37. - Disposal of waste materials. 
(a)  The owner and/or manager of any fast-service and/or drive-in restaurant shall at least once every twenty-four (24) hours dispose if waste materials deposited by customers on the premises. It shall be the duty of the fast-service or drive-in restaurant, or any person in charge of said restaurant, to keep the restaurant premises, parking area and contiguous property free from all rubbish, waste products and debris, including napkins, straws, paper cups and plates and other waste material at all times, provided; however, that no private property shall be entered without consent of the owner or the owner's agent. 
(b)  The owner or manager shall provide the fast service and/or drive-in restaurant with a sufficient number of adequate refuse containers. 
(c)  In addition to the other penalties provided by this article, the proprietor of any fast-service or drive-in restaurant may be charged with the costs of cleaning up or removing debris found on the premises and on the public highway or highways adjacent to said premises. The enforcement officer shall have the right, if s/he sees debris on the premises occupied by the fast-service or drive-in restaurant and the highways adjacent thereto to cause the same to be cleaned up and removed from the premises and shall certify the costs of cleaning up and removal to the public service director. If the proprietor of any fast-service or drive-in restaurant fails to pay the costs of clean up and/or removal, such costs may be recovered by the city in the appropriate court of law. The costs when collected, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 3-812; Ord. No. 80-517, § 2, 8-26-97) 
Cross reference— Garbage and rubbish generally, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 14-38. - Unlawful conduct on premises. 
(a)  No owner or operator of any fast-service or drive-in restaurant shall operate or permit any loudspeakers or shall make or permit to be made any other loud sound or shall permit any show or exhibit on the premises occupied by such fast-service or drive-in restaurant; provided, however, that the owner or operator of such restaurant may use an intercom address system solely for the purpose of taking orders from customers on the premises. No public address, loud speaker or other sound produced on the premises shall exceed the limits and standards set forth in the Warren Code of Ordinances relating to sound and to noise levels and its measurement and monitoring. It shall be a violation of this section for any customer or other person on the premises to produce any prohibited sound. 
(b)  The owner and/or manager of any fast-service and/or drive-in restaurant shall not knowingly permit disorderly conduct or loitering upon the premises. 
(c)  No person on the premises of any fast-service and/or drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of a motor vehicle, shall consume, have in his or her possession or under his or her control, any alcoholic liquor; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person when served inside the building by a fast-service or drive-in restaurant duly licensed to serve such beverages. 
(d)  No person on the premises of any fast-service and/or drive-in restaurant, shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn or make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed. 
(e)  No person shall place, throw or deposit any waste materials upon the outside premises or parking areas of any fast-service and/or drive-in restaurant or on any street, alley or adjoining property, except in adequate receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to congregate for any time whatsoever at any location on the premises of any fast-service and/or drive-in restaurant other than in the restaurant building, or in a legally parked motor vehicle. Any persons so congregating shall be deemed guilty of loitering. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the owner and/or manager of any fast-service and/or drive-in restaurant to post on the premises, in a conspicuous location, one (1) or more signs bearing the following legend: "Cruising and Gathering Outside of Vehicle Unlawful." 
(Ord. No. 1967, § 3-813; Ord. No. 80-517, § 2, 8-26-97)  
Sec. 14-39. - Paving, parking and lighting. 
All fast-service and drive-in restaurants shall have adequate paving, parking and lighting as required by the City of Warren Zoning Ordinances. 
(Code 1967, § 3-814; Ord. No. 80-517, § 2, 8-26-97)  
Sec. 14-40. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 80-517, § 2, 8-26-97)  
Chapter 15 - FRANCHISES  
PREAMBLE 
The city has the authority to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for the use of streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places of the city for the furnishing of any public utility service to the city and its inhabitants. This chapter is intended to encourage customer choice and competition among electric utilities and other electric generators to reduce electric rates. Any grant of franchise in this chapter excludes a franchise to construct, lay, maintain, or operate facilities, including but not limited to, electric lines, towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances in, along, over or under highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the City of Warren, Michigan.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
City or grantor shall mean the City of Warren, Michigan or its designee. 
Facilities/electric system shall mean any plants, works, systems, improvements and equipment owned, leased or used by grantee, including, anchors, wires, fixtures, underground conduits, circuits, electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles, crossarms, braces, feeders, transmission/distribution wires, transformers, other electrical appliances and other property used or installed in the public right-of-way, which is necessary or convenient for the sale, transmission and/or distribution of electricity to a customer or customers. 
Public right-of-way means all public rights-of-way within the city which are owned by the city, either as an easement or in fee simple, and all other public places, including but not limited to the public rights-of-way used for streets, highways, sidewalks and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-2. - Franchise required. 
No person or utility may transport, deliver, or sell electricity to one or more customers through the use of facilities located in the public rights-of-way, and may not otherwise transact business in the city for the transportation and/or delivery of electricity unless the person or utility has been granted a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-3. - Franchise application process. 
(a)  Any request for a franchise must be submitted on an application in such form as may be prescribed by the city. The application must be submitted by a non-refundable application fee in the amount established by the city. 
(b)  Any untrue or misleading statement of material fact or omission of a material fact shall be grounds for rejection of an application. 
(c)  The applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in connection with the proposed franchise, including but not limited to, any technical, legal, and financial evaluation, administrative review, and document preparation. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Secs. 15-4—15-23. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC 
 
15-24. - Grant of non-exclusive electric utility franchise. 
Subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in article I and II, the City of Warren grants to Nordic Electric, L.L.C., a Michigan limited liability company ("grantee"), a franchise to supply electricity and electrical services as part of a program approved or authorized by the Michigan Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction, or by a federal agency, and to transact related local business in the City of Warren. This grant of a franchise excludes a franchise to construct, lay, maintain or operate facilities, including but not limited to electric lines, towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances in, along, over or under the highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the City of Warren, Macomb County, Michigan; and further provided that grantee shall supply electricity and electrical services solely through facilities presently owned and maintained by the Detroit Edison Company, by agreement with the Detroit Edison Company or as otherwise provided by law. This grant of franchise also includes a franchise for grantee to own, operate and maintain metering and telemetry equipment for the purpose of serving its customers, provided that such equipment will not be used to bill services provided by the Detroit Edison Company. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-25. - Term of franchise. 
The term of the franchise granted under article I and II is for two (2) years after it takes effect, subject to revocation at the will of the City of Warren at any time during the two-year period. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-26. - Electric service and extension of system. 
(a)  If grantee accepts all terms and conditions set forth in this franchise, then the grantee may furnish electricity to customers located in the city under a program approved or authorized by the Michigan Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction, or by a federal agency, and in accordance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Subject to the terms of article I and II, the grantee may from time to time extend its services and furnish electricity to any and all residents within the city in accordance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. There are no limitations on the number of customers, which the grantee may serve hereunder. However, the prohibition pertaining to construction set forth in the preamble and section 15-4 shall remain effective. 
(b)  Notwithstanding this grant, the grantee must comply with all provisions of the Code of Ordinance and rules and regulations of the city which regulate the use of public rights-of-way in the City of Warren, including but not limited to all permit requirements, to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-27. - Sale/lease/successors/assigns. 
Grantee shall not sell, lease or sublease, assign, or allow another to use the franchise granted in article II without the consent of the city. If the grantee intends to transfer or assign this franchise, written application for such transfer or assignment shall first be made to the city. In reviewing a request for a transfer, the city may request additional information as deemed necessary to inquire into the technical, legal, and financial qualifications of the prospective transferee, and the grantee shall assist the city in so inquiring. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-28. - Consideration; costs. 
(a)  In consideration of the rights, power, and authority granted by the city, the grantee shall faithfully perform all duties required by the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  In further consideration of the rights, power and authority granted by the city, grantee agrees: 
(1)  To pay to the city a non-refundable application fee in the amount of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00); and 
(2)  To compensate the city: 
a.  For the amount of its actual expenses incurred by the city in the drafting and preparation of this ordinance, including reasonable actual attorney fees; and 
b.  For the amount of its actual expenses resulting from the process of adopting this ordinance. Grantee's total obligation to compensate the city for its actual expenses under this subsection (b) shall not exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-29. - Use of public rights-of-way and other public places by grantee. 
(a)  No burden on public ways. No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway or other public place used by the grantee shall be obstructed by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-30. - Public emergency. 
The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig up or otherwise destroy facilities of grantee, or used by grantee's customers, without any prior notice, if such action is deemed necessary by the appropriate city official or employee because of a public emergency. Public emergency shall be any condition which, in the opinion of the city, poses an immediate threat to the lives or property of the citizens of the city, caused by any natural or manmade disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, major water main breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. The owner of the facilities shall be responsible for repair at its sole expense of any of its facilities damage pursuant to any such action taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-31. - License and employee identification. 
(a)  If at any time any personnel of grantee or any of its agents, as part of their duties, call upon residences in the city with the intention of offering electric customers a choice of alternative electric supply and/or services, grantee and/or its agents shall be required to obtain a license as required in chapter 24, article V of the Warren Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  All personnel of grantee or any of its agents who have as part of their duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of grantee or its agents shall be clearly identified as such to the public. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-32. - No city liability; indemnification. 
(a)  City not liable. The city, its officials, employees, and agents, shall not be liable for: 
(1)  Any injury that may occur to any person, or for any damage that may occur to any person, or for any damage that may occur to any property, as a result of any act, decision, or other consequence or occurrence arising out of the discharge of duties and responsibilities pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Any injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use operation, condition, or dismantling of any electric system owned or used by grantee, or used by grantee's customers, and due to the act or omission of any person or entity other that the city. 
(3)  For any interference with or disruption of the operation of any electric system owned or used by grantee or used by grantee's customers, or for any damage arising out of grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Indemnification. As part of the consideration for this article, grantee shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees, departments, boards, and commissions from any and all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings, and reasonable expenses of any nature (including, without limitation, actual fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of grantee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns which may arise as a result of the franchise. 
(c)  Assumption of risk. Grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents and employees, all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any city-owned or controlled property, including public ways, and grantee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the city for personal injury or property damage to any person arising out of the condition of the electric system or grantee's failure to comply with any federal, state, or local statute, ordinance, or regulation. 
(d)  Notice, cooperation, and expenses. The city shall give grantee prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any actions, suits, or other proceeding covered by this article. 
(1)  Grantee shall pay all expenses incurred by city in defending itself with regard to any such actions, suits, or proceedings. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney fees and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by or on behalf of the city's attorney, and the actual expenses of city's agents, employees or expert witnesses, and disbursements and liability assumed by city in connection with such suits, actions, or proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-33. - Insurance. 
(a)  During the term of this franchise, grantee shall maintain or cause to be maintained in full force and effect, and at its sole cost and expense, the following types and limits of insurance: 
(1)  Worker's compensation insurance with Michigan statutory limits, including employers' liability coverage. 
(2)  Automobile liability insurance to cover any vehicles used by anyone in connection with its activities under this article, with personal protection insurance and property protection insurance to comply with the provisions of the Michigan no fault insurance law including residual liability insurance with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as to the combined single limit for each occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(3)  Comprehensive general liability insurance with the minimum limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) as the combined single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage. The policy shall provide blanket contractual liability insurance for all written contracts, and shall include coverage for products and completed operations liability, independent contractors liability, broad general form liability extensions or equivalent, and coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage. 
(b)  The city, its elected officials, appointed officials, employees, agents, board members, committees, and commissions shall be named as an additional insured in all applicable policies. All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled or modified unless sixty (60) days prior written notice is given to the city. Grantee shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance evidencing such coverage as a condition of this article, and shall maintain on file with the city a current certificate along with written evidence of payment of required premiums. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carrier licensed to do business by the State of Michigan or by surplus line carriers on the Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(c)  Each policy which is to be endorsed to add the city as an additional insured hereunder, shall contain cross-liability wording, as follows: 
In the event of a claim being made hereunder by one insured for which another insured is or may be liable, then this policy shall cover such insured against whom a claim is or may be made in the same manner as if separate policies had been issued to each insured hereunder. 
(d)  If the insurance policies required by this article are written with deductibles, the deductibles shall be approved in advance by the city. Grantee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished by this article. 
(e)  Grantee shall require each and every one of its contractors and subcontractors carry, in full force and effect, workers' compensation, comprehensive public liability and automobile liability insurance coverage of the type which grantee is required to obtain under the terms of this article with appropriate limits of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-34. - Franchise not exclusive. 
The rights, power and authority granted are not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-35. - Annual performance report. 
On or before March 31 of each year, grantee shall submit to the city clerk's office an annual report, which describes grantee's activity in the city for the preceding calendar year (January 1 —December 31). The report must include the following information: 
(1)  Total Energy sales quantities, revenues and number of customers, separated into industrial, commercial and residential classes. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-36. - Information to be provided to customers. 
Grantee shall provide to its customers in the city the following information: 
(1)  Price information, including average annualized cents per kilowatt hour measured at the customer's meter, price variability information by time of use and volume, and all charges, fees and penalties; 
(2)  Terms of service, including length and kind of contract, billing policies, warranties and notice procedures; 
(3)  Customer service information, including a contact address, telephone number and procedures for obtaining and maintaining service for making complaints; and 
(4)  Fuel and emissions characteristics, information on the fuel mix and emissions characteristics associated with the grantee's load-serving resource portfolio. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-37. - Cooperation with the city energy committee and/or commission. 
Grantee agrees to cooperate with the city in any energy plan created by the energy committee/commission by participating in projects and programs mutually agreed upon by the city and grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-38. - Revocation. 
The franchise granted by this article is subject to revocation at the will of the city upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-39. - Jurisdiction. 
Grantee shall be and remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city now in effect or which might subsequently be adopted for the regulation of land uses or for the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-40. - State and federal regulatory agencies. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not addressed or fixed by this chapter, remain subject to the rules and regulations applicable to electric service by the Michigan Public Service Commission, its successor bodies or any federal agency. 
(b)  Filing. Grantee shall provide the city with copies of all documents which grantee sends to the Michigan Public Service Commission or applicable agency and copies of all orders, decisions, or correspondence grantee receives from the public service commission related to services provided under this franchise. Grantee shall permit city to inspect and examine all records it is required to maintain or file under Michigan Public Service Commission rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Sec. 15-41. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect twenty (20) days from the date of adoption by the city council and shall continue in effect for a period of two (2) years subject to revocation at the will of the city at any time during said two-year period; provided, however, it shall cease and be of no effect unless and until within fifteen (15) days after adoption the grantee shall file its written acceptance of the same with the clerk, and pay to the city the sum required by section 15-8. 
(Ord. No. 80-549, 12-28-99)  
Chapter 16 - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 1994, amended former Ch. 16, §§ 16-1—16-10, relating to garbage and rubbish, in its entirety to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Ch. 16 derived from Code 1967, §§ 4-1201—4-1207 and Ord. No. 80-409, § 1, adopted June 9, 1992. 
Charter reference— Authority to collect and dispose of garbage and rubbish, § 3.1(b)(2)(c). 
Cross reference— Refuse and debris at excavations for wrecked buildings, § 9-418; disposal of waste materials at drive-in restaurants, § 14-37; garbage and rubbish storage facilities in mobile homes, § 20-45; garbage and rubbish disposal for mobile homes, § 20-46; nuisances, Ch. 21; disposal of rubbish, garbage and waste materials in parks, § 23-10; regulation of soil, refuse or fuel carrying vehicles, § 37-631 et seq., water and sewers, Ch. 41. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.241 et seq., 123.361 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Purpose. 
The City of Warren finds that the reduction of the amount of solid waste and conservation of recyclable materials is an important public purpose. 
The separation and collection of paper, cardboard, glass, cans and vegetative yard waste for recycling from the residential establishments in this municipality will minimize the adverse environmental effects of landfilling by reducing the need for landfills and conserving existing landfill capacity, facilitate the implementation and operation of other forms of resource recovery, conserve natural resources and reduce the cost of solid waste disposal in general. The promotion and use of recyclable materials, goods produced from recyclable materials and goods which facilitate recycling will further serve the same purposes by encouraging and facilitating recycling. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
City designated disposal facility: A facility or facilities which the city has identified from time to time as an approved location for the disposal of municipal solid waste, compost material, and/or recyclable materials. 
City recyclable container: A container provided by the City of Warren as a suitable container for the purpose of residential recyclable collection. 
Comingled: Source-separated, nonputrescible recyclable materials that have been mixed at the source of generation (i.e., placed in the same container). 
Compost material: Grass, leaves, weeds, garden waste which may include vegetable waste, and light brush less than two (2) inches in diameter and four (4) feet in length. 
Newspaper: All newsprint and materials that are a part of a newspaper only. 
Recyclable material: Glass bottles and jars without caps; tin and aluminum cans; plastic containers marked "1" (PETE) or "2" (HDPE); newspapers, newspaper inserts, telephone books, magazines, catalogs, all size brown paper bags, white paper, colored paper, computer paper, stationery, glossy and non-glossy advertisement flyers, index cards, post cards, and paper envelopes. 
Recycling drop off: Any facility designed and operated solely for the receiving and storing of source separated, nonputrescible metal, glass, paper, plastic containers and cardboard. 
Site of generation: Any premises in the City of Warren in or on which solid waste, compost or recyclable materials is generated by any person. 
Solid waste: Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials resulting from domestic and community activities, and shall include all other waste materials, including non-hazardous liquids. 
Source separate: To separate recyclable and compost material from the solid waste stream at the point of waste generation. 
Yard waste: All grass, weeds, leaves, small twigs and shrub clippings, flowers and basic waste materials resulting from landscaping. 
Yard waste collection season: A period each year as scheduled by the Department of Public Service during which a yard waste collection service is provided in specified areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-3. - Curbside program established; preparation for collection; collection schedule. 
(a)  Curbside program established; collection schedule. There is hereby established within the city a program ("curbside program") for the separate collection of municipal solid waste compostables and recyclable materials from all residents of the City. 
Separate collections of compostables and recyclable material shall occur in the manner and on the schedule as set forth by the director of public service. 
Such schedules shall be published by the city and shall define the area and dates of collection and the material designated for recycling. 
All residents and other persons in charge of any premises located within the city areas serviced by the curbside program, established by this article, shall source separate all designated recyclables and compostables from solid waste and place them between curb and sidewalk where possible at the side of the public right-of-way fronting their premises in the manner designated by this article on the dates specified for collection. 
(b)  Preparation of solid waste, compostables and recyclables for curbside collection. All solid waste, compostables and recyclables placed at the curbside for collection shall be prepared for collection in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and article together with the special requirements as may be set by the director of public service. 
a.  All newspapers shall be placed in paper bags or tied in bundles not exceeding thirty-five (35) pounds in weight nor exceeding one (1) foot in thickness. 
b.  All brush shall be cut into four-foot lengths or less and tied into bundles weighing not more than thirty-five (35) pounds in weight. No individual piece of brush may exceed two (2) inches in diameter. 
c.  All compostables must be placed in a clear plastic bag. Compostables not so bagged will not be picked up. The gross weight of compost bags, placed for collection shall not exceed forty (40) pounds in weight. Compostables not so contained will not be picked up. 
d.  All recyclables must be placed in a recyclable material container provided by the City of Warren. Recyclables not so contained will not be picked up. 
e.  Solid waste must be thoroughly drained of liquids and be wrapped in several thicknesses of paper before being placed in receptacles for collection. 
Items too large to fit into regular containers such as discarded rugs, appliances, furniture, mattresses, etc., should be set neatly next to the waste receptacles. Appliances with a latching door must have the door removed for safety purposes. Mattresses, rugs and similar items must be rolled up and tied securely whenever possible. Motor vehicle air conditioners, household refrigerators and freezers and room air conditioners must have affixed to it, documentation or certification, that the refrigerant has been removed by a certified contractor, before it will be collected at curbside. 
f.  NO SOLID WASTE, COMPOSTABLE, OR RECYCLABLE MATERIAL SHALL BE PLACED AT THE CURB OR STREET FOR COLLECTION PRIOR TO 6:00 P.M. OF THE CALENDAR DAY PRIOR TO THE RESIDENTS SCHEDULED PICK-UP DAY. 
g.  After the collection of the container contents has been made, the empty container shall be removed from the curb or street and replaced on the owner's storage area as soon as possible, but in no case later than ten (10) hours after collection of the refuse has been made. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-4. - Separation of brush, leaves, yard waste and other compostables or recyclables. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of leaves, yard waste, compostables, or designated recyclables, nor arrange for the disposal of the same or cause the same, to be disposed of in any manner inconsistent with this ordinance. 
(b)  All persons who gather leaves, yard waste, compostables or designated recyclables, shall source separate the items and place them for collection at the times and in the manner heretofore or hereafter specified by this ordinance or the director of public service. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prevent any person from gathering leaves for compost, mulch or other gardening purposes. 
(d)  The city, or any other person collecting solid waste generated within the City Limits, may refuse to collect solid waste from any person who has failed to source separate designated recyclables or compostables. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-5. - Unlawful activities, scavenging, littering. 
(a)  Designated recyclable materials and compostable materials placed at curbside in accordance with this ordinance shall become the exclusive property of the city or the city's authorized agent. There shall be a presumption that the occupier or owner of the premises intended to recycle or compost the material under this ordinance if the material is placed at curbside. It shall be unlawful for any person not duly authorized by the city, to collect, remove, pick up, or cause to be collected, removed, or picked up, any such material. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, cause to be violated, or assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other than compostable or designated recyclable material in or near any recycling drop off or city designated disposal facility. 
(d)  The term "litter" as used in this section means all solid waste, compost material, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
It is unlawful for a person knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, to dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. The phrase "public or private property or water" includes, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or watercourse or the shore or beach thereof, including the ice above the water; a park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties or timberlands. It is unlawful for a person who removes a vehicle, wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road, or street, to fail to remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road, or street as a result of the accident. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-6. - Authority, costs, notice to remove solid waste. 
(a)  The director of public service is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any premises to remove solid waste found to be not in compliance with this ordinance on such premises (unless the same is on the abutting public right-of-way in which case no notice is required). Such notice shall be by hand delivery or certified mail, addressed to the said owner at the last known address. 
(b)  If solid wastes are not removed from the premises within six (6) days after the date of mailing such notice, or if the solid waste is on abutting public right-of-way, the owner and/or tenant(s) of the premises shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 16-10(b) of this ordinance. The director of public service is also hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the removal of the solid waste or to order the removal by the city. 
(c)  When the city has effected the removal of such solid waste or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month from the date of removal, shall be charged to the owner of the premises on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and payable at the time of payment of such tax bill. 
(d)  Where cost of removal is not paid by the owner within sixty (60) days after the removal of such solid waste as set forth in parts (b) and (c) of this section, then the director of public service shall cause to be recorded in the treasurer's office the date and premises on which removal was done. The recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest until final payment has been made and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for collection of taxes; further, the total amount shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of one (1) percent per month in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date of the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent; said sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the premises described in the statement that the same is due. 
(e)  Any owner (as indicated in the current assessment roll of the city) of a condominium complex which does not meet city specification may request curbside solid waste, compost and recyclable material pick up by the city. The request and waiver of city liability must be made in writing with the director of public service. Upon said request the city will perform curbside pick up and the city will not be held liable for damage or alterations to any and all surface areas, subsurface areas or subsurface structures of any street not meeting city specification. The signed waiver of liability must be approved by the director of public service and filed with the city clerk's office. 
(f)  Commercial waste of any kind will not be collected by the department of public service. Commercial enterprises include industrial, office, medical and commercial businesses. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-7. - Other remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, this municipality may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists as defined in this article for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article. In addition to an injunction, the court may impose penalties as authorized by section 16-10. 
(b)  The penalties and remedies prescribed by this ordinance shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent this municipality from exercising any other remedy provided by this ordinance or otherwise provided at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-8. - Recyclable container specifications. 
(a)  City recyclable container shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate to refuse collectors that the container is intended for residential recyclable collection service. 
Specifications for city recyclable containers and its use, and any future changes to those specifications shall be developed in accordance with this ordinance. Those specifications shall include, but shall not be limited to, the materials used and the content of printed information. 
(b)  At the inception of the mandatory recyclable material program, the City of Warren will provide to every residence a recyclable material container free of charge. Additional recyclable material containers that must be provided to a residence shall be sold to the residence at a price to be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-9. - Compost bag specifications. 
(a)  Compost material bags shall be clear in order to indicate to compost material collectors that the bags are intended for residential compost collection service. 
(b)  Specifications for city compost material bags and their use and any future changes to those specifications shall be developed in accordance with this ordinance. These specifications shall include, but shall not be limited to, the materials used for such bags. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 16-10. - Penalty. 
Except if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d), the violation of a provision of this chapter is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(Ord. No. 80-449, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-527, § 13, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-630, § 1, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 80-651, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 80-731, § 4, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17)  
Chapter 17 - HOTELS/MOTELS, LAUNDRIES AND SELF-SERVICE CAR WASHES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
State Law reference— Cleaning agents, MCL 323.231 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 14, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 17-2—17-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-16. - Defined. 
For purposes of this article, a "self-service laundry" shall be deemed to be any place of business, whether or not customarily attended by the operator or employees of the operator thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, ironing, and/or extracting moisture from garments, linens, rugs, blankets, and other commonly laundered articles through the use of coin-operated machines or devices operated by the patrons of such business. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1802) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 17-17. - Requirements. 
All self-service laundries for which a license shall have been issued under this article shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All provisions of building, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, health and fire codes, rules or regulations applicable to self-service laundries shall be complied with by the licensee. 
(2)  The water heating and/or softening system shall be installed and maintained so as to be inaccessible to the general public. 
(3)  Washers shall be installed and maintained so that such moving parts and electrical components thereof as need not be accessible to the operator thereof in the usual and customary operation of such machines, shall not be readily accessible to the general public. 
(4)  Dryers shall be so installed and maintained that the backs and tops thereof shall not be readily accessible to the general public. 
(5)  All dryers installed or maintained in a self-service laundry shall be so designed as to be inoperable when the door thereof is open, and all such dryers shall be capable of having their doors opened from the interior thereof upon the application of outward pressure against such doors. 
(6)  All automatic washers or combination washer-extractor units installed in any location after May 1, 1970, shall be so manufactured or equipped that the doors or lids thereto cannot be opened during any portion of the operating cycle of such machine, or so that if the door or lid thereto is opened during any portion of the operating cycle thereof, such machine will be automatically caused to cease operating; provided, however, that this subsection (6) shall be deemed to have been complied with if such machines are equipped with a device, mechanism or means readily accessible to the user thereof, whereby the operation of such machine may be stopped, which such device, mechanism or means shall be identified by an appropriate label or sign prominently displayed upon such machine. 
(7)  Separate extractor machines shall be securely anchored to the floor and shall be so manufactured or equipped that the doors thereof cannot be opened during any portion of the operating cycle thereof. 
(8)  The minimum level of illumination in self-service laundries shall be not less than fifteen (15) foot-candles throughout the entire area accessible to the public, measured at a height of four (4) feet above the floor. All switches for control of illumination shall not be accessible to the public. All self-service laundries shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be so installed and maintained that the area therein accessible to the general public shall be reasonably visible to the exterior thereof either by direct or indirect view. 
(9)  An appropriate refuse receptacle shall be furnished in all self-service laundries for the convenient use of the patrons thereof. 
(10)  All self-service laundries shall be prohibited from having amusement devices or mechanical music devices commonly known as juke boxes; provided, that this shall not prohibit the placing of AM or FM radios for the enjoyment of patrons, provided, however, that the controls thereof shall not be accessible to the public; and provided further, that where the establishment provides an attendant, a juke box may be allowed during such time as the attendant is on duty. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1806)  
Secs. 17-18—17-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 17-31. - Required. 
(a)  Every person operating a self-service laundry within the city shall obtain a license as provided in this division. 
(b)  The license prescribed in this division shall be in addition to any other license required by virtue of the operation of any business other than the business of a self-service laundry. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-1801, 3-1804)  
Sec. 17-32. - Application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1803; Ord. No. 80-274, § 1, 2-22-83)  
Sec. 17-33. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1803; Ord. No. 80-274, § 1, 2-22-83)  
Sec. 17-34. - Investigation; approval. 
Application for a license under this division shall be referred to the fire department, the division of buildings and safety engineering, the health department and the police department, and each of the departments shall certify to the city clerk whether the location concerned in such application complies with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1805)  
Secs. 17-35—17-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SELF-SERVICE CAR WASHES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, adopted January 14, 1997, amended the Code by the addition of §§ 17-35—17-37 and 17-38—17-41; however, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 17-46—17-48 and 17-60—17-63, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-46. - Defined. 
For purposes of this article, a "self-service" car wash shall be deemed to be any place of business, whether customarily attended by the operator or employees of the operator, available to the public for the purpose of washing, vacuuming, and cleaning automobiles through the use of coin-operated machines or devices operated by the patrons of such business. 
(Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 17-47. - Requirements. 
All self-service car washes for which a license shall have been issued under this article shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All provisions of building, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, health and fire code, rules or regulations applicable to self-service car washes shall be complied with by the owner, licensee, manager, or person in charge of any self-service car wash. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the owner, licensee, manager, or person in charge of any self-service car wash, to keep the premises together with the parking area and any adjacent area, free from rubbish, waste products and debris. An appropriate refuse receptacle shall be furnished in all self-service car washes for the convenient use of the patrons. 
(3)  All liquid wastes created from the operation of the self-service car wash shall be intercepted before entering a sewer by a suitable catch basin properly trapped and vented. Such wastes shall not drain over or into any street, sidewalk, courtyard, or paved approach, and no person shall throw or discharge from any lot or building any water, fluid or liquid substance so as to affect injuriously the surface of the street or sidewalk or so as to make it unsafe for travel. 
(4)  All self-service car washes shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  All equipment used for the operation of the self-service car wash shall be properly installed and maintained so as not to cause a danger to the general public. 
(6)  All lights used in connection with auto washes shall be shaded so as not to project upon or become a nuisance to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 17-48. - Unlawful conduct on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate for any time whatsoever at any location on the premises of a self-service car wash if they are not using the self-service car wash for the purpose it was designed for. Any person so congregating shall be deemed guilty of loitering. 
(Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, 1-14-97)  
Secs. 17-49—17-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 17-60. - Required. 
(a)  Every person operating a self-service car wash within the city shall obtain a license as provided in this division. 
(b)  The license prescribed in this division shall be in addition to any other license required by virtue of the operation of any business other than the business of a self-service car wash. 
(Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 17-61. - Application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 17-62. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 17-63. - Investigation; approval. 
Application for a license under this division shall be deferred to the fire department, the division of building and safety engineering, the health department and the police department, and each of the departments shall certify to the city clerk whether the location concerned in such application complies with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 80-505, § 1, 1-14-97)  
Secs. 17-64—17-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HOTELS AND MOTELS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-509, adopted May 13, 1997 added a new art. IV, §§ 17-42—17-54, relative to motels and hotels to read as herein set out. Sections 17-42—17-54 of said Ord. No. 80-509 have been redesignated at the direction of the city as §§ 17-76—17-83 and 17-96—17-100. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-76. - Defined. 
For the purpose of this article, a "hotel" or "motel" is defined as any building or part thereof kept, used or maintained as or held out to the public to be an inn, hotel or motel where travelers or members of the public (including gratuitous guests) are furnished with sleeping accommodations and which may include individual or general kitchen facilities, or a public dining room where the guests and general public may be served with food and drink. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-77. - Word "hotel" or "motel" to be displayed at entrance and on outside of building. 
Licensees under this article shall display the word "hotel" or "motel" in letters not less than two (2) inches high in a conspicuous place at the entrance thereof and on the outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-78. - Register required; use of fictitious names prohibited. 
(a)  Every licensee or his agent, servant or employee, under this article shall provide and maintain a register in which shall be inscribed, in ink, at the time of arrival, the correct name of every guest renting or occupying a room, together with the home street and city address of each such guest, and the number of the space assigned, together with the time when such was rented. When any guest shall terminate his stay, it shall be the duty of the licensee or his agent, servant or employee, to see to it that the time thereof is entered in the register. Such register shall be open to inspection to police and fire officers on official business. 
(b)  Whenever a licensee or his agent, servant or employee knows or has reasonable cause for believing that any person has inscribed a false name or given false information in such register, it shall be his duty to forthwith notify the police department of such fact. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to write or cause or permit to be written in any hotel or motel register any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person so registered. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-79. - Responsible person required to notify fire department of fires occurring in hotel or motel. 
In all establishments licensed under this article, the licensee shall at all times have a person (who may also be the licensee) at this place of registration, who shall be charged with the duty of immediately notifying the fire department when a fire occurs therein. Any person therein who discovers such a fire shall immediately notify the person on duty at the place of registration. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-80. - Liability of hotel or motel for loss of valuables. 
Each licensee under this article who provides a safe or suitable vault for the custody of money, bank notes, jewelry, articles of gold and silver manufacture, precious stones, personal ornaments, railroad mileage books or tickets, negotiable or valuable papers, shall keep the same in good order and shall not be liable for the loss of or injury of any such property belonging to any guest unless such guest has offered to deliver the same, for custody in such safe or vault; provided that the licensee shall not be obliged to receive from any one guest for deposit in such safe or vault any properties hereinbefore described exceeding a total value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-81. - Locks, etc., required on doors, windows and transoms. 
Each licensee under this article shall keep on the doors of the sleeping rooms used by the guests suitable locks and bolts and on the transoms and windows of rooms suitable fastenings. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-82. - Occupancy of rooms by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article or his agent, servant or employee to permit any minor under seventeen (17) years of age to be housed in any establishment licensed under this article, unless such presence is with the consent or knowledge of the parent, guardian or adult lawfully in charge of such minor, unless such licensee, his agent, servant or employee forthwith notifies the police department of the presence of such minor. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-83. - Hotels and motels to comply with housing act of state and other rules and regulations. 
Every hotel and motel and every part thereof shall comply with the housing act of the state, this code and other ordinances of the city, and all rules and regulations lawfully promulgated under this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Secs. 17-84—17-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 17-96. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of conducting or maintaining a hotel or motel within the city without a license in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-97. - Fee; expiration date. 
The fees for licensee under this division shall be as established pursuant to chapter 18 of this code. All licenses shall expire on the thirty-first day of March of each year. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-98. - Application; agreements by licensee. 
(a)  Application for a license under this division shall be made to the city clerk on forms furnished for such purpose by the city clerk. The application shall contain, in addition to other required information, the following: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant; 
(2)  If applicant is a corporation: 
a.  The full and accurate corporation name; 
b.  When and where incorporated; 
c.  Full names and addresses of the officers of the corporation. 
(3)  If applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of members thereof; 
(4)  If the applicant conducts business under a trade or assumed name: 
a.  The complete and full trade name. The name and address of the persons doing business under such trade or assumed name. 
b.  Such application shall also contain an agreement upon the part of the applicant that he will comply with the provisions of this article and that he will forthwith notify the police department as to the presence of any minors under seventeen (17) years of age housed in any such licensed establishment, unless with consent or knowledge of the parent, guardian or adult lawfully in charge of such minor. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-99. - Investigation of applicant. 
The city clerk shall refer all applications for license under this article to the police commissioner, who shall cause each application to be investigated to determine whether the applicant or licensee has been convicted of violating any of the laws of this state, the United States or this code or other ordinances of the city involving moral turpitude, and to determine whether there are any facts which would tend to show that such applicant or licensee is not a suitable person to conduct or maintain such a business. The police commissioner shall furnish to the city clerk, in writing, the information obtained from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether the license should be granted, refused, revoked or renewed, as the case may be. The police commissioner may conduct any further investigation which it deems advisable for the purpose of showing whether or not the applicant is a suitable person to conduct the business. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 17-100. - Inspections. 
Each application for a license or renewal thereof shall be referred by the police commissioner to the building department and the fire department. No license shall be issued until after an inspection has been made by the aforesaid agencies and it has been found that the premise comply in all respects with the housing act of the state and the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city and a certificate to that effect shall have been issued by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 80-509, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Chapter 18 - LICENSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; handbill distributors license, § 3-24; license for ambulances, § 5-16 et seq.; license for pool and billiard establishments, § 6-31 et seq.; license for bowling alleys, § 6-61 et seq.; license for public dance halls, § 6-91 et seq.; license for skating rinks, § 6-121 et seq.; license for theaters and concerts, § 6-151 et seq.; license for circuses, carnivals and exhibitions, § 6-186 et seq.; license for amusement parks and riding devices, § 6-211 et seq.; license for amusement machines, § 6-246 et seq.; license for auctions and auctioneers, § 8-21 et seq.; license for moving buildings, § 9-376 et seq.; license for wrecking buildings, § 9-431 et seq.; license required for restaurants, § 14-17; license for self-service laundries, § 17-31 et seq.; massage establishments license, § 19-21 et seq.; myomassologist license, § 19-29 et seq.; license required to sell paraphernalia for controlled substances, § 22-206; license for peddlers, § 24-31 et seq.; licensing of ice cream vendors, § 24-53; license for transient merchants, § 24-91 et.seq.; license for route salesperson, § 24-126 et seq.; license for junk yards, § 30-21 et seq.; sidewalk contractors license, § 34-71 et seq.; license for tattoo parlors, § 36-26 et seq.; license for wreckers, § 37-571 et seq.; license for parking lots and stations, § 37-611 et seq.; license for soil refuse or fuel carrying vehicles, § 37-646 et seq.; business license for taxicabs and minibuses, § 39-41 et seq.; license for trailer rentals, § 39-106 et seq.; license for motorcycle rentals, § 39-151 et seq.; license for vending machines, § 40-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - License required. 
No person shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct, maintain or manage any business, trade, occupation or premises for which any license is required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city without first procuring the license in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 3-101)  
Sec. 18-2. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 15, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 18-3. - Evidence of doing business. 
The fact that any person represents himself or herself as being engaged in any business, trade or occupation for the transaction of which a license is required, or that such person exhibited a sign or advertisement indicating that he or she is engaged in such business, trade or occupation, shall be prima facie evidence of the liability of such person to pay the required license fee. 
(Code 1967, § 3-119)  
Sec. 18-4. - State license or permit not exemption. 
The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or management of any business, trade, occupation or premises shall not exempt such person from the necessity of procuring a license from the city, if such license is required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 3-103)  
Sec. 18-5. - Application. 
Each person required to procure a license from the city shall make application for such license to the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the clerk and shall state, under oath, such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license, including the following: 
(1)  The full names, business addresses and residence addresses of all owners, proprietors, officers, managers and local employees of applicant's business; the names and addresses of each officer, if the applicant is a corporation; 
(2)  The place or places in the city where it is proposed to maintain applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business be conducted; 
(3)  The nature, character and quality of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale by applicant; 
(4)  The nature and kind of business which applicant proposes to conduct and the manner of operating same; 
(5)  A list of all assumed, trade or firm names under which applicant intends to do business; 
(6)  The nature and character of advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers; 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or managing applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, and, if so, full particulars in connection therewith. 
(Code 1967, § 3-104)  
Sec. 18-6. - Compliance with state law prerequisite to issuance. 
No license required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city shall be issued to any person who is required to procure a license or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence that the required state license or permit has been issued and that all fees pertaining thereto have been paid. 
(Code 1967, § 3-106) 
Cross reference— Approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required for license for pool and billiard establishments, § 6-34; approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required for license for bowling alleys, § 6-64; approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required for license for public dance halls, § 6-94; approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required for license for skating rinks, § 6-123; approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required for license for theaters and concerts, § 6-153; approval of police commissioner, fire commissioner and health officer required for license for circuses, carnivals and exhibitions, § 6-189; approval of police commissioner required for license for auctions and auctioneers, § 8-23.  
Sec. 18-7. - Compliance with city ordinances; approval of city officers or department heads. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any applicant until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter and every other ordinance of the city pertaining to the business for which application for the license is made. No license shall be issued, if the approval of any officer of the city is required, until such approval is made. "Approval," in each instance, shall mean written approval by the designated officer upon the face of the application for a license; subscribed by such officer; and the date of the approval. 
(b)  Whenever the approval of a license is required by any city officer or department head, the criteria for approval shall be the applicant's compliance with federal, state and local laws concerning the field in which such officer or department head is involved. 
(c)  Whenever the police commissioner's approval is required, the police commissioner shall determine the good moral character of the applicant in accordance with section 18-8. 
(Code 1967, § 3-107)  
Sec. 18-8. - Licensing standards for good moral character. 
(a)  The phrase "good moral character," when used in this Code for the purpose of licensing, shall be construed to mean the propensity on the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(b)  A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used, in and of itself, as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination, and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that at the current time he or she has the ability to, and is likely to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner, that he or she is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he or she seeks to be licensed. 
(c)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character: 
(1)  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction; 
(2)  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction; 
(3)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest, and open manner; 
(4)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
(d)  When a person is found to be unqualified for a license because of a lack of good moral character, or similar criteria, the person shall be furnished by the city clerk with a statement to this effect. The statement shall contain a complete record of the evidence upon which the determination was based. The person shall be entitled, as of right, to a rehearing on the issue before the city council if he or she has relevant evidence not previously considered regarding his or her qualifications.  
Sec. 18-9. - Personal property taxes, prerequisite. 
No license shall be issued or renewed under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city until any and all personal property taxes, levied and assessed against such person by the city which may be due and payable at the time of the filing of the application for such license, shall have been paid. 
(Code 1967, § 3-108)  
Sec. 18-10. - Fees. 
(a)  No license shall be issued until the required nonrefundable fees shall be paid. 
(b)  No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from payment of the fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons, licenses which are clearly marked as to such exemption and the reason therefor. 
(c)  Whenever any license to operate or conduct any business, trade or occupation is required, the license fee to conduct or operate such business, trade or occupation, whether it be connected or operated in conjunction with any other business or not, shall be paid unless a contrary intention is expressed. 
(d)  Whenever any license is required to operate or conduct any business, trade or occupation, the required license fee shall be paid for each separate premises maintained by the licensee. 
(e)  If the license year shall terminate within six (6) months or less from the date of the issuance of the license, the required license fee shall be one-half of the required fee. 
(f)  A penalty of ten (10) percent of any required license fee shall be assessed and paid upon the failure of any licensee to renew such license on or before the expiration date thereof. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-109, 3-110, 3-121—3-123)  
Sec. 18-11. - Insurance. 
In all cases where public liability or property damage insurance is a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, the city may require that it be named as a coinsured or additional insured under such policy and such policy shall be in the form as approved by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 3-125)  
Sec. 18-12. - Denial, revocation, suspension; causes enumerated. 
(a)  The issuance of licenses applied for under this chapter or any other ordinance of the city may be denied by the city clerk, and licenses issued may be revoked or suspended by the city clerk at any time, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the application for license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the operation of a business; 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city reasonably related to the occupation or profession being licensed; 
(4)  Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(5)  Failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this chapter and every other ordinance of the city reasonably related to the occupation or profession being licensed. 
(b)  Written notice of suspension or revocation, stating the cause therefor, shall be delivered to the licensee personally or mailed to his or her address as shown in his or her application for a license. 
(c)  Any person whose license is revoked or suspended, or any person whose application for a license is denied, shall have the right to a hearing before the city council, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days following the delivery or mailing of the notice of revocation or suspension, or within ten (10) days following the denial of the application for a license. The city council may reverse any determination to issue or to deny the issuance of a license or any revocation of a license, and the city council may grant or reinstate any license. No person shall operate any business during any time when his or her license therefor has been suspended, revoked or cancelled. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-111—3-113)  
Sec. 18-13. - Expiration. 
Unless otherwise noted, the license year shall terminate on the thirty-first day of March at midnight, following the issuance of the license. The restaurant license year shall terminate on the thirty-first day of May at midnight, following the issuance of the license. The expiration date of each license shall be indicated on the face thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 3-105; Ord. No. 80-273, § 1, 2-22-83; Ord. No. 80-735, § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 18-14. - Renewal. 
Unless otherwise provided, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1967, § 3-114)  
Sec. 18-15. - Carrying, display requirements. 
(a)  No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city upon his or her person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or maintenance of any business for which the license was issued; except that whenever the business is operated, conducted or maintained at a fixed place or establishment, the license shall be displayed at all times in some conspicuous place in the business premises, and the licensee shall produce the same for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested so to do by any city police officer. 
(b)  No licensee shall fail to conspicuously display on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this chapter, such tags or insignia as may be furnished by the city clerk and required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. 
(c)  No person shall display any expired, suspended or revoked license, or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-115—3-117)  
Sec. 18-16. - Transfer prohibited. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city shall be transferable. 
(Code 1967, § 3-118)  
Sec. 18-17. - Provisions complementary and supplemental. 
The provisions of this chapter, together with other relevant provisions of any other ordinance, or the provisions hereafter authorized or required by state law, and any and all thereof relative to licenses, permits, businesses, trades, occupations, premises or anything connected therewith, shall be construed to be complementary and supplemental to each other so far as relevant, and unless otherwise prescribed or inconsistent herewith, shall constitute a part of the regulations and conditions applicable generally to any particular license in the same manner as though these provisions were fully written into each separate ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 3-124)  
Sec. 18-18. - Fee, insurance and bond schedule. 
The several businesses, trades, occupations, activities or things requiring licenses under this chapter, subject to all provisions of this and any other ordinance of the city, and the annual fees, and bonds, if any are required are set forth in the following schedule. In all cases where public liability or property damage insurance is a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, the city may require that it be named as a co-insured or additional insured under such policy or policies and such policy or policies shall be in such form as approved by the city. Any license may be issued without fee for any charitable, religious, educational, fraternal or public organization not conducted solely for private profit, upon the approval of the city council. 
(1)  Auction permit fee to enforce section 8-5: 
a.  Period of one (1) day ..... $40.00 
b.  Period of one (1) month ..... 110.00 
c.  Period of three (3) months ..... 210.00 
d.  Period of six (6) months ..... 360.00 
(2)  Auctioneer ..... 110.00 
Bond requirements: $2,500.00 with two (2) or more sureties as prescribed in section 8-25. 
Cross reference— Auctions and auctioneers generally, Ch. 8. 
(3)  Amusement parks or places: 
a.  Maintaining or operating five (5) or less kinds of exhibits, shows, or amusements ..... 350.00 
b.  Maintaining or operating six (6) or more kinds of exhibits, shows, or amusements ..... 500.00 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of any such license, applicant shall file with the city proof of a standard liability insurance policy or policies issued by a company licensed to do business in the state for general liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or willfulness of the licensee, his agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limit personal injury and property damage coverage. Applicant shall file a surety bond with a company authorized to do business in this state in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) indemnifying and agreeing to pay the city all damages, indebtedness or loss to the city arising from any acts or omissions of the licensee, his agents, servants, employees, or his lessees, in the operation of such business. 
Cross reference— Amusement parks generally, § 6-201 et seq. 
(4)  Amusement riding or moving devices or other amusement places: 
a.  First day ..... 30.00 
b.  Each subsequent day ..... 20.00 
Includes every device usually found in amusement parks operated for profit, including but not limited to Ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, roller coasters, whirligigs and shooting galleries. Whenever operated by the same management as any amusement park otherwise licensed as herein provided, such license shall be deemed to include and be in lieu of the license fees enumerated under this heading. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of any such license, applicant shall file with the city proof of a standard liability insurance policy or policies issued by a company licensed to do business in the state for general liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or willfulness of the licensee, his agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limit personal injury and property damage coverage. Applicant shall file a surety bond with a company authorized to do business in this state in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) indemnifying and agreeing to pay the city all damages, indebtedness or loss to the city arising from any acts or omissions of the licensee, his agents, servants, employees, or his lessees, in the operation of such business. 
Cross reference— Riding devices generally, § 6-201 et seq. 
(5)  Ambulance vehicles: 
a.  First vehicle ..... 35.00 
b.  Each additional vehicle ..... 15.00 
Cross reference— Ambulances generally, Ch. 5. 
(6)  Bowling alley ..... 40.00 
Cross reference— Bowling alleys generally, § 6-51. 
(7)  Building mover ..... 100.00 
See also sections 9-377 through 9-380. 
Cross reference— Moving buildings generally, § 9-341 et seq. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Catering business located in Warren ..... 25.00 
(9a)  Catering vehicles operated in Warren, per vehicle ..... 15.00 
Cross reference— Food and food handlers generally, Ch. 14. 
(10)  Circus, carnival, open air exhibition and similar events: 
a.  First day ..... 85.00 
b.  Each subsequent day ..... 45.00 
Side show in connection with above: 
a.  First day ..... 30.00 
b.  Each subsequent day ..... 15.00 
Warren Zoning Ordinance section 4.35(5) limits permits for such uses to be valid for a total of sixteen (16) consecutive or nonconsecutive days; however, the permit expires thirty (30) days from the date of issue. 
Whenever a side show shall be operated by the same management as the circus, menagerie, carnival or open air exhibition, such license fee shall be deemed to include and be in lieu of the license fees enumerated above. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of any such license, applicant shall file with the city proof of a standard liability insurance policy or policies issued by a company licensed to do business in the state for general liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or willfulness of the licensee, his agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limit personal injury and property damage coverage. Applicant shall file a surety bond with a company authorized to do business in this state in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) indemnifying and agreeing to pay the city all damages, indebtedness or loss to the city arising from any acts or omissions of the licensee, his agents, servants, employees, or his lessees, in the operation of such business. 
Cross reference— Circuses, carnivals and exhibitions generally, § 6-171 et seq. 
(11)  Christmas tree sales lot ..... 30.00 
(12)  Amusement machine fees: 
a.  Distributor ..... 510.00 
b.  Amusement machine center owner ..... 710.00 
c.  Owner ..... 85.00 
d.  Machines: 
1st ten (10) machines, each ..... 75.00 
2nd ten (10) machines, each ..... 50.00 
Additional after twenty (20), each ..... 25.00 
Machine transfer fee ..... 15.00 
Renewal fees: 
Distributor ..... 260.00 
Amusement machine center owner ..... 360.00 
Owner ..... 47.50 
Machine renewal fees: 
1st ten (10) machines, each ..... 37.50 
2nd ten (10) machines, each ..... 25.00 
Additional after twenty (20), each ..... 12.50 
Cross reference— Amusement machines generally, § 6-226 
(13)  Merchandise, service and music vending machines: 
a.  Distributor ..... 50.00 
b.  Owner ..... 10.00 
c.  Each machine ..... 5.00 
(14)  Concert, music or lecture ..... 50.00 
Cross reference— Concerts generally, § 6-136 et seq. 
(15)  Concert, play, musical performance, motion picture or vaudeville exhibition: 
Cross reference— Concerts generally, § 6-136 et seq. 
a.  First day ..... 50.00 
b.  Each subsequent day ..... 15.00 
(16)  Dance halls open to public for admission fee ..... 85.00 
Cross reference— Public dance halls generally, § 6-76 et seq. 
Public dance, each day ..... 30.00 
(17)  Dancing school ..... 45.00 
(17a)  Dog license: Dog licenses can be obtained at the city clerk's office in person or by mail. The cost depends on whether the dog is spayed or neutered and how long the rabies shot is valid: 
One year rabies shot 	Spayed/neutered $3.00 	$2.40 for senior citizens 
One year rabies shot 	Not spayed/neutered $5.00 	$4.00 for senior citizens 
Three year rabies shot 	Spayed/neutered $8.00 	$6.40 for senior citizens 
Three year rabies shot 	Not spayed/neutered $10.00 	$8.00 for senior citizens 
 
(18)  Dry cleaning and dyeing: 
a.  Processing plants ..... 35.00 
b.  Establishments ..... 25.00 
c.  Each vehicle used in pick-up and delivery ..... 20.00 
Cross reference— Laundries generally, Ch. 17. 
(19)  Garage sale ..... free 
(20)  Estate sale license per day ..... 20.00 
Per Warren Zoning Ordinance section 5.01(k) the estate sale is limited to four (4) specified days per calendar year as listed on the estate sale license. 
(20a)  Fortunetelling ..... 150.00 
Application fee for background check ..... 10.00 
Cross reference— Fortunetelling generally, § 6-238 et seq. 
(21)  Handbill distributor: 
a.  Period of one (1) year ..... 75.00 
b.  Period of three (3) months ..... 50.00 
c.  Period of one (1) week ..... 30.00 
d.  Period of one (1) day ..... 20.00 
Cross reference— Handbills, § 3-16 et seq. 
(22)  Hotel, motel and cabin business license ..... 10.00 
Additional fees: 
a.  Each room inspected ..... 10.00 
b.  Fire inspection, per room ..... 5.00 
(23)  Reserved. 
(24)  Reserved. 
(25)  Parades and processions ..... No fee 
Two hundred dollars ($200.00) cash bond to insure cleanup of debris, etc., required. Application for license required to be filed not less than ten (10) days before the event. Approval of route required from police commissioner. 
(26)  Parking lots and stations: 
a.  Ten-car capacity ..... 15.00 
b.  Eleven (11) to twenty-five (25) cars capacity ..... 30.00 
c.  Twenty-six (26) to fifty (50) cars capacity ..... 50.00 
d.  Over fifty-car capacity ..... 60.00 
(27)  Pawnbroker ..... 260.00 
A minimum of two bonds, each in the sum of $1,500.00, with at least two (2) sureties for a total of $3,000.00 in bonds as required by section 30-54. 
Three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) bond required by section 30-48. 
Cross reference— Secondhand goods and pawnbrokers generally, Ch. 30. 
(28)  Peddler ..... 55.00 
Cross reference— Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants generally, Ch. 24. 
(29)  Pool room: 
a.  Pool room establishment - Owner ..... 30.00 
b.  Distributor: 
(1)  License fee ..... 10.00 
(2)  Each location ..... 20.00 
c.  Each table ..... 3.00 
(30)  Precious metal and gem dealer certificate of registration ..... 60.00 
(31)  Renter of motorcycles, each location ..... 50.00 
Cross reference— Motorcycle rentals generally, § 39-131 et seq. 
(32)  Renter of trailers, each location ..... 70.00 
Each location ..... 70.00 
Cross reference— Rental of trailers generally, § 39-91 et seq. 
(33)  Restaurant ..... 40.00 
Cross reference— Restaurants generally, § 14-16 et seq. 
(34)  Reserved. 
(35)  Reserved. 
(36)  Route salesman ..... 55.00 
One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) bond required. 
Cross reference— Route salesperson generally, § 24-111 et seq. 
(37)  Secondhand goods business licenses: 
a.  Automotive recycler; scrap processor; junk yard ..... 60.00 
b.  Junk peddler, per person ..... 35.00 
each additional trailer or vehicle ..... 25.00 
c.  Secondhand goods dealer; junk dealer ..... 35.00 
d.  Secondhand motor vehicle dealer (used car lot) ..... 110.00 
Cross reference— Secondhand dealers and junk dealers, § 30-16 et seq. 
(38)  Reserved. 
(39)  Sidewalk cement contractors ..... 20.00 
Must demonstrate proof of insurance in amounts required pursuant to Sec. 34-75. 
Cross reference— Sidewalks generally, § 34-51 et seq. 
One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) bond required. 
(40)  Reserved. 
(41)  Skating rinks* ..... 45.00 
*Municipally operated skating rinks excluded. 
Cross reference— Skating rinks generally, § 6-111 et seq. 
(42)  Snow removal and plowing: 
a.  First vehicle ..... 35.00 
b.  Each additional vehicle ..... 20.00 
(43)  Reserved. 
(44)  Soil, refuse truckers; per vehicle ..... 20.00 
Cross reference— Soil removal, dumping and regarding generally, Ch. 32. 
(45)  Solicitations, charitable: 
Identification in writing to city council required for issuance of license. Identification and licensing requirements waived upon presentation of certificate of exemption under MCL section 400.271 et seq ..... free 
(46)  Taxicabs ..... 10.00 
a.  Each vehicle ..... 25.00 
b.  Public vehicle drivers permit ..... 5.00 
(47)  Theaters, stage or screen ..... 85.00 
Cross reference— Theaters generally, § 6-136 et seq. 
(48)  Transient merchants: 
a.  Each day, less than one (1) week ..... 25.00 
b.  Each week, less than one (1) month ..... 30.00 
c.  Each month, less than three (3) months ..... 45.00 
d.  Three (3) months ..... 70.00 
e.  Six (6) months ..... 110.00 
Any fee paid prior to the statutory tax day or in a year in which no assessment for personal property taxes was made upon the goods, wares or merchandise of the licensee shall be retained by the city without credit for such taxes; any license fee paid after such tax day and in a year in which an assessment has or will be made upon such goods, wares and merchandise shall constitute a credit upon the city, county and school taxes payable in such year. 
Cross reference— Transient merchants generally, § 24-71 et seq. 
(49)  Reserved. 
(50)  Self-service laundries and self-service car washes ..... 50.00 
Cross reference— Self-service laundries generally, § 17-16 et seq. 
(51)  Tattoo parlors ..... 60.00 
Cross reference— Tattoo parlors generally, Ch. 36. 
(52)  Massage establishment ..... 200.00 
Extension or expansion ..... 100.00 
Cross reference— Massage generally, Ch. 19. 
(53)  Tow trucks: 
a.  First vehicle ..... 40.00 
b.  Each additional vehicle ..... 15.00 
(54)  Retail sale of fireworks license (pursuant to section 13-20) ..... 110.00 
(55)  Sexually oriented businesses (pursuant to chapter 6, article X): 
a.  Business licenses, initial fee ..... 110.00 
Renewal ..... 60.00 
b.  Employee license, initial fee ..... 60.00 
Renewal ..... 35.00 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-125, 5-211; Ord. No. 80-281, § 1, 4-26-83; Ord. No. 80-292, § 1, 8-30-83; Ord. No. 80-293, § 1, 9-27-83; Ord. No. 80-303, § 1, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 80-320, § 1, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 80-329, § 1, 10-28-86; Ord. No. 80-340, § 48, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-400, § 3, 12-26-91; Ord. No. 80-510, § 1, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 80-518, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-532, § 1, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 80-608, § 7, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 80-611, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 80-622, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 80-659, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 80-676, § 1, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 80-687, § 1, 8-10-10; Ord. No. 80-761, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 18-19. - Document schedule. 
The following fees shall be charged for providing the following documents: 
(1)  Birth and death certificate fees: 
a.  One (1) certified copy of a birth record ..... $ 7.50 
b.  Additional copies ordered at same time, per copy ..... 3.00 
c.  One (1) certified copy of a death record ..... 7.50 
d.  Additional copies ordered at same time, per copy ..... 3.00 
e.  For persons sixty-five (65) years or older, certified copy of a birth record ..... 2.00 
f.  For persons sixty-five (65) years or older, one (1) certified copy of a death record ..... 6.00 
g.  Additional copies of death records ordered at the same time, per copy ..... 2.40 
(2)  Voter and election information on CD ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 80-518, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-676, § 1, 3-24-09)  
Chapter 19 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SPAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-761, adopted October 24, 2017, repealed the former Chapter 19, §§ 19-1—19-23, 19-29—19-56, and 19-64—19-68, and enacted a new Chapter 19 as set out herein. The former Chapter 19 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80-349, § 1, adopted December 22, 1987. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
State Law reference— Regulation of massage establishments and myomassaologists, MCL 339.1701 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Purpose and findings. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the operation of massage and spa establishments, massage schools, and other similar businesses offering massage therapy services; and to regulate employees of such establishments who are not licensed as massage therapists by the state, as an exercise of the city's police power in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The licensing requirements are designed to help prevent illegal massage, prostitution, and related sex crimes, without hindering legitimate massage establishments and their massage therapists. The city police department closed down a massage establishment where there was sexual conduct or the intimation of sexual conduct, rather than lawful massage therapy. ( City of Warren v Executive Art Studio, Inc. et al. Macomb County Circuit Court No: 96-3630-CZ; Michigan Court of Appeals No. 197353C.) Such establishments that offer massage services as a subterfuge for prostitution, masturbation for hire, and other paid sexual contact are harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
The Michigan Legislature declared that the practice of massage therapy is an activity affecting the public interest and involving the health, safety, and welfare of the public. MCL 333.17951 et seq. was enacted to prohibit a person from engaging in the practice of massage therapy or using certain titles without being licensed under the Public Health Code; to create the Michigan Board of Massage Therapy; to establish minimum educational and experience standards for licensure; and to require continuing education courses as a condition for license renewal. The acquisition of a massage establishment license is a privilege, not a right. The enactment and enforcement of this chapter relates to municipal concerns and is a valid exercise of the City's police powers. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Authorized city official includes, but is not limited to, the police commissioner, the fire commissioner, the director of property maintenance and building inspection, or their designees. This also includes police officers and city personnel described in chapter 1 of the Code. 
(2)  Employee means any person who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage establishment, massage school, spa or other similar business and receives consideration from the operator of the massage establishment or its patrons. Employees includes independent contractor, agent, apprentice, trainee, leased personnel and/or other similar relationships. This does not include a person who is exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the promise, delivery of goods to the premise or other similar relationships. 
(3)  Massage means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including but not limited to, pressure, range of motion stretches, rubbing, kneading, tapping, pounding, compression, vibration, stroking, application of friction, or percussion of the human body or parts of it by hand or with an instrument, apparatus (mechanical or electrical), with or without aids such as water, rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, creams, lotions, ointments, lubricants, salt glow/scrubs, body wraps, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage therapy. 
(4)  Massage therapist means an individual engaged the practice of massage therapy. 
(5)  Massage establishment means a commercial establishment where any person offers or provides massage. It includes, but is not limited to, massage schools, massage parlors, spas, sauna baths, Turkish bathhouses and steam baths. 
(6)  Not included . This term shall not include: 
a.  A regularly licensed hospital, medical clinic, nursing home, other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state; other licensed facilities such as barber shops, salons; or any other medical facility where massages are provided as an incidental or accessory use to the main use of the premises. 
b.  Transient workplace locations during normal business hours where the massage is performed upon employees pursuant to a policy of medical insurance or as a benefit provided by the employer as part of a workplace health program. 
c.  Kiosks or similar areas at locations open to the public where all massage therapy services are performed in public. 
d.  An organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court, or other educational, cultural, recreational, and athletic facilities for the welfare of the residents. 
e.  Exempt locations do not waive the massage therapist's duty to obtain a license as required by state law. 
(7)  Owner means a person who conducts or owns a massage establishment, massage school, or other similar business. 
(8)  Patron means any individual or customer who receives a massage at a massage establishment, massage school, or other similar establishment (excluding physical therapy or chiropractic services at the offices of a licensed health care professional) under such circumstances that is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration. 
(9)  Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity. 
(10)  Practice of massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the human body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health and well-being of the client. "Practice of massage therapy" includes complimentary methods, including the external application of water, heat, cold, lubrication, salt scrubs, body wraps, or other topical preparations; and electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands. "Practice of massage therapy" does not include medical diagnosis; practice of physical therapy; high velocity, low-amplitude thrust to a joint, electrical stimulation, application ultrasound; or prescription of medicines. 
(11)  School means any of the following accredited or licensed institutions of higher education that meet the minimum standards and curriculum, in compliance with MCL 333.16148: 
a.  A public or private community college, college, or university. 
b.  A public or private trade, vocational, or occupational school. 
(12)  Spa establishment means a commercial establishment that offers or engages in personal services that call for the patron to disrobe, including but not limited to, body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak. This term does not include hospitals or other professional health establishments separately licensed by the state. 
(13)  Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified crimes: 
a.  An offense punishable by death or imprisonment for ninety (90) days or more under any of the following statutes, as amended from time to time, for which less than five (5) years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
1.  Michigan Penal Code (MPC) chapter IV (Adulterating and Misbranding); 
2.  MPC chapter X (Arson and Burning); 
3.  MPC chapter XI (Assaults); 
4.  MPC chapter XVII (Bribery and Corruption); 
5.  MPC chapter XXII (Compounding Offenses); 
6.  MPC chapter XXVA (Criminal Enterprises); 
7.  MPC chapter XXVIII (Disorderly Persons); 
8.  MPC chapter XXXI (Embezzlement); 
9.  MPC chapter XXXIII (Explosives, Bombs, and Harmful Devices); 
10.  MPC chapter XXXIV (Extortion); 
11.  MPC chapter XLIII (Frauds and Cheats); 
12.  MPC chapter XLIV (Gambling); 
13.  MPC chapter XLV (Homicide); 
14.  MPC chapter XLVIII (Indecency and Immorality); 
15.  MPC chapter LVIII (Mayhem); 
16.  MPC chapter LXVII (Prostitution); 
17.  MPC chapter LXVIIA (Human Trafficking); 
18.  MPC chapter LXXVI (Sexual Conduct); 
19.  MPC chapter LXXVIII (Robbery); 
20.  MPC chapter LXXXIII-A (Michigan Anti-Terrorism Act); 
21.  MCL chapter 333, Part 74 (Controlled Substances—Offenses and Penalties); 
22.  MCL 205.27 (Taxation—Prohibited Acts (including tax evasion)); 
23.  MCL 257.625 (operating while intoxicated, impaired, controlled substance or other); 
b.  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one (1) of the foregoing offenses; 
c.  Any offense enumerated in the city's Code which contains the same elements as one (1) of the foregoing state offenses; or 
d.  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in the state, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-3. - Licensed professions excepted. 
(a)  This chapter does not apply to a licensed physical therapist, athletic trainer, cosmetologist, or barber, performing functions authorized under the license held, nor does this chapter apply to a licensed medical doctor, osteopath, podiatrist, nurse or chiropractor, or any individual working under the direct supervision of a licensed medical doctor, osteopath, nurse or chiropractor, while engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
(b)  This chapter does not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, other medical care facilities/clinics licensed under the laws of this state or to the offices of a physical, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-4. - Massage spa establishments—Licenses required. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue massage establishment/spa establishment license upon investigation, and after receipt of all of the required information and reports if the applicant meets the requirements hereunder and the requirements of city ordinances and has paid the necessary fees. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate massage/spa establishment without a valid establishment license issued by the clerk in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage/spa establishment unless each and every massage therapist has a valid massage therapist license issued by the state pursuant to MCL 333.17951 et seq. of the public health code, as amended, unless exempt from such licensing law. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any individual to work as a massage therapist without having a valid massage therapist license issued by the state pursuant to MCL 333.17951 et seq. of the public health code unless exempt from such licensing law. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-5. - Licenses to be displayed. 
(a)  A massage/spa establishment license issued under this chapter shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place in the lobby of the massage/spa establishment or school for which it was issued. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any massage therapist or student to work in, on or about any establishment, unless there shall be displayed in an open and conspicuous place in the lobby of said establishment, a massage therapist license issued to said massage therapist respectively pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-6. - Accommodating two (2) or more patrons. 
It shall be unlawful for any massage/spa establishment to accommodate two (2) or more patrons in the same room unless: 
(1)  The two (2) patrons in the same room knowingly and voluntarily request massage services in the same room; and 
(2)  The two (2) patrons requesting massage services in the same room execute a consent form indicating permission to share a room and that they know each other. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-7. - Responsibility of employer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating an establishment to permit or allow an employee, student, agent or massage therapist, or any person whatsoever, to violate this chapter on the premises of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-8. - Alcoholic beverages and controlled substances prohibited. 
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage or controlled substances as defined by state law on the premises of any establishment. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-9. - Access and inspections. 
(a)  All establishments subject to this chapter are declared to be public places, and shall not, during business hours, have the doors to the exits and entrances of such establishments locked or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress and egress of persons; provided, however, such doors may be closed. 
(b)  Every establishment subject to this chapter shall be open for inspection by authorized city officials concerned with the licensing and supervision of such establishment during operating hours for the purpose of enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter; other ordinances or regulations of the city relating to the public health, safety and welfare; or state law. 
(c)  If reasonably necessary to perform authorized work, perform their duties, or to preserve the peace, an authorized city official may enter upon and inspect the establishment at all reasonable times during business hours, or during times when the licensed premises are occupied by an employee or owner of establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry to a premises which a massage/spa establishment or massage school is ostensibly being operated, by authorized city officials for the purpose of making lawful inspections. If entry is refused or not obtained, an authorized city official may, if required by law, seek a warrant in order to authorize entry into the property, structure, or premises without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-10. - Closing hours. 
No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-11. - Maintenance of premises; sterilization and cleaning equipment. 
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating an establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All equipment, including but not limited to, shower stalls, toilets, and lavatories, used in the massage establishment shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic, and bathing devices or parts hereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization, before initial use, and any such instruments and devices or parts thereof, after having been used upon one (1) patron, shall be sterilized before being used upon another. Towels, linens, and items for personal use shall be clean, freshly laundered, and shall not be furnished for use of another patron until thoroughly laundered. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-12. - Cleanliness of employees. 
The skin and hands of those attending to patrons shall be clean and in a healthy condition, and the nails shall be kept short. The hands shall be washed thoroughly with hot running water, using proper soap or disinfectant before providing service or treatment to a patron. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-13. - Massage equipment. 
No beds, mattresses, water mattresses, cots or other equipment designed for sleeping shall be permitted at the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-14. - List of employees; employee information. 
The establishment shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all employees, both on-duty and off-duty, and such list shall be shown to the authorized city official upon request. Records shall be kept for a minimum of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-15. - Keeping of records. 
(a)  Records of the establishment : Every person who operates an establishment shall maintain an accurate record of all patrons accommodated; such records shall include the patron's names, proof of identity age and current address together with the time, date and place of service, the nature of the service provided, and the name of the massage therapist providing the service. Every patron shall furnish proof of identify by showing a valid driver's license, voter registration certificate or similar identification, to the person that operates the establishment for the purpose of maintaining the accuracy of the establishment's record requirement. Such record shall be available at all times at the establishment for inspection by any authorized city official. 
(b)  Records of the physical therapist : A licensed physical therapist shall maintain a legible client record for each client, which accurately reflects the licensee's assessment and treatment of the client. Entries in the client record shall be made in a timely fashion. As to what information shall be contained in the client record, the city adopts by reference the requirements set forth in the state administrative rules relating to massage therapy, including but not limited to, R 338.727, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-16. - Clothing of employees and other persons. 
All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of patrons receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist, shall be completely clothed. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either a blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body, including the torso, excluding the arms and neck, and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or a skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two (2) inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this chapter shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-17. - Facilities necessary. 
No license to conduct a massage establishment, spa, massage school or similar business shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Signs . A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, spa or school provided, that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city. 
a.  Massage and spa establishments shall post and maintain a copy of the human trafficking notice as set forth in MCL 752.1035 and as amended. The penalty for failing to comply with the notice requirement in this subsection includes: 
1.  If the city determines that an establishment has failed to comply with the notice requirements of this subsection, the city shall notify the establishment that it is in violation of this subsection and provide the establishment with forty-eight (48) hours to come into compliance with this subsection. 
2.  If the establishment under subsection (i) is subsequently notified a second time of a failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection within one (1) year of the previous notification, the violation is a municipal infraction and the establishment may be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
3.  If the same establishment is notified a third time of a failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection within one (1) year of the two (2) previous two (2) notifications, the violation is a municipal civil infraction and the establishment may be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Lighting . Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city building code, and at least one (1) artificial light of not less than sixty (60) watts or equivalent shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed. 
(3)  Ventilation . Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city building code. 
(4)  Disinfecting . Equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(5)  Water . Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(6)  Cabinets . Closed cabinets shall be provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
(7)  Interior structure, doors, openings, locks . Adequate massage facilities enabling the accommodation of at least two (2) patrons shall be provided. Adequate facilities, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined as separate enclosed rooms, having doors capable of being closed but not locked. Exterior doors may have locks, but such exterior doors shall not be locked while the establishment is open for business or while any massage is being performed therein. Barrier-free dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided to patrons and employees. One (1) toilet and one (1) wash basin shall be provided at every massage establishment. Separate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
(8)  Good repair and sanitary conditions . All walls, ceiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, whirlpools, steam rooms, saunas, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(9)  Towels and linens . Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(10)  Wash basin . A minimum of one (1) separate wash basin shall be provided in each establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment. The basin shall provide antiseptic soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each wash basin, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(11)  Entrances and exits . No establishment shall have an entrance or exit way providing a direct passageway to any other type of business, residence or living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-18. - Supervision. 
Each massage establishment, spa or massage school shall have an owner, manager or supervisor on the premises at all hours that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager or supervisor on the premises, the establishment must cease operations and close until an owner, manager or supervisor is on the premises. A violation of this section shall by an agent, or employee of the licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee. Such violation by a licensee shall also constitute a violation by the owner, president, and/or other supervisory official of the licensee, in his or her individual capacity, for permitting another to violate the chapter. Any such violation may be a basis for suspending, revoking, or not renewing a license. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-19. - Massage establishment as a school of massage. 
A school of massage licensed as such under this chapter shall be governed by all of the terms hereunder and further must comply with the requirements set forth in MCL 333.17951 et seq., 333.16148 and any other regulations require by law. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Secs. 19-20—19-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 19-29. - Duty of city clerk. 
The city clerk shall: 
(1)  Accept all applications and fees required to be filed if complete. 
(2)  Keep a record of all applications made. 
(3)  Ensure that fees in the proper amount accompany each application and submit the fees to the city treasurer. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a properly and fully completed license application, forward the applications to the police department, the building department or any other department the clerk deems necessary to review the application. 
(5)  Grant, refuse, suspend or revoke licenses or applications upon the investigation, recommendation or approval or non-approval of the authorized city officials. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-30. - Application for establishment license. 
Any person desiring an establishment license shall file a written application, with the city clerk on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(1)  The application shall set forth the following: 
a.  The applicant's full legal name and other names used by the applicant in the preceding five (5) years, including whether the applicant is an individual or a corporation, state of incorporation, partnership or other entity; 
b.  The business name, all phone numbers, location, legal description and designation under which the establishment is to be operated. A statement whether the applicant is the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. If premises is leased, a copy of the signed lease for the business premises and written consent from the owner to utilize the premises for the described purpose, if the premises are not owned by the applicant; 
c.  The business address where the establishment is to be operated and the residential mailing address of the applicant; 
d.  The name, residence addresses and telephone numbers of the manager or other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of the establishment; 
e.  The following personal information concerning the applicant: 
1.  Sole proprietor . If the applicant is a sole proprietor, written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, state identification card or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or the federal government. 
2.  Other . If the applicant is not a sole proprietor, then the partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall submit a complete list of the entity's: 
i.  Officers; 
ii.  Directors; 
iii.  Partners, members, or shareholders (natural persons) holding a ten percent or greater ownership interest in such legal entity, or if there is no shareholder (natural person) with at least a ten (10) percent interest, the ten (10) shareholders with the greatest ownership interest; 
iv.  Employee or agent primarily responsible for operation of the massage or spa establishment; and 
v.  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government for each person listed in subparts 1-4 above. 
f.  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to section 19-30(1)e.2. has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of an establishment that has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
1.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
2.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment revoked. 
g.  A statement of whether the applicant or a person listed in response to Section 19-30(1)e.2. has in the previous twelve (12) months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
1.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
2.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
h.  A sworn and notarized statement of a registered agent and at least 18 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the applicant. 
i.  The days and times the establishment will be open to provide services. 
j.  A detailed summary or description of the nature and type of services to be provided at the establishment. 
k.  Listing of all criminal arrests and convictions, other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdictions in which convicted, the offense on which arrested initially and the offense for which he or she was ultimately convicted, the dates of conviction and the penalty. 
l.  Release and authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. 
m.  Written declaration by the applicant, given under oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in and attached to the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  A tender of the correct license fee as hereinafter provided. 
b.  Proof that an assumed name certificate has been filed with the county clerk; and/or if required, the state if the applicant is to operate the establishment under an assumed name. 
c.  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the state to do business in the state, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by to do business in the state and must submit copies of the certificate of organization or incorporation, as applicable, and articles of organization or incorporation, as applicable. 
d.  For every person on the premises who offers, or will offer, services for which a license under MCL 333.17951 et seq. is required, a copy of the state license for each such person as well as a color photograph, no smaller than two (2) inches by two (2) inches, showing the face, neck, and shoulders of each such person; or, if there are none, a statement certifying that no person on the premises offers, or will offer, services for which said person is required to be licensed by the state pursuant to MCL 333.17951 et seq. 
e.  It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the license for the establishment, or the employer of any persons purporting to act as a massage therapist to ensure that each person employed as a massage therapist shall first have obtained a valid license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or as required by state law. 
(3)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed to the public only as required under governing law. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to any required disclosure under the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, 15.231 et seq. or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-31. - Investigation by authorized city official. 
Upon receiving a complete application for a massage establishment or spa license, the authorized city officials shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, if an individual; or of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation; and of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the establishment and/or the equipment used therein or of the manager or other individual principally in charge of the operation of the establishment. This includes criminal background checks. The authorized city official may, in his or her discretion, require a personal interview of the applicant, and such further information, identification and physical examination of the applicant as shall bear on the investigation. 
Authorized city officials shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the establishment is to be carried on, for the purposes of assuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as set forth in these regulations and with the regulations of public health, safety and welfare of the city including but not limited to zoning, building and fire code. 
Any licenses required by this chapter shall be issued and signed by the city clerk upon the investigation and recommendation and approval of the authorized city officials. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-32. - Issuance of massage/spa establishment license. 
Authorized city officials shall present their findings to the city clerk for issuance of a massage or spa establishment license within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application (or to a time as agreed to by the city and the applicant) unless the clerk finds that: 
(1)  The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city or sufficient funds were not provided; 
(2)  The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws; 
(3)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the establishment and/or the equipment used therein or the manager or other individual principally in charge of the operation of the establishment has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving a violation of laws relating to specified criminal activity or health codes prior to the date of the application; 
(4)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this chapter or has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; 
(5)  The applicant has had an establishment license or similar license revoked or suspended by this city, county or state or any other city, county or state or local agency prior to the date of the application; 
(6)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other individual principally in charge of the operation of the establishment, is not over the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(7)  The applicant is neither the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated, nor the holder of a lease for the period to be covered by the lease. 
(8)  The city has revoked a massage or spa establishment license at the premises (or from the same owner/lessor) within the previous twelve (12) months. 
(9)  The applicant and/or application does not meet all other requirements of this chapter or other ordinances of the city pertaining to business establishments included but not limited to fire, health, building and zoning ordinances. 
(10)  The applicant or a person listed in response to Section 19-30(1)e.2. has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(11)  The applicant or a person listed in response to section 19-30(1)e. has within the previous five (5) years been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(12)  The establishment does not comply with all applicable building, health, and life safety codes, or the building to be occupied does not have a valid, current certificate of compliance. 
(13)  The applicant or a person listed in response to section 19-30(1)e.2. has in the previous twelve (12) months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(14)  The applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity that is required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, but is not so chartered or authorized. 
(15)  A license, if issued, shall be issued in the name of the applicant. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-33. - Fees. 
The fee for a license under this article shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. A fee shall be payable also for each application involving extension or expansion of a building for other place of business of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-34. - Transfer prohibited. 
Establishment licenses are not transferable, separable or divisible, and such authority as a license confers shall be conferred only on the licensee named therein. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-35. - License valid for one (1) year. 
(a)  Each license issued under these regulations shall be valid for no more than one (1) year from the date of its issuance as shown thereon. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be conspicuously displayed on the wall of the lobby of the establishment, said wall being in an area open to the public and a photograph of the massage therapist shall be attached to his or her license on display. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-36. - Renewal of licenses. 
Any time after the expiration of eleven (11) months of the term of a license required by this chapter, the licensee may file with the city clerk a written application to renew such license on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. Such application shall contain the information required herein for an original license to the extent that such information would not be duplicative and such application shall be accompanied by a tender of the correct fee as herein provided. The city clerk shall renew such license unless the authorized city officials find that the requirements of this chapter for the reissuance of a license are not met. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-37. - Obtaining license by fraud. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact, or to give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing a license required by this chapter and any such license so secured shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-38. - Fraudulent use of license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently make use of, in any manner to his own or another's benefit, a massage/spa establishment or massage therapist's license which has not been duly issued to him or in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, state laws or other laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-39. - Counterfeiting, changing, defacing license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or forge or to change, deface or alter a license required or issued under the provisions of this chapter or under state law. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-40. - Patronage of massage business by minors. 
No person licensed as a massage therapist shall massage or treat any person under the age of eighteen (18) years upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine, or physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the massage therapist giving the massage or treatment. If the person under the age of eighteen (18) years is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this provision shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-41. - Unlawful activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person, or give or administer any bath or baths, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this chapter for illegal purposes, or for monetary gain or profit have any contact with a person's breasts, genital area or buttocks in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desire. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-42. - Exposure of genitals, pubic area, etc. 
(a)  No massage therapist or student shall massage a patron whose genitals are exposed during the treatment. 
(b)  No patron receiving a massage shall expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, anus or the areola or nipple of the female breast to another person on the premises of an establishment. This prohibition relating to exposing the areola or nipple of the female breast shall not apply when the massage therapist is certified to provide oncology massage or manual lymphatic drainage massage. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-43. - Advertising. 
No massage or spa establishment, massage school or similar business, or massage therapist granted a license under this chapter or under state law shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any massage services. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-44. - Sale or transfer of interest in massage business. 
Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an establishment, the license shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the massage establishment. The provisions of section 19-30 of this chapter shall apply to any person, firm or entity applying for a massage establishment license for premises previously used as such establishment. 
Any sale or transfer of any interest in an existing establishment or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the establishment shall require inspection and shall require compliance with this chapter. A fee in an amount as established by resolution or ordinance of the city council shall be payable for each application involving extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-45 - Name of business. 
No person licensed under this chapter shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation not specified in the license. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Secs. 19-46—19-62. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, APPEALS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 19-63. - Suspension. 
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the authorized city officials for a minor violation of this chapter by the licensee thereof. 
Any establishment license issued under this chapter may be suspended for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the authorized city official(s) for a violation of this chapter by an agent or employee of the massage establishment provided such violation occurred at the establishment. 
Such suspension shall be effective ten (10) days after written notice thereof is given to the licensee. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the reason(s) for such suspension, the duration of such suspension, the beginning of such suspension, and the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
Such notice may be given by delivering the same to the licensee, by delivering the same to the establishment, or by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the address stated on the license application and such notice shall be deemed given upon deposit of the notice in the United States mail as aforesaid. 
This section is cumulative of all other rules, regulations and laws. An appeal, as provided herein, from any suspension hereunder, shall automatically stay such suspension pending such an appeal. The police commissioner, his/her designee or other authorized official shall have the authority to take possession of the license wherever it is located and hold the same until the suspension period has expired if: 
(1)  A timely appeal has not been made after the effective date of the suspension; or, 
(2)  An appeal is made and the suspension is upheld in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-64. - Revocation. 
Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the authorized city official(s) for a significant violation of this chapter or should the licensee no longer qualify for a license as an original applicant, or the licensee's license has been suspended three (3) times within the ten-year period or has misrepresented or withheld information on his original or renewal application. Any establishment license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city clerk upon the investigation, recommendation or approval of the authorized city official(s) of a significant violation of this chapter by an agent or employee of the establishment provided such violation occurred on the establishment premises. 
Such revocation shall be effective immediately after written notice thereof is given to the licensee. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the reason(s) for such revocation and the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Such notice may be given by delivering same to the establishment, or by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the address stated on the license application and such notice shall be deemed given upon deposit of the notice in the United States Mail as aforesaid. 
This section is cumulative of all other rules, regulations and laws. An appeal, as provided herein, from any revocation hereunder, shall automatically stay such revocation pending such appeal. The police commissioner, his/her designee or other authorized official shall have the authority to take possession of the license wherever it is located and hold the same until the suspension period has expired if: 
(1)  A timely appeal has not been made after the effective date of the suspension; or, 
(2)  An appeal is made and the suspension is upheld in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 19-65. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the city clerk or authorized city official(s) regarding the issuance, suspension or revocation of a license required hereunder may, within thirty (30) days thereafter, appeal to a hearing examiner appointed by the city council. The appeal of a revocation of a license shall be accompanied by the posting of a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) cash bond. If the revocation or cancellation is set aside, then the bond is to be refunded in full. If the revocation or cancellation is upheld, then the bond is forfeited to the city as a reasonable estimate of the expenses associated with the appeal process. 
(b)  The appeal to the hearing examiner shall be initiated by filing a written objection with the hearing examiner. The written objection shall state what the action or decision of the city clerk or authorized city official should have been and why. A copy of the document containing the notice of the action or decision complained of shall be attached to said written objection. Upon receipt of said written objection and attachment, the hearing examiner shall set the same down for a hearing to be held within the next fifteen (15) days and advise all parties of the date, time and place of hearing. The person aggrieved shall bring to the hearing all licenses issued to him pursuant to this chapter. The city attorney may appear and represent the interests of the city clerk or authorized city official. 
(c)  At hearings before the hearing examiner, all witnesses will be sworn. The hearing examiner will hear the testimony of the city clerk or authorized city official who may be called. The hearing examiner will hear the testimony of the persons aggrieved along with any witnesses the person aggrieved may call. Additionally, the hearing examiner will review all documents and exhibits submitted to him by the parties. The hearing examiner will not be bound by formal rules of evidence and will control the evidence, reserving to himself the power to exclude testimony or exhibits he does not consider relevant. 
(d)  The hearing examiner will maintain an accurate record of the evidence adduced at the hearing. 
(e)  Within forty-eight (48) hours of the close of the hearing, the hearing examiner will notify the parties of his decision. Within three (3) days of the close of the hearing the hearing examiner will reduce to writing his or her report which will consist of a finding of facts and his or her decision. The hearing examiner will file the original of his report with the city clerk, will keep one (1) copy, will send one (1) copy to the person aggrieved and will send one (1) copy to the police department and other authorized city officials as necessary. 
(f)  If the city clerk or authorized city official or the person aggrieved is dissatisfied with the hearing examiner's decision, he or she may, within five (5) days from the date the hearing examiner filed his or her report, file a written objection with the city council. When such an objection is filed, the city council will place the matter on the agenda of the city council for review at the next meeting of the city council which is at least five (5) days after the date of the filing of the objection. If the objection is filed by the city clerk or authorized city official(s), notice that the matter is on the agenda will be sent to the applicant by mail. The person aggrieved shall bring to the city council hearing all licenses issued to him pursuant to this chapter. When the matter comes before city council, the city council will review the matter, considering such information as is in the hearing examiner's file and report and will either affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the hearing examiner. 
(g)  As to an appeal taken to city council by the city clerk or authorized city official, the decision of the city council shall be final. As to an appeal taken to city council by a licensee, the decision or decisions of which said licensee objects, said licensee may thereafter pursue his remedy by appealing the decision(s) of the city council to the county circuit court as permitted by law and court rules. 
(Ord. No. 80-761, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Chapter 19.5 - MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, adopted January 22, 2019, in effect repealed former ch. 19.5 §§ 19.5-1—19.5-30, and enacted a new ch. 19.5 §§ 19.5-1—19.5-29, as set out herein. The former ch. 19.5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80-769, § 2, adopted December 11, 2018. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 19.5-1. - Short title. 
This chapter is known and cited as the "medical marihuana regulatory ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-2. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by balancing registered qualifying medical marihuana patients access to medical marihuana and other residents' concerns about potential odor, light, mold, explosion, fire, environmental contamination, and security caused by medical marihuana cultivation, processing, and use. The ordinance permits qualifying patients to cultivate, process, and use marihuana as permitted by state law. It regulates only as necessary to protect all residents from the inherent and unique health, safety, and welfare issues that arise from cultivating, processing, and using marihuana. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter addresses medical marihuana cultivating, processing, testing, selling, extracting, and transporting, pursuant to the Medical Marihuana Facility Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. (MMFLA). Manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, or possessing with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense is illegal under Federal Law, 21 USC 841. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-4. - Cost recovery. 
(a)  If marihuana cultivating, processing, testing, selling, extracting, or transporting causes property damage, personal injury, or other injury through explosion, fire, release of harmful substances, or any other event reasonably related to the cultivating, processing, testing, selling, extracting, or transporting marihuana, all people involved in or responsible for the marihuana cultivating, processing, testing, selling, extracting, or transporting are jointly and severally liable for all resulting damages. This includes, but is not limited to, damages associated with the emergency response, property repair, remediation, medical expenses, marihuana disposal, expenses related to discontinued use, and prosecution. 
(b)  Before the city issues a medical marihuana facility license, a person applying for a medical marihuana facility license shall post a bond for local cost recovery. The city may use the bond to cover any expenses it incurs as described in section 19.5-4(a) above. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-5. - Permission to inspect. 
(a)  At any time, the building division, the police department, or the fire department may: inspect the real and personal property (including log books, other business records and security camera footage) associated with a local industrial medical marihuana operation or a medical marihuana facility. 
(b)  At any time, the police department may inspect a secure transporter vehicle to determine compliance with the MMFLA. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-6. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, these words and phrases shall have the following definitions ascribed to them:] 
Church. Tax exempt religious institution registered with the city as religious tax exempt. 
Co-location means a business that operates as both a licensed medical marijuana grower and also either a licensed provision center and/or medical marijuana processor at the same address. 
Cultivation or cultivate means (i) all phases of growth of marihuana from seed to harvest; or (ii) preparing, packaging or repackaging, labeling or relabeling of any form of marihuana. 
Department means the department of licensing and regulatory affairs. 
Grower means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. Includes a license that has received multiple grower license from state (stack licenses) shall be allowed and shall comply with MMFLA regulations. 
Licensed premises means the facility at which a person or business holds a state operating license under the MMFLA. 
Licensee means a person holding a state operating license under the MMFLA. 
Marihuana product means a topical formulation, tincture, beverage, edible substance, or similar product containing any usable marihuana that is intended for human consumption in a manner other than smoke inhalation. Marihuana-infused product is not considered a food for purposes of the food law, 2000 PA 92, MCL 289.1101 to 289.8111. 
Medical marihuana means that term as defined in section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
Medical marihuana facility means a location at which a license holder is licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act. 
Michigan marihuana license is a permission to operate a medical marihuana business in accordance with the ordinance [from which this chapter derived]. 
Michigan Medical Marihuana Act means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 to 333.26430. 
Processor means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center. 
Provisioning center means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the department's marihuana registration process in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act is not a provision center for purposes of this act. "Registered primary caregiver" means a primary caregiver who has been issued a current registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. 
Registered qualifying patient means a qualifying patient who has been issued a current registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act or a visiting qualifying patient as that term is defined in section 3 of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26423. 
Safety compliance facility means a licensee that is a commercial entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility. 
School means an existing public or private state licensed public or private elementary, middle, junior high or high school. An in-home day care center is not a school. Vocation schools are not included in this definition. 
Secure transporter means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee. 
Stacked licenses means multiple grower licenses issued by the state to a licensee as permitted by the MMFLA or rules and regulations adopted by the bureau of medical marihuana regulation (BMMR). 
State operating license unless the context requires a different meaning, a "license" means a license that is issued under this act that allows the licensee to operate as one (1) of the following, specified in the license: 
(1)  A grower; 
(2)  A processor; 
(3)  A secure transporter; 
(4)  A provisioning center; 
(5)  A safety compliance facility. 
Statewide monitoring system. Unless the context requires a different meaning, "system" means an internet-based, statewide database established, implemented, and maintained by the department under the marihuana tracking act, that is available to licensees, law enforcement agencies, and authorized state departments and agencies on a 24-hour basis for all of the following: 
(1)  Verifying registry identification cards. 
(2)  Tracking marihuana transfer and transportation by licensees, including transferee, date, quantity, and price. 
(3)  Verifying in commercially reasonable time that a transfer will not exceed the limit that the patient or caregiver is authorized to receive under section 4 of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26424. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
ARTICLE II. - FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 19.5-7. - Number and types of facilities. 
(a)  The city authorizes the following medical marijuana facilities: 
(1)  Grower—Growers may have stacked licenses: 
a.  Class A (up to five hundred (500) plants); 
b.  Class B (up to one thousand (1,000) plants); 
c.  Class C (up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) plants); 
(2)  Processor. 
(3)  Secure transporter. 
(4)  Provisioning center. 
(5)  Safety compliance facility. 
(b)  The number of each of the licenses listed herein shall not be limited except provisioning centers. 
(c)  The city may issue up to fifteen (15) provisioning center licenses. The city may issue these provisioning center licenses at any time. 
(d)  Once the city has issued fifteen (15) provisioning center licenses, the city will stop accepting new applications until a license becomes available. The city will hold existing applications for twelve (12) months from the date of submission. 
(e)  Any Provisioning Center license issued must be established and a certificate of compliance issued within six (6) months, or the licensee shall surrender the license. A licensee may apply for an extension to city council before the six-month time-limit elapses. Upon the licensee's submission of a timely request to extend city council may grant one (1) six-month extension for good cause. 
(f)  The Licensee shall obtain Zoning approval before the city issues a medical marihuana facility license. Even if a licensee obtains zoning approval, the city may still deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19; Ord. No. 80-778 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 19.5-8. - Co-location—grower, processor, provisioning center, and Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (MRTMA) facilities. 
(a)  Any combination of the following types of MMFLA operating licenses may operate as separate marihuana facilities at the same location: grower, processor, provisioning center (MMFLA co-location facility). 
(b)  To operate a MMFLA co-location facility the applicant shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Offer proof that the state has authorized the proposed operation at the same location; 
(2)  Operate the facility in such a way that it is not in violation of any city or state statutes/ordinances and regulations; 
(3)  Apply for and be granted separate state and city operating licenses for each separate function of the facility: MMFLA grow, MMFLA process, and MMFLA provisioning; 
(4)  Have distinct and identifiable area with designated structures that are contiguous and specific to the operating license; 
(5)  Have separate entrances and exits, inventory, record keeping and point of sale operations, if applicable; 
(6)  Post the state and city licenses on the wall in a distinct area and as provided in this ordinance; and 
(7)  Have the required inspections and permits for each building. 
(c)  A co-location facility that includes a provisioning center shall have the entrance and exit to the provisioning center and entire inventory physically separated from any of the other part of the facility so that a person can clearly identify the retail entrance and exit. 
(d)  A MRTMA grower, MRTMA processor, or MRTMA grower and processor facility may operate at the same location as a licensed MMFLA grower, MMFLA processor, MMFLA provisioning center, or MMFLA co-location facility (MMFLA/MRTMA shared facility). 
(e)  To operate MMFLA/MRTMA shared facility, the applicant shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Offer proof that the state has authorized the proposed operation at the same location; 
(2)  Apply for and be granted separate state and city operating licenses for each separate function of the facility: MMFLA grow, MMFLA process, MMFLA provisioning; 
(3)  Operate the facility in such a way that it is not in violation of any city or state ordinances/statutes and regulations; and 
(4)  Guarantee a minimum investment of two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000) in the shared facility. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19; Ord. No. 80-778 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 19.5-9. - General requirements. 
(a)  Medical marihuana facilities shall meet all of the operating criteria under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and administrative rules adopted by the Michigan Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, Marihuana Licensing Division. 
(b)  Licensees shall comply with, and conduct their business in compliance with, all applicable state and local laws including the following: 
(1)  The facility is licensed by the state; 
(2)  Cultivation shall be conducted so as not to create dust, glare, noise, odors, or light spillage beyond the parcel and shall not be visible from an adjoining public way. 
(3)  A medical marihuana facility shall obtain a zoning compliance certificate. 
(4)  The facility must be registered with the division of building inspection, and as part of its certificate of compliance, is inspected by zoning, electrical, building, mechanical, and plumbing inspectors, and the fire and police departments for compliance with applicable laws, local ordinances and codes, including this ordinance. The facility must pass annual safety inspections for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(5)  In addition to the requirements of this chapter, a certificate of compliance application must include: A waste disposal plan detailing plans for chemical disposal, plant waste and water disposal, which shall be subject to review and approval by the waste water treatment plant. Said plan shall be in compliance with regulations of the MDEQ and codes and ordinances of the city including codes and ordinances pertaining to the discharge of water and by-products into the city sewer system; 
(6)  A floor plan identifying the number of plants, chemical storage space, and other relevant aspects of the layout, subject to review and approval by the building inspection division. 
(7)  The facility maintains: 
a.  A daily log of the amount and location of the marihuana on the premises for each registered primary caregiver and each patient; 
b.  A daily log of all transfers; and 
c.  Any other written records necessary to show compliance with applicable state and local laws. 
(c)  All applicants for a license must be current on city taxes and any other financial obligation to the city. 
(d)  Provisioning centers must obtain all necessary state and local license/permits before commencing operations and shall maintain a valid license during any period of operation. 
(e)  No provisioning center may provide medical marihuana to any persons other than registered qualifying patients and registered primary caregivers whose status to possess cannabis pursuant to state law has been verified. 
(f)  No medical marihuana provided to a registered primary caregiver may be supplied to any person(s) other than the registered qualifying patient(s) who designated the registered primary caregiver. A provisioning center may give medical marihuana to a secure transporter for the purpose of transporting the material for testing. 
(g)  Provisioning centers must demonstrate compliance with state in law in the areas of security plans, inventory records, patient records, product safety, product labeling, disposal protocols and recall strategies. 
(h)  Interior building lighting, exterior building lighting, and parking area lighting must be in compliance with applicable regulations, ordinances and building codes. 
(i)  No provisioning center shall permit the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or offsite of the premises. 
(j)  Signs displayed on the exterior and interior of the property shall conform to state and city regulations. 
(k)  Provisioning centers shall not have a drive-thru window. 
(l)  All licensed medical marihuana facilities shall create and display a sign which is installed and maintained in a conspicuous location visible to all persons entering the premises located inside the building which reads as follows: 
THE MICHIGAN MEDICAL MARIHUANA ACT ACKNOWLEDGES THAT "FEDERAL LAW CURRENTLY PROHIBITS ANY USE OF MARIHUANA EXCEPT UNDER VERY LIMITED CIRCUMSTANCES" SEE MCL 333.26422(c). IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS OR CONCERNS PLEASE CONSULT WITH YOUR ATTORNEY. 
(m)  Immediately report in writing to the division of building and safety engineering any fire, accident, chemical spill, criminal activity on the premises, criminal charges brought against an owner, occupant, or operator of the business, or enforcement action taken against the facility, its owner, or the business operator by LARA or other government agency. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-10. - Prohibitions. 
Nothing in this ordinance allows any person to: 
(1)  Engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance; 
(2)  Possess, cultivate, grow, use, or distribute marihuana for any purpose other than for use as medical marihuana as authorized and limited by the MMFLA and administrative rules and regulations; 
(3)  Engage in any activity related to the possession, cultivation, growing, use, or distribution of marijuana that is otherwise not permitted under the laws of the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 19.5-11. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall own or operate a medical marihuana facility ("facility") in the city without first applying for and receiving a license from the zoning department. 
(b)  A facility or grow operation shall not include a club, café, or other design that permits consumption of medical marihuana at the facility or grow operation. 
(c)  A license is not transferable and shall only apply to the person listed on the license. 
(d)  A provisioning center license shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, from July 1 to June 30. All other facility licenses shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from date of issue. 
(e)  Applications to renew a license shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of expiration. Such renewal shall be annual and shall be accompanied by an annual license fee in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) unless otherwise set by city council. License shall be subject to revocation if the applicant does not comply with the representation made with the initial application to the medical marihuana committee and/or city council. 
(f)  Licenses shall be displayed at all times, inside the location, in an open and conspicuous place. 
(g)  A use purporting to be engaged in the medical use of marihuana prior to enactment of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, or prior to being registered with the Michigan Department of Community Health, shall be deemed to not be a legally established use and not entitled to legal nonconforming status under the provision of this ordinance and under MMFTA. 
(h)  The issuance of any license pursuant to this article does not create an exception, defense or any other immunity for any potential criminal liability any person may have for the cultivation, production, distribution, manufacture or possession of marihuana in any form, possession of illegal drug paraphernalia, or presence in places where illegal drugs are being used, distributed, stored or kept. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-12. - License application. 
(a)  Applications for medical marihuana facilities licenses must be submitted by applicants along with the required fees. During the first year, applications for provisioning centers will not be accepted after sixty (60) days from the date the administration has made the applications available to the public. Provisioning center applications shall be held by the city for one (1) year. New applications for provisioning centers shall not be accepted until a license becomes available. 
(b)  The application, facility and site plan shall be submitted to the city on such forms and containing such information that the city shall prescribe, along with the required application fee as established by council of the total required fee, two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) is non-refundable. If the application is denied, the remainder of the fee will be returned to the applicant. 
(c)  Applications shall not be accepted unless a complete plan has been submitted. 
(d)  The plan shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The type of proposed marihuana facility or grow operation, location. 
(2)  Diagram of the facility including, but not limited to, its size and dimensions; specifications; physical address; location of common entryways, doorways, or passageways; means of public entry or exit; limited access areas within the facility. 
(3)  Floor plan and layout, including dimensions, maximum storage capabilities, number of rooms, dividing structures, fire walls, and entrances and exits. 
(4)  Means of egress, including, but not limited to, delivery and transfer points. 
(5)  Construction details for structures and fire-rated construction for walls. 
(6)  Building structure information, including, but not limited to, new, pre-existing, free standing, or fixed. Building type information, including but not limited to, commercial, warehouse, industrial, retail, converted property, building, mercantile building, laboratory or center. 
(7)  Zoning classification and information. 
(8)  Proposed security plan. 
(9)  Any other information required by this chapter or the city. 
(e)  Applications shall include: 
(1)  The particular license or licenses for which the applicant is applying. 
(2)  An explanation of the services to be provided and a completed medical marihuana checklist. 
(3)  Name and address of applicant. 
a.  If applicant is a corporation, LLC, partnership or trust, the names and addresses of each officer, director, member, partner or beneficiary. 
b.  Copy of applicant's driver's license or state identification. 
(4)  Employment and/or business history of the applicant for the past three (3) years. 
(5)  Address of the proposed facility, designate whether the proposed facility will be new construction or renovation of an existing building. 
(6)  If a leased facility, an executed copy of the lease for the premises where the facility is proposed to be operated and a separate written consent from the owner of the premises authorizing the use of the premises. 
(7)  List of any community involvement with the city. 
(8)  Provide the proposed gross revenue to be generated from the facility for the ensuing year. A description of the type of marihuana facility; anticipated or actual number of employees; and projected or actual gross receipts. 
(9)  The days and hours the facility is proposed to be open or in operation. 
(10)  All criminal convictions, fully disclosing the jurisdiction of the conviction. 
(11)  Whether the applicant applied for a license from the state. 
(12)  Name and address of registered caregiver and years caregiver has been licensed. 
(13)  Provide the sources and total amount of the applicant's capitalization to operate and maintain the proposed marihuana facility. 
(14)  Has applicant had filed, or been served with, a complaint or other notice filed with any public body, regarding the delinquency in the payment of, or a dispute over the filings concerning the payment of, any tax required under federal, state, or local law. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-13. - Review process. 
(a)  Applicants shall submit to the chief zoning inspector all documents required as stated on the instructions included with the application. 
(b)  Applicants shall submit the application in accordance with chapter 19.5 of the city Municipal Code with the chief zoning inspector's office, and provide a copy of said application with the plan to determine whether the application shall go for review. 
(c)  If the chief zoning inspector denies an application or determines that an application is deficient, it shall forward written notification of the denial, including the reason for such denial, to the applicant as set forth in the application process. A denial by the chief zoning inspector is appealable to city council. 
(d)  A medical marihuana review committee, made up of the city attorney, or his designee, the director of the public service department, or his designee, and the members of the medical marihuana committee or alternates of the city council, as appointed by city council and alternates, shall review applications for provisioning centers. 
(1)  Applications and plans for provisioning centers shall be transmitted to the review committee for approval. The city council may hire the service of an auditing firm if they deem necessary. 
(2)  When reviewing plans and applications the review committee shall consider each applicant's submission and rate the plans and applications on a zero (0) to ten (10) score (zero (0) does not comply and ten (10) meaning exceeds compliance requirements) considering the factors as provided below: 
a.  The integrity, moral character, and reputation; personal and business probity; financial ability and experience; and responsibility or means to operate or maintain a marihuana facility of the applicant. 
b.  The financial ability of the applicant to purchase and maintain adequate liability and casualty insurance. 
c.  The sources and total amount of the applicant's capitalization to operate and maintain the proposed marihuana facility. 
d.  Whether the applicant has been indicted for, charged with, arrested for, or convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to, forfeited bail concerning, or had expunged any relevant criminal offense under the laws of any jurisdiction, either felony or misdemeanor, not including traffic violations, regardless of whether the offense has been expunged, pardoned, or reversed on appeal or otherwise. 
e.  Whether the applicant has filed, or had filed against it, a proceeding for bankruptcy within the past seven (7) years. 
f.  Whether the applicant has been served with a complaint or other notice filed with any public body regarding payment of any tax required under federal, state, or local law that has been delinquent for one (1) or more years. 
g.  Whether the applicant has a history of noncompliance with any regulatory requirements in this state or any other jurisdiction. 
h.  Whether at the time of application the applicant is a defendant in litigation involving its business practices. 
i.  The security proposed for the facility or grow operation, and safety compliance plan. 
j.  Neighborhood compatibility plan as to the proximity of the D.D.A. district based on the proposed site. 
k.  The applicant's business plan, considering the applicant's business experience within the past ten (10) years. 
l.  Community involvement, including, but not limited to, charitable contributions and involvement. 
m.  Consideration of the effects of the proposed facility and/or growing operation on neighboring properties. 
n.  Written acknowledgment that the premises and surveillance and security camera recordings for protection of the public safety are subject to inspection for purposes of determining compliance with state and local laws, without a search warrant. 
o.  Date of commencement. 
p.  Holistic approach with medical use. 
q.  Recycling systems/environmental friendly as to the proposed site as to co-location. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-14. - Initial license approval. 
(a)  The review committee shall forward the scores and applications to the city council with recommendations. The issuance of any provisioning center license shall be approved by the city council. 
(b)  Council shall confirm compliance with all requirements and factors in the granting of licenses. If the number of applicants meeting the requirements herein exceed the number of available licenses, the council shall rank the applicants in order, considering the factors outlined above and consideration of the plan proposed for the provisioning center; new construction and thereafter reconstruction of buildings shall be ranked equal than those applications proposing existing buildings. The capitalization and improvements to real estate shall be ranked higher than proposed existing buildings. Ranking shall be based upon a zero (0) to ten (10) scale for each factor including zoning compliance with a zero (0) meaning does not comply and a ten (10) meaning exceeds compliance. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-15. - Transfer. 
The city hereby adopts the LARA state regulations for transfer of an interest subject to council approval. If the state grants a transfer of interest, it shall be subject to city council approval. Also stated in this particular chapter that state regulations will supersede any language in this chapter if there is any conflict. If transfer is approved, it will be a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-16. - Revocation. 
A license issued under this section may be revoked by the city for any of the following: 
(1)  Fraudulent or material misrepresentation contained in the application. 
(2)  A pattern of violations of this section or actions creating a nuisance, after reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. 
(3)  A loss after final determination of the state medical marihuana licensing board of the licensee holder's state medical marihuana facility license. 
(4)  Failure or refusal to pay the annual fee. 
(5)  Any conduct or act contrary to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act or other applicable law, rules or regulations is prohibited and could result in revocation of the license and other legal remedies and penalties. 
(6)  If the growth, cultivation, or processing of marihuana leads to an event causing damage or injury to property or persons, including but not limited to an explosion, fire, or release of harmful substances, or violation of a state or local law, code or regulation, the owner and tenants are each responsible for reimbursing any costs associated with the emergency response, property repair, remediation and medical expenses caused by the event, and/or prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-17. - Appeal. 
(a)  An appeal of the chief zoning officer's decision to reject an application; or revoke, suspend, or fail to renew a license is to city council. 
(1)  The chief zoning inspector shall notify the applicant or licensee of the reason for an adverse licensing or application decision. 
(2)  If the applicant or licensee wants to appeal the chief zoning inspector's adverse decision, within fourteen (14) days of the adverse decision, the applicant or licensee shall submit a written request to city council for an appeal hearing, stating in detail the grounds for the appeal. 
(3)  City council shall notice, schedule, and hold an appeal hearing to review the chief zoning officer's decision within thirty (30) days of the submission of the written appeal request. 
(b)  An appeal of a city council decision to deny a license is to the Macomb County Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 19.5-18. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  A retail provisioning center may open no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and shall close no later than 9:00 p.m. the same day. No sales of medical marihuana shall occur outside these hours. Business hours shall be posted at the entrance of the provisioning center. 
(b)  All medical marihuana businesses may be open seven (7) days per week. There shall be no hourly restriction on the hours of operation of medical marihuana grower, processor, safety compliance and secure transporter facilities. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-19. - Public access restricted. 
Medical marihuana facilities, other than provisioning centers, shall not be open to the public. All visitors must be tracked in an entry log identifying the visitor's name, entry and departure times and the purpose of the visit. A licensee may allow access to persons who are actively engaged in the maintenance, repair or improvement of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-20. - Outdoor activity. 
With the exception of growing marihuana plants outdoors as permitted by MCL 333.26423(d), all medical marihuana cultivation, processing, distribution and testing shall occur indoors and shall not be visible from the exterior of the building. All activities of medical marihuana facilities shall be conducted out of public view. 
All marihuana and/or marihuana products shall be kept indoors and shall not be visible from the exterior of the building. All marihuana or marihuana products ready for sale shall be maintained in a locked cabinet except when being accessed for distribution. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-21. - Signage. 
All signage for any medical marihuana facility shall comply with all applicable state laws as well as city ordinances. Signs and displays depicting a marihuana leaf are prohibited. No signage shall contain slang any terms for marijuana such as "reefer", "ganja", "weed" or similar slang references to marihuana or cannabis. Signage with the word "marihuana" or "cannabis" or another other word or phrase understood to mean marihuana is prohibited unless such word or phrase is immediately preceded by the word "medical" in type and font that is at least as readily discernible as the other words in the phrase or sentence. Deceptive, false, or misleading signage is prohibited at any medical marihuana facility. Green cross graphic signs on the exterior of a medical marihuana facility is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-22. - Ventilation and odor control. 
(a)  No marihuana vapors or odor shall be detectable from the exterior of any medical marihuana facility or from within any adjoining premises. 
(b)  Medical marijuana grower facilities, medical marihuana processor facilities and medical marijuana safety compliance facilities may not operate without an approved odor control/ventilation plan. An odor control/ventilation plan shall describe the ventilation systems that will be used and how such system will operate to prevent any odor of marihuana leaving the premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-23. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  The use, consumption, ingestion or inhalation of marihuana or marihuana products on or within the premises of any marihuana facility is prohibited. 
(b)  The sale or on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(c)  No free samples of medical marihuana shall be distributed from any medical marihuana facility. 
(d)  There is no storage of toxic, flammable, or hazardous materials on the premises. 
(e)  There is no discharge of toxic, flammable or hazardous materials into city sewer system. 
(f)  It shall be prohibited to distribute medical marihuana from any outdoor location. No medical marihuana grower facility processing facility, secure transportation facility or safety compliance facility shall post or allow to be posted signs or other advertising materials identifying the premises as being associated with the cultivation, processing, transportation or testing of medical marihuana. 
(g)  No medical marihuana facility shall be permitted to operate from a moveable, mobile, or transitory location. Drive through facilities are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-24. - Minors. 
No minors under the age of eighteen (18) years of age are permitted within a medical marihuana facility. An individual must have a medical marihuana card in order to be present in a provisioning center. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-25. - Disposal. 
All licensees must provide for the secure disposal or marihuana and related waste as required by state law and regulation. Waste containing marihuana may not be placed for collection with regular solid waste and/or recyclables. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-26. - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any portion of this chapter to be invalid for any reason, the remaining portions of the chapter, not specifically held to be invalid, remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-27. - Certificate of compliance. 
No medical marihuana facility shall operate within the city without a valid certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTIES AND SUSPENSION OF A LICENSE 
 
Sec. 19.5-28. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter, including the operation of a medical marijuana establishment without a license issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to a civil fine and costs. Increased civil fines may be imposed for a repeat violation. As used in this section, "repeat violation" shall mean a second or any subsequent infraction of the same requirement or provision committed by a person or establishment within any twelve-month period. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the penalty schedule is as follows: 
(1)  Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus costs, for the first violation; 
(2)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus costs, for the repeat violation; 
(3)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus costs, per day, plus costs, for any violation that continues for more than one day. 
(b)  All fines imposed under this chapter shall be paid within forty-five (45) days after the effective date of the order imposing the fine or as otherwise specified in the order. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 19.5-29. - Suspension. 
The chief zoning inspector may temporarily suspend a medical marihuana establishment license without a prior hearing if the city finds that public safety or welfare requires emergency action affecting the public health, safety, or welfare. The chief zoning inspector shall cause the temporary suspension by issuing a suspension notice in connection with institution of proceedings for notice and a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 80-772 , § 2, 1-22-19)  
Chapter 20 - MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; subdivision regulations, Ch. 35; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 37; vehicles for hire, Ch. 39; trailer rentals, § 39-91 et seq.; water and sewers, Ch. 41; zoning, App. A; R-4 mobile home districts, App. A, Art. XI. 
State Law reference— Mobile home commission act, MCL 125.1101 et seq.; campgrounds, MCL 333.12501 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words have the meanings described below: 
Authorized city official means police officers and city personnel described in chapter 1 of this Code. 
Dwelling means any mobile home structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for cooking, eating, living, sanitation or sleeping by human occupants either permanently or transiently. 
Mobile home means a structure that is transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. "Mobile home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three (3) or more mobile homes are located on a continual, non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a mobile home. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, trust, corporation, a group acting as a unit, or any other legal entity or combination of legal entities. 
Responsible party means the owner, lessee, or occupant of the mobile home, and the mobile home park or property owner and/or park operator. 
(Code 1967, § 6-1302(1), (2), (4); Ord. No. 80-757, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 20-2. - Implementation of federal standards. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall substantially implement the standards promulgated by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 to 5426. 
(b)  This standard is not designed to generally exclude mobile homes or persons who engage in any aspect pertaining to the business of mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-257, § 1, adopted May 9, 2017, renumbered § 20-3 to § 20-2, as setout herein. Formerly, § 20-2 pertained to exceptions and was derived from Code 1967, § 6-1302(1).  
Sec. 20-3. - Mobile Home Commission Act and city ordinances. 
The Mobile Home Commission Act ("Act"), MCL 125.2301 et seq., enumerates the Manufactured Housing Commission and municipalities' powers and duties. However, the Act does not prohibit the city from enforcing this chapter, its ordinances, or from taking other appropriate action to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, as authorized by law or its charter. This includes, but is not limited to, enforcing: misdemeanor violations; Building and Building Regulations (Chapter 9); Fire Prevention and Protection (Chapter 13); Garbage and Rubbish (Chapter 16); Nuisances (Chapter 21); Property Maintenance (Chapter 28); Vegetation, (Chapter 38); and Zoning (Appendix A). 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 2, 5-9-17)  
Secs. 20-4—20-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, adopted May 9, 2017 amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 20-16—-20-24, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1967, § 6-1303(1)—(8); Ord. No. 80-377, § 1, 7-25-89. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 20-16. - Right of entry; enforcement permitted. 
An authorized city official may enforce city ordinances and take other appropriate action to protect the public health, safety, and welfare as permitted by law, charter, or ordinance. If reasonably necessary to perform authorized work, perform their duties, or to preserve the peace, an authorized city official may enter upon and inspect the mobile home park and any structures located in a mobile home park at all reasonable times. If entry is refused or not obtained, an authorized city official may, if required by law, seek a warrant in order to authorize entry into the property, structure, or premises without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the premises. An authorized city official shall not enter a dwelling without permission of the owner or occupant, unless a warrant had been obtained, or there is imminent danger to life, or otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-17. - Notice, method of service. 
An authorized city official shall provide notice and service of an alleged violation as follows: 
(a)  Blight violations—See chapter 2.5 of this Code relating to the Administrative hearing bureau and MCL 117.4q. 
(b)  Municipal Civil Infractions—See chapter 1, division 3 of this relating to municipal civil infractions. 
(c)  Misdemeanors—See chapter 1, division 2 of this Code relating to appearance tickets. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-18. - Emergency provision. 
Whenever an authorized city official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety and welfare, he or she shall, without notice of hearing, issue a written order stating the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he or she deems necessary to meet the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-19. - Appeal. 
(a)  Notice only. If a notice of a blight violation is issued, an alleged violator may appeal the notice of violation to the public service director or his/her designee only if: 
(1)  A citation has not been issued for the alleged violation in question; and 
(2)  The appeal is filed with the building department within five (5) business days of the notice being issued. 
(b)  Citation issued. Once a citation for a blight violation is issued, the alleged violator may not appeal the violation in question to the public service director or his designee. The alleged violator may appeal the violation by denying responsibility and scheduling a hearing date with the administrative hearing bureau. If a finding of responsibility is entered, a violator has twenty-eight (28) days to appeal to the Macomb County Circuit Court. If the citation or appearance ticket is for a municipal civil infraction or a misdemeanor, the process to dispute is described in chapter 1. 
A copy of the Rules of Procedure for the Administrative Hearings Bureau is on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-20. - Condemnation. 
The process and procedure for condemnation relating to mobile homes and mobile home parks is set forth in chapter 9, article VI, division 1. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-21. - Abatement of dangerous buildings, structures or premises. 
The process and procedure for abatement of dangerous buildings, structures or premises relating to mobile homes and mobile home parks is set forth in chapter 9, article VI, division 2. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-22. - Penalty for violations. 
The penalty for a person found guilty of a misdemeanor; or responsible for municipal infraction or blight violation, is set forth in chapter 1, section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 3, 5-9-17)  
Secs. 20-23—20-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, adopted May 9, 2017, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article III, §§ 20-36—-20-72, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1967, §§ 6-1304—6-1340. 
 
Sec. 20-36. - Fastening of structural systems. 
Roof framing shall be fastened to wall framing, walls to floor structure, and floor structure to chassis. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-37. - Moisture resistance. 
On the repairs or replacement of any wood floors or sub-floors in kitchens, bathrooms (including toilet compartments), laundry rooms, water heater compartments, and any other areas subject to excessive moisture shall be moisture resistant or shall be made moisture resistant by sealing or by an overlay of nonabsorbent material applied with water resistant adhesive. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-38. - Carpeting under heat-producing appliances. 
Carpeting shall not be used under a heat producing appliance unless the appliance is listed for such use. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-39. - Weather resistance. 
Exterior coverings shall be moisture and weather resistant. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-40. - Dwelling penetrations. 
Where adjoining materials or assemblies of materials are of such nature that separation can occur due to expansion, contraction, wind loads or other loads induced by erection or transportation, sealants shall be of a type that maintains protection against infiltration or penetration by air, moisture or vermin. Exterior surfaces shall be sealed to resist the entrance of rodents. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-41. - Windstorm protection. 
Each mobile home shall have provisions for support and anchoring systems which, when properly designed and installed, will resist over-turning and lateral movement (sliding) of the mobile home as imposed by the respective design loads. The provisions made for anchoring systems shall be based on the design criteria stipulated in H.U.D. Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards referenced in section 20-2. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-42. - Habitable rooms. 
Each habitable room shall be provided with exterior windows or doors openable directly to the outside of the home. Each bathroom and toilet compartment shall be provided with artificial light and, in addition, be provided with an openable external window or door, except where a mechanical ventilation system is provided. Kitchens may be provided with artificial light and mechanical ventilation capable of producing a change of air in the room every thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-43. - Exit facilities. 
Mobile homes shall have a minimum of two (2) exterior doors located remote from each other. Locks shall not require the use of a key for operation from the inside. Every room designed expressly for sleeping purposes, unless it has an exit door, shall have at least one (1) outside window. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-44. - Interior privacy. 
Bathroom and toilet compartment doors shall be equipped with a privacy lock. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-45. - Garbage and rubbish storage; disposal. 
(1)  A storage container for garbage shall be watertight and shall preclude infestation of insects and rodents. 
(2)  Rubbish shall be properly contained and stored. The area for storage shall be kept in a manner suitable to preclude infestation of insects and rodents. Where dumpsters are used, they shall be placed on a paved area that shall extend a minimum of two (2) feet in all directions from the dumpsters. Water used in cleaning a dumpster shall be discharged to a sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  A storage container for garbage and rubbish shall be cleaned with sufficient frequency to preclude the attraction of insects and rodents. 
(4)  The storage of garbage and rubbish shall not create a harborage or food source for insects or rodents. 
(5)  Every occupant of a mobile home shall dispose of all his or her rubbish and garbage which might provide food for rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner in compliance with this section, the International Property Maintenance Code, and the manufactured housing regulations adopted by the state. 
(6)  In the event there is conflict between this chapter and chapter 28 relating to garbage and rubbish, this chapter shall supersede chapter 28. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17) 
Cross reference— Garbage and rubbish generally, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 20-46. - Frequency of removal. 
Garbage and rubbish shall be removed from a mobile home park at least once a week, or more often if the container lid or lids will not properly close. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, adopted May 9, 2017, amended § 20-46 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 20-46, pertained to garbage and rubbish disposal, and derived from Code 1967, § 6-1314.  
Sec. 20-47. - Fire safety—Smoke detector. 
At least one (1) smoke detector device shall be installed in each mobile home to protect each separate bedroom area. The architectural planning of the mobile home shall not isolate a smoke detector so as to impair its effectiveness. Smoke detectors shall comply with all the requirements approved by nationally recognized testing laboratories and shall be properly installed according to their listing and manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-48. - Basic principles for plumbing systems. 
It is one (1) of the basic purposes of this chapter to provide for environmental sanitation, through properly designed, acceptably installed and adequately maintained plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17) 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 9-126 et seq.  
Sec. 20-49. - Required facilities. 
Every mobile home shall have facilities consisting of at least one (1) kitchen sink, flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-50. - Connection to drainage system. 
All plumbing, fixtures, drains, appurtenances and appliances designed or used to receive or discharge liquid waste or sewage shall be connected to the mobile home waste water system. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-51. - Prohibited fittings and practices. 
(a)  Drainage or bent piping shall not be drilled and tapped for the purpose of making connections. 
(b)  Cracks, holes or other imperfections in materials shall not be concealed by welding, brazing or soldering, or by paint, wax, tar or other leak sealing or repairing agents. 
(c)  Piping, fixtures or equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with the normal use or with the normal operation and use of windows, doors or other required facilities. 
(d)  Galvanized pipe shall not be bent or welded. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-52. - Cutting structural members. 
Structural members shall not be unnecessarily or carelessly weakened by cutting or notching. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-53. - Exposed piping. 
All piping, pipe threads or hangers, and supports exposed to the weather, water, mud, and subject to damage therefrom, shall be painted, coated, wrapped or otherwise protected from deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-54. - Freezing. 
All piping and fixtures when known to be subject to freezing temperatures shall be insulated or protected to prevent freezing. Heat tapes shall not be permitted on exterior thermoplastic waste piping unless manufactured for such use. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-55. - Workmanship. 
All repairs should be done in a workmanlike manner. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-56. - Assembling of pipe on the repair or replacement. 
All joints and connections shall be correctly assembled for tightness. Pipe threads shall be fully engaged with the threads of the fitting. Plastic pipe and copper tubing shall be inserted to the full depth of the solder cup or welding sockets of each fitting. Pipe threads and slip joints shall not be wrapped with string, paper, putty or similar fillers. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-57. - Access. 
When repaired and replaced, each plumbing fixture and standpipe receptor shall be located and installed in a manner to be accessible for usage. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-58. - Toilet installation. 
Toilets shall be securely bolted to an approved flange or other approved fitting which is secured to the floor by means of brass or equally corrosion resistant material. A watertight seal shall be made of an approved gasket or sealing compound. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-59. - Shower and tub enclosures. 
Shower doors and tub and shower enclosures shall be constructed so as to be waterproof and, if glazed, glazing shall comply with the Standard for Transparent Safety Glazing Material used in buildings (ANSZ 297.1-1972). 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-60. - Flush tanks. 
Toilet flush tanks shall be equipped with an approved anti-siphon ball cock which shall be installed and maintained with its outlet or critical level mark not less than one (1) inch above the full opening at the over-flow pipe. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-61. - Hot and cold water. 
Every mobile home shall have hot and cold running water connected to supplied facilities. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-62. - Supplied facilities. 
(a)  Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall maintained in a satisfactory working condition. 
(b)  No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued in any mobile home let or occupied by him or her, except for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuances of service is approved by the authorized city official. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-63. - Heating, cooling and fuel burning systems. 
The following sections cover the heating, cooling and fuel burning equipment installed within, on or external to a mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-64. - Heat producing appliances. 
Heat producing appliances and vents, roof jacks and chimneys necessary for their installation in mobile homes shall be listed or certified by a nationally recognized testing agency for use in mobile homes and properly installed according to such listing. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-65. - Heat, cooling controls. 
Each space heating, cooling or combination heating and cooling system shall be provided with at least one (1) readily adjustable automatic control for regulation of living space temperature. The control shall be placed a minimum of three (3) feet from the vertical edge of the appliance compartment door. It shall not be located on an exterior wall. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-66. - Types of fuel. 
Each fuel-burning appliance shall bear permanent marking designating the types of fuel for which it is listed. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-67. - Temperature. 
Every mobile home must have heating facilities capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms to a temperature of at least seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit at a distance three (3) feet above the floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions. The heating system shall be properly vented to the outside. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-68. - Fire extinguisher. 
Every mobile home shall have an operable fire extinguisher having at least a 2A-10B-C rating that is properly filled and located so its readily accessible for use. 1974 PA 133, MCL 125.771 to 125.774 which provides for home fire protection, requires that all homes manufactured, sold, or brought in to this state shall be equipped with at least one (1) fire extinguisher approved by the National Fire Protection Association and one (1) smoke detector approved by the State Construction Code Commission. The homeowner of a home brought into this state for use as a dwelling shall have 90 days to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 20-69. - Electrical systems. 
Electrical systems shall be connected in an approved manner when in service. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17) 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 9-36 et seq.  
Sec. 20-70. - Lighting fixtures required over a bathtub or shower stall. 
Where a lighting fixture is installed over a bathtub or in a shower stall, it shall be of the enclosed and gasketed type approved for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-71. - Grounding where metallic faceplates are used. 
Where metallic faceplates are used, they shall be effectively grounded. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-72. - Insects, rodents and other pests. 
(a)  The presence of insects, rodents or other pests within a mobile home or on the premises is declared to be a violation of this chapter. Every occupant of a mobile home shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises. In a mobile home used as a rented unit, not only the occupant but also the owner of the mobile home shall have the responsibility for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises. The extermination of insects, rodents or other pests infesting public or common areas of any mobile home park shall be the responsibility of the owner of such park. 
(b)  All exterior surfaces of a mobile home and all exterior openings around piping, ducts, plenums or vents shall be sealed to resist the entrance of rodents. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 4, 5-9-17) 
Cross reference— Rodent and pest control generally, § 21-66 et seq.  
Sec. 20-73. - Skirting. 
(a)  Required . A manufactured home must have a skirting around its entire perimeter. 
(b)  Venting . Home skirting shall be vented in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. In the absence of instructions, louvered or similar vents shall have a minimum of six hundred (600) square inches of open space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of living space. A minimum of one (1) vent shall be placed at the front and rear of the home and two (2) at each exposed side. Access panels of sufficient size to allow full access to utility hookups located beneath the home shall be installed. Skirting, if any, shall be an exterior building material. 
(c)  Weather conditions . Skirting shall be installed in a manner so as to resist damage under normal weather conditions, including damage caused by freezing and frost, wind, snow, and rain. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 5, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 20-74. - Penalty. 
The violation of a provision of article III of this chapter is a blight violation. The Administrative Hearings Bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2.5, Section 2.5-7. 
(Ord. No. 80-757, § 5, 5-9-17)  
Chapter 21 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority for abatement of nuisances, § 3.1(b)(1). 
Cross reference— Garbage and rubbish, Ch. 16; offenses, Ch. 22; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 24; special assessment procedures for nuisances, § 33-46 et seq.; unsafe, dangerous conditions prohibited on sidewalks, § 34-53; water and sewers, Ch. 41. 
State Law reference— Air pollution act, MCL 336.11 et seq.; environmental protection act, MCL 691.1201 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Public nuisances defined. 
Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; interferes with or destroys or renders dangerous any street or highway; allows accumulation of junk or obnoxious matters on private property; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provisions of this chapter and the common and statute law of this state. 
(Code 1967, § 4-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 21-2. - Dangerous structures prohibited. 
No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a nuisance to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Code 1967, § 4-102)  
Sec. 21-3. - Deposit of unwholesome substances prohibited. 
No person shall, within the limits of the city, by himself or herself or by another, throw, place, deposit or leave in the street, lane, alley, public place or square, any animal or vegetable substance, dead animals, fish, shavings, dirt, rubbish, excrement, filth, unclean or nauseous water or liquor, hay, straw, soot, offal, garbage, swill, or any other article or substance whatever which may cause any offensive, unwholesome or nauseous smell, or endanger the health of the public. 
(Code 1967, § 4-109) 
Cross reference— Littering, §§ 16-10, 21-5; placing snow, dirt and litter on public ways, § 34-2.  
Sec. 21-4. - Drainage of lots, lands, excavations, cellars, vaults, etc. 
No premises within the city shall be damp, unwholesome, filthy, with stagnant or impure water in which mosquito larvae is prone to mature, or in such condition as to produce offensive exhalations. Administrative search warrants may be obtained by the department of property maintenance inspection to enforce this section by searching properties containing swimming pools or on which tires are regularly kept. Requests for administrative search warrants may be based on either of the following: 
(a)  With respect to non-residential premises, the conditions in the area surrounding the premises proposed to be searched after heavy rainfall; 
(b)  Complaints of numerous mosquitoes in the area in which the premises are located. 
(Code 1967, § 4-111; Ord. No. 80-712, § 1, 7-23-13)  
Sec. 21-5. - Littering. 
(a)  The term "litter" as used in this section, shall mean all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris, or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of, litter on any public or private property, other than on property designated and set aside for such purposes. 
(c)  Every parcel of property, including buildings, vacant or occupied, and every part thereof including yards, courts and passages connected thereto or belonging to the same, shall be kept clean and free of litter. Accumulated litter shall be kept, stored and deposited in adequate waste receptacles of metal or heavy-duty plastic construction with a tight cover which shall be kept closed in order to prevent the litter from being blown, scattered or strewn about the premises, and the waste receptacles shall be emptied when filled and in any event shall be emptied at least once a week whether or not filled. The owner of every parcel of property shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this subsection, except that the tenants shall be responsible for the cleanliness of that part of the premises which they occupy, use or control. 
(d)  It shall be the dual responsibility of the owners as well as the tenants, as the case may be, to keep those area designated for parking of motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees, patrons and customers of commercial and industrial establishments, clear and free of litter and to provide adequate waste receptacles thereon for the use of customers and patrons for the depositing of litter. 
(e)  The city shall establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter on city property or property under the control and supervision of the city. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the department of public service, through its officers, inspectors and/or employees. 
(Code 1967, § 4-113; Ord. No. 80-340, § 15, 6-9-87) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 16-10; deposit of unwholesome substances, § 21-3; placing snow, dirt and litter on public ways, § 34-2. 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 752.901 et seq.  
Sec. 21-6. - Abating nuisances. 
Whenever any public nuisances exist in the city, they shall be abated in the manner and according to the procedure as is prescribed by chapter 33. 
(Code 1967, § 4-112)  
Sec. 21-7. - Declared nuisances; abatement. 
(a)  Any building, vehicle, boat, aircraft or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution or gambling, or used by, or kept for the use of prostitutes or other disorderly persons, or used for the unlawful manufacture, storing, possessing, transporting, sale, keeping for sale, giving away, bartering, furnishing or otherwise disposing of any narcotic and/or hypnotic drug as defined by law or of any vinous, malt, brewed, fermented, spirituous or intoxicating liquors or any mixed liquors or beverages, any part of which is intoxicating, is hereby declared a nuisance and the furniture, fixtures and contents of any such building, vehicle, boat, aircraft, or place and all such intoxicating liquors therein are also declared a nuisance, and all such narcotic and/or hypnotic drugs and nuisances shall be enjoined and abated as hereinafter provided, and as provided in the court rules. Any person, or his servant, agent or employee who shall own, lease, conduct or maintain any building, vehicle or place used for any of the purposes or by any of the persons above set forth or where any of the acts above enumerated are conducted, permitted or carried on, is guilty of a nuisance. 
(b)  Action to abate; parties. The city attorneys of Warren, Michigan, the prosecuting attorney or any citizen of the city, may maintain an action for equitable relief in the name of the City of Warren, upon the relation of such city attorney, prosecuting attorney, or citizen to abate said nuisance and to perpetually enjoin any person, his servant, agent, or employee, who shall own, lease, conduct or maintain such building, vehicle, boat, aircraft or place, from permitting or suffering such building, vehicle, boat, or aircraft or place owned, leased, conducted or maintained by him, or any other building, vehicle, boat, aircraft or place conducted or maintained by him to be used for any of the purposes or by any of the persons set forth in section 21-7(a) or for any of the acts enumerated in said section. When the injunction has been granted, it shall be binding on the defendant throughout the judicial circuit in which it was issued. 
(c)  Owner of premises defined; authority of court; closing of premises; owner of vehicle defined, parties defendant. An owner of the premises within the meaning of this chapter is deemed to be the grantee or vendee of the last recorded deed or contract which describes the premises, or any part thereof upon which any nuisance exists as heretofore defined, and the naming of such person a party defendant gives the court authority to abate the nuisance by closing the premises and such defendant is subject to the order and judgement of the court. 
(1)  Owner of vehicle defined; parties defendant. An owner of a vehicle within the meaning of this chapter is deemed to be the person in whose name the vehicle is titled, any chattel mortgagee or assignee thereof or other lien holder whose lien has been filed in the office of the register of deeds prior to the commencement of suit, and the plaintiff shall join such mortgagee, assignee or lien holder as party defendant. 
(d)  Admissible evidence; unnecessary proof; judgment and order. In any action brought under this chapter, evidence of the general reputation of the building, vehicle, boat, aircraft or place is admissible for the purpose of proving the existence of the nuisance. 
(1)  Proof of knowledge of the existence of the nuisance on the part of the defendants or any of them, is not required. 
(2)  It is not necessary for the court to find the property involved was being used as and for a nuisance at the time of the hearing, or for the plaintiff to prove that the nuisance was continuing at the time of the filing of the complaint, if the complaint is filed within thirty (30) days after any act, any violation, or the existence of a condition herein defined as a nuisance, but on finding that the material allegations of the complaint are true, the court shall render judgment and order of abatement as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Contempt; punishment, procedure, bail. If any order of injunction granted under the provisions of this chapter is violated, the court may summarily try and punish the offender as for contempt, and the person so offending shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail nor more than six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Such violation shall be charged by a motion supported by affidavit, and the court, if satisfied of the sufficiency thereof, shall immediately issue a bench warrant for the arrest of such offender and to bring him before such court to answer for such misconduct. The court may, in its discretion, permit such person arrested to give bail and fix the amount thereof pending hearing of the matters charged in such motion. 
(f)  Order of abatement; closing of building, removal of contents; sale; contempt. If the existence of the nuisance is established in an action as provided in this chapter, an order of abatement shall be entered as a part of the judgment in the case, which order shall direct the removal from the building or place of all furniture, fixtures and contents therein and shall direct the sale thereof in the manner provided for the sale of chattels under execution, and the effectual closing of the building or place against its use for any purpose, and so keeping it closed for a period of one (1) year, unless sooner released as in this chapter provided. 
(1)  Vehicles, sale. Any vehicle, boat, or aircraft found by the court to be a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter, is subject to the same order and judgment as any furniture, fixtures and contents as herein provided. 
(2)  Sale of personal property; costs, liens, balance to state treasurer. Upon the sale of any furniture, fixtures, contents, vehicle, boat or aircraft as provided in this section, the officer executing the order of the court shall, after deducting the expenses of keeping such property and costs of such sale, pay all liens according to their priorities which may be established by intervention or otherwise at the hearing or in other proceedings brought for that purpose as being bona fide and as having been created without the lienor having any notice that such property was being used or was to be used for the maintenance of a nuisance as herein defined, and shall pay the balance to the city treasurer to be credited to the general fund of the City of Warren. 
(3)  Use of closed building; contempt. If any person uses a building or place so directed to be closed, with knowledge that such building or place is closed by order of the court, he shall be punished as for contempt, as provided in section 21-7(e). 
(g)  Removal and sale of property, fees; closing of building; loss of exemptions; liability of officers, fees. For removing and selling the movable property, the officer is entitled to charge and receive the same fees as he would be levying upon and selling like property upon execution, and for closing the building or place and keeping it closed, a reasonable sum shall be allowed by the court. 
(1)  Loss of property exemptions, liability of officers. Any person found guilty of maintaining a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit the benefit of all property exemptions, so far as the satisfaction of the order or judgment of the court requires the same, and the taking and disposing of any property of the defendant or defendants by virtue of such order or judgment by any officer directed to execute the same is not a trespass nor shall such officers be liable either civilly or criminally therefor, if a proper return of such order or judgment and accounting for such property is made to the court within ten (10) days after the order or judgment is executed. 
(h)  Proceeds of sale of personal property, application. The proceeds of the sale of the personal property, as provided in section 21-7(g), shall be applied in payment of the costs of the action and abatement, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the persons entitled thereto as the court may direct. 
(i)  Delivery of premises to owner, bond, abatement, liability of sureties; appeal; prerequisite to delivery. If the owner of such building or place pays all costs of the proceeding, and files a bond with sureties approved by the circuit judge, in the penal sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) conditioned that he/she will immediately abate the nuisance and prevent the same from being established or kept therein within a period of one (1) year from the date of the judgment, the court may order such premises to be delivered to the owner and if the bond is given and costs therein paid before order of abatement, the action shall be thereby abated as to that building only. 
(1)  Liability of sureties. If it appears to the court that the conditions of the bond have been violated, the principal and sureties thereon are liable thereon for the full penalty of the bond in an action brought in the name of the City of Warren; or upon motion in the action in which the bond was given. 
(2)  Appeal, stay or order of abatement. Should the defendants, or any of them, appeal to the supreme court from the order and judgment rendered, the injunction or order or abatement shall not be stayed pending the appeal, except that stay may be granted or the order of abatement may be modified pending such appeal upon the written order of two (2) justices of the supreme court. 
(j)  Rate for towing and storage of vehicle. The applicable rates for towing and storage of vehicles pursuant to this ordinance shall be in conformance with Ordinances 37-551 through 37-553 in order to insure proper rates and release of vehicles of the rightful owner or authorized person. 
(Ord. No. 80-372, § 1, 2-28-89)  
Sec. 21-8. - Penalty. 
Except if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d), the violation of a provision of this chapter is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 16, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-631, § 1, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 80-652, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-731, § 5, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17)  
Secs. 21-9—21-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 21-21. - Generally. 
Among others, each of the acts in this article is declared unlawful and is prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103)  
Sec. 21-22. - Horns and signal devices. 
The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; or the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and reasonable period of time is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(a)) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 21-23. - Television, phonograph, musical instruments, etc. 
The playing of any television, phonograph or similar device or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(b); Ord. No. 80-498, § 1, 7-23-96; Ord. No. 80-677, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 21-24. - Excessive noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of the city or on any public street to make any excessive noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. which disturbs the quiet or peace of the persons located in the vicinity. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(c); Ord. No. 80-422, § 1, 12-22-92)  
Sec. 21-25. - Hawking. 
The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(d)) 
Cross reference— Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 24; loud noises and speaking devices prohibited by peddlers, § 24-19; loud noises and speaking devices restricted for transient merchants, § 24-74; loud noise and speaking devices restricted for charitable solicitation, § 24-154.  
Sec. 21-26. - Animal and bird noises. 
The keeping and/or feeding of any animals or birds which by causing frequent or long continued nuisances through noise or the deposit of fecal matter which shall disturb the safety, health, comfort or repose of any person is unlawful. 
This will include the intentional placing of animal or bird feed on the ground which encourages the lingering or congregating of any animals or birds. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(e); Ord. No. 80-598, § 1, 8-26-03) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 7.  
Sec. 21-27. - Whistle or siren. 
The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time, or as a warning of fire or danger is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(f))  
Sec. 21-28. - Engines and motor vehicles. 
(a)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud explosive noises therefrom is unlawful. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of the city to repair, rebuild or test any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(g); Ord. No. 80-422, § 2, 12-22-92) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference— Mufflers, MCL 257.707.  
Sec. 21-29. - Construction noises. 
(a)  Any construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure, excavation of any building site, construction or excavation of any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other public improvement, including operations required for said construction or excavation, is unlawful between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays, and 7:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays, unless written approval is obtained from the city engineer. 
(b)  The operation of any cement batching operation is unlawful unless a permit is obtained from the Warren city council, specifying the location, method and hours of operation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(h); Ord. No. 80-423, § 1, 12-22-92) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 9.  
Sec. 21-30. - Handling merchandise. 
The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(i))  
Sec. 21-31. - Noise or commotion in vehicles. 
Making or causing a commotion or unnecessarily loud noise, or loud or profane music from a motor vehicle, be it in motion or stationary, whereby the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed, or persons owning or occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(j); Ord. No. 80-499, § 1, 7-23-96) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 21-32. - Sound trucks. 
Operating or causing to be operated a sound truck with radio or amplifier within the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city clerk is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(k)) 
Cross reference— Advertising generally, Ch. 3; traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 21-33. - Alarms. 
All alarms that can be heard by the public shall include a device that automatically shuts the sound of the alarm off after it has sounded for a period of no longer than fifteen (15) minutes. The owner of any alarm that sounds publicly for longer than fifteen (15) minutes, or who fails to install a device that will limit the sound to no more than fifteen (15) minutes, shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-315, § 1, 3-11-86)  
Sec. 21-34. - Exceptions. 
None of the prohibitions in this article shall apply to or be enforced against any police or fire vehicle of the city or ambulance while engaged upon necessary public emergency business; necessary excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; or the reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loud speakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 1967, § 4-103(l); Ord. No. 80-315, § 1, 3-11-86)  
Sec. 21-35. - Mobile sound amplification. 
The broadcasting of electronically reproduced sound from motor vehicles or other portable means, when audible to or perceived by others in the community who are not responsible for such broadcast, which has the deleterious effect upon the community of increasing noise pollution, disturbing the peace and quiet of residential neighborhoods and others near the sound in question, and impeding the ability of the listener and others from hearing or noticing the approach of emergency vehicles using sirens and other alerts is unlawful. It is the intent of this section to strike an appropriate balance between the right of the individuals to obtain information and derive pleasure by listening to radios and other devices, and the right of the public to a peaceful and healthful environment. Therefore the following restrictions shall govern the broadcasting of such sound within the city: 
(a)  The playing, transmitting, amplifying, or other broadcasting of personal or commercial music or sound, by electronic or other technological means installed in a motor vehicle or otherwise portable device, in such a manner that it is plainly audible at a distances of thirty (30) feet in any direction from the operator or source between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. is unlawful. 
(b)  The playing, transmitting, amplifying, or other broadcasting of personal or commercial music or sound, by electronic or other technological means installed in a motor vehicle or otherwise portable device, in such a manner that it is plainly audible in a public place or residential neighborhood by any person other than the operator between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., is unlawful. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the phrase "plainly audible" means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. The enforcing officer need not determine the title of a specific sound, specific words, or the performing artist, and the detection of the rhythmic bass component of music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound. 
(d)  For violations of this section involving broadcasts from a motor vehicle, the operator of the motor vehicle shall be presumed to have dominion and control over the source of the broadcast, and shall therefore be presumed to be responsible for the violation. Passengers, or others lacking an ownership interest, may be found guilty of violating this subsection if such persons had constructive dominion and control over the source of the broadcast, or otherwise aided and abetted the operator. 
(e)  This section shall not be applicable to mobile sound amplification for which a valid city permit has been issued, or for which such sound amplification is incidental to and appropriate for the use of a valid city permit, such as for parades, ice cream trucks, and similar activities, so long as such activities comply with the terms of any such city permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-677, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 21-36. - Penalty. 
The violation of a provision of article II of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction. The district court shall punish a person found responsible of a violation of article II of this chapter with a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation; and/or costs; assessments; and damages and expenses, as provided by MCL 600.8727(3). 
(Ord. No. 80-731, § 6, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 21-37. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-652, adopted on May 8, 2007, repealed section 21-38 in its entirety, which pertained to penalties. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 21-39—21-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOXIOUS WEEDS AND RUBBISH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Vegetation, Ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Control and eradication of noxious weeds MCL 247.61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-46. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the following definitions ascribed to them: 
Noxious and poisonous weeds shall include Canada thistle, dodders, mustards, wild carrot, perennial sowthistle, hoary alyssum, bindweed, ragweed goldenrod, oak-eye daisies, burdock, poison ivy, poison sumac, or other plants detrimental to health. 
Owner shall mean the person appearing on the city tax rolls to whom the property is assessed. 
Vegetation shall include any grass or rank vegetation detrimental to the public health. 
(Ord. No. 80-463, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 80-698, § 1, 3-27-12; Ord. No. 80-707, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-47. - Duty of owners and occupants. 
(a)  No person occupying and/or owning any property whether occupied or vacant, improved or unimproved, shall permit or maintain on any such property, or on the untraveled portion of streets lying between the road and sidewalk which abuts on any such property, any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than six (6) inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. No such occupant and/or owner shall cause, suffer or allow noxious/poisonous weeds or plants detrimental to health, to grow on any such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the occupant and/or owner of every property whether occupied or vacant, improved or unimproved, within the city to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all such weeds, grass, or rank, poisonous or noxious vegetation once before the first day of May and as often thereafter as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of subsection (a). 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the occupant and/or owner of every property whether occupied or vacant, improved or unimproved, within the city to remove by lawful means all such garbage, excrement or other unwholesome, deleterious or offensive thing or substance,, trash or rubbish, or any dead or hazardous tree or tree limb that threatens surrounding property or the public right-of-way as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, §§ 4-104, 4-105; Ord. No. 80-394, § 1, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 80-463, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 80-667, § 1, 4-8-08, eff. 4-28-08; Ord. No. 80-707, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-48. - Failure to comply; remedy costs. 
(a)  If the provisions of section 21-47 are not complied with, the director of public service, or his duly appointed representative, shall give written notice to the occupant and/or owner of the property, by first class mail and/or posting on the premises to comply with the provisions of section 21-47 within five (5) days of the date of the notice, and if the notice is not complied with within such time, the director of public service, or his duly appointed representative, may cause such weeds, grass, other vegetation, and any item listed in section 21-47, to be removed or destroyed and the actual cost of cutting, removal or destruction, with a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) flat rate for administrative expenses, plus twenty-five (25) percent of the actual cost of cutting, removal or destruction, shall be a lien on the property and added to the taxes assessed against the property as a special assessment against the property in the same manner as other assessments and taxes. Such costs may also be recovered by the city by an action in assumpsit. Such costs, when so collected, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Furthermore, any person found in violation of this article shall be responsible and/or liable for the expense of giving written notice of noncompliance to the owner and/or occupant of the property. 
(b)  In lieu of the written notice by first class mail and/or posting on the premises provided in subsection (a), the director of public service, or his duly appointed representative, may cause to be published a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county during the month of March that weeds not cut by the first day of May of that year, as outlined in subsection (a) of this section, will be cut by the city and the owner of the property charged with the cost thereof, which costs shall be a lien on the property and added to the taxes assessed against the property as a special assessment, and shall be collected as a special assessment against the premises in the same manner as other assessments and taxes. 
(Code 1967, § 4-107; Ord. No. 80-363, § 1, 7-12-88; Ord. No. 80-394, § 1, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 80-463, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 80-668, § 1, 4-8-08; Ord. No. 80-707, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-49. - Inspection; city liability. 
(a)  The department of public service through its officers, inspectors and/or employees is authorized to inspect every building, structure or land reported and make a determination of whether there is a nuisance as listed in section 21-47. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to reject any and all claims arising from any damage that may result from the normal operation of cutting or destroying weeds growing on the same tract, part, or parcel of land, as required in this article as well as any and all claims arising from actions taken by the city pursuant to violations of section 21-47(c). 
(Code 1967, § 4-107; Ord. No. 80-394, § 1, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 80-463, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 80-707, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-527, § 16, adopted Jan. 13, 1998, repealed § 21-50 which pertained to a penalty and derived from Code 1967, § 4-108; Ord. No. 80-349, § 1, adopted June 25, 1991; and Ord. No. 80-463, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 1994.  
Secs. 21-51—21-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RODENT CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 7; insects, rodents and other pests in mobile homes, § 20-72. 
State Law reference— Bounty for killing rats, MCL 433.251 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-66. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Occupant means the person that has the use of or occupies any building, structure or vacant land. 
Owner means the owner listed on the last tax assessment records of the building, structure or vacant land, whether an individual, partnership, corporation, or their agent. 
Rodent means any variety or species of rats or mice. 
Rodent eradication means the elimination or extermination of rodents from a building, structure or vacant land so that there is no evidence of rat infestation remaining, by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning, fumigating, trapping, clubbing, etc. 
Rodent harborage means any condition which provides shelter or protection for rodents, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside of a building, structure or vacant land. 
(Code 1967, § 4-114; Ord. No. 80-706, § 1, 9-25-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 21-67. - Rodent infestation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to permit a condition of rodent harborage to exist in any building, structure, or on vacant land. The presence of rodent infestation shall constitute evidence of rodent harborage for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-115; Ord. No. 80-706, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-68. - Inspection. 
The department of public service through its officers, inspectors and/or employees is authorized and directed to inspect every rodent-infested building, structure or vacant land reported and make a determination of whether there is a rodent infestation and harborage. 
(Code 1967, § 4-116; Ord. No. 80-706, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-69. - Notice. 
If a building, structure or vacant land is found to be a rodent harborage, the owner or occupant shall be notified in writing of this condition by first class mail or by posting upon a conspicuous part of the building, structure or vacant land. The owner shall be advised to take immediate rodent eradication measures within the time specified in the written notice, in no event to be less than ten (10) days. 
(Code 1967, § 4-117; Ord. No. 80-706, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-70. - Abatement by owner or occupant. 
Whenever the owner or occupant is notified by the department of public service, the owner or occupant shall immediately institute rodent eradication measures and shall continuously maintain such measures until the premises is rodent free. 
(Code 1967, § 4-118; Ord. No. 80-706, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-71. - Abatement by city. 
If, at the expiration of the time limit in the notice under section 21-69, the owner or occupant has not complied with the requirements thereof, the department of public service shall take such steps that are necessary to eradicate the rodents. The cost of such eradication, together with a fifty dollar ($50.00) administration fee plus twenty-five (25) percent of the actual cost of eradication measures, shall be charged against the premises and shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the city assessor who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. 
(Code 1967, § 4-119; Ord. No. 80-365, § 1, 9-27-88; Ord. No. 80-706, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 21-72. - Collection of costs. 
The owner listed on the last tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such costs by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If he or she fails to pay the same within thirty (30) days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next city tax roll and the same shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-120; Ord. No. 80-706, § 1, 9-25-12)  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC PROPERTY SMOKING RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 21-73. - Purpose. 
The City of Warren recognizes that secondhand smoke poses a danger to public health and has been associated with chronic disease, birth defects, and even death. The city wishes to protect the public from the dangers of secondhand smoke when they enter buildings, or participate in activities on municipal property. All persons should be able to enjoy city services without concern or risk of inhaling secondhand smoke. Public property should be free from litter, dangers, and lingering odors associated with smoking. This article endeavors to provide protection and serve the health, safety, and welfare of the public from the ills associated with smoking. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
Sec. 21-74. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article, whether capitalized or not, will have the following meanings: 
Entrances means the doors and/or other areas designed and used for ingress and egress by members of the public including, but not limited to, any entrance accessed through a parking lot structure. 
Public building means all buildings owned, leased, or managed by the City of Warren including, but not limited to: city administrative buildings, court buildings, maintenance garages, satellite office buildings, libraries, and buildings owned by the Downtown Development Authority (DDA), the Tax Increment Finance Authority (TIFA), and the Warren Building Authority. 
Smoking means the inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigarette, cigar, or pipe/bong; or any other action that produces smoke. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
Sec. 21-75. - General prohibition. 
A person shall not smoke within twenty-five (25) feet of an entrance to a public building, except as noted in section 21-76. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
Sec. 21-76. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The following public buildings shall be excluded from the general prohibition: 
(1)  Any building managed by Warren Community Housing Authority including, but not limited to, the Joseph Coach and Stillwell Manor apartments. 
(b)  The Warren Community Housing Authority may enact more restrictive smoking regulations. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
Sec. 21-77. - Signs. 
The city shall post signs that are reasonably calculated to inform all persons of the smoking restrictions in this article. The signs shall include the following language: 
(1)  "NO SMOKING WITHIN 25 FEET OF THIS ENTRANCE"; and 
(2)  A citation to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
Sec. 21-78. - Debris receptacles. 
(a)  In order to control litter caused by smoking and demarcate the appropriate distance from public entrances where smoking is permitted, the city shall place debris receptacles: 
(1)  At a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from an entrance to a public building where smoking is permitted. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally moves a debris receptacle, when placed pursuant to this article, more than one (1) foot in any direction from its appropriate location, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to ninety (90) days in jail, a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or court costs. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
Sec. 21-79. - Construction. 
This article is intended to supplement, not duplicate or preempt, any applicable ordinance, state law, or federal law. Therefore, this article shall not be interpreted to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
Sec. 21-80. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Except where otherwise specified, any violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation. 
(2)  A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each additional violation of this article, within a one-year period. 
(b)  If a person continues to smoke after a police officer tells the person to stop, or issues him or her a citation under this article, the police officer may: 
(1)  Ask the person to leave the public property; and/or 
(2)  Issue the person a citation for a misdemeanor, punishable by up to ninety (90) days in jail, a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or court costs. 
(Ord. No. 80-720, § 1, 7-23-14)  
ARTICLE VI. - LOCAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MEDICAL MARIHUANA 
 
Sec. 21-81. - Purpose. 
The City of Warren acknowledges that lawful medical use of marihuana serves the seriously ill, by alleviating their symptoms. It is in the public welfare to establish local standards to ensure that the procedures utilized to help the seriously ill with medicinal marihuana are compatible with the character of the community. The neighborhoods must be protected from any residual odors or dangerous heating processes that are associated with marihuana growth, as well as the explosions and fires caused by the grow process. The ordinance from which this article is derived is intended to impose local requirements for those individuals registered as "qualifying patients" as defined under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421, et seq., to contain growth of medical marihuana to specifically zoned areas, and to restrict presence in neighborhoods only to those qualifying patients who take safety measures to prevent hazards and odors associated with the growth and processing of marihuana. The ordinance from which this article is derived is intended to preserve the character of the community, and protect the citizens from any disruption, traffic, offensive smell or nuisance due to the growth of medical marihuana, and the unexpected consequences of electrical fires and dangerous explosions. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-82. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article, whether lower case or capitalized, "qualifying patient(s)" or "primary caregiver" will have the meaning assigned to "registered qualifying patient" and "registered primary caregiver" in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421, et seq., (the Act). All other terms will have the meanings assigned to them in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-83. - General. 
(a)  The growth, manufacturing, processing, or storage of medical marihuana by a qualifying patient or his or her primary caregiver shall only occur at the residence of qualifying patient, or other location permitted by this ordinance, and shall only be allowed inside of an enclosed, locked facility, or other closed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the qualifying patient or his or her primary caregiver. Such facility shall be under the exclusive control of the qualifying patient or his or her primary caregiver through written lease, contract or deed. 
(b)  A qualifying patient, or his or her primary caregiver shall not distribute, transfer or sell the medical marihuana to another person other than to the qualifying patient on the qualifying patient's residential dwelling or premises. No person shall be allowed or have access to medical marihuana on the qualifying patient's property other than the qualifying patient and his or her primary caregiver or other persons who may lawfully assist the patient under the Act. 
(c)  Only one (1) qualifying patient, or his or her primary caregiver, may grow, store, cultivate, manufacture or store medical marihuana per residential dwelling, and only for the assistance to the qualifying patient residing in that dwelling. 
(d)  No marihuana shall be cultivated, grown, manufactured or processed in any manner that would transmit or emit odor from the dwelling or property to neighboring private or public properties or areas. 
(e)  The odor of marihuana from the growth, manufacturing, processing, or cultivation must be contained through use of operable filtration to ventilation and exhaust equipment. Odors must otherwise be effectively confined to the interior of the building or dwelling from which the odor is generated. No ventilation or exhaust system may be installed where marihuana is grown or cultivated without a filtration system approved by the building inspections division. 
(f)  If a qualifying patient or his or her primary caregiver intends to grow, manufacture, store, cultivate or process medical marihuana at a location other than at the qualifying patient's principal residence as defined by MCL 211.7u, such activities shall only occur within an industrial districts as may be designated and expressly allowed within the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Warren. The growth, manufacture, cultivation, or processing of medical marihuana shall not occur in connection with, or at a location at which, another commodity, product or service is also available, except to the extent permitted by law. 
(g)  All growth, storage, manufacturing and cultivation must otherwise comply with the following: 
(1)  The Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, and rules promulgated under the Act, and this article and applicable ordinances. 
(2)  The property has registered with the division of building inspections, satisfies administrative safety inspections by the fire department and division of building inspections; administrative safety inspections will include the property's heating equipment, filtration system, and electrical wiring, lighting, and watering disposal methods that support or are associated with the cultivation, growth or harvesting of marihuana, and the storage of any chemicals associated with the cultivation, growth, manufacturing or processing of medical marihuana, and which may include plant clipping discard methods. 
(3)  All medical marihuana shall be grown and contained within the structure, and in an enclosed, locked facility inaccessible and equipped with locks to restrict access from any person other than the qualified patient and his or her primary caregiver, or person authorized to assist the patient, under the Act. 
(4)  On-site lighting in rooms with windows where medical marihuana is grown shall employ shielding methods between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m., without alteration to the exterior of the residence, to prevent ambient light spillage that may create a distraction for neighboring property. 
(5)  Any portion of dwelling or structure where heating equipment is used to grow, process, manufacture, or cultivate medical marihuana, or where chemicals such as herbicides, pesticides, and fertilizers are stored, shall be subject to mandatory inspection and approval by the City of Warren fire department. 
(6)  Upon registration, a plan is submitted to and approved by the division of building inspections for the processing, storage and cultivation of medical marihuana, identifying the heating equipment and processes, chemical storage, filtration equipment, electrical wiring, and lighting, and plant material and water disposal methods, utilized in connection with the growth, processing or cultivation of medical marihuana. 
(7)  Information and records obtained through the registration process that are deemed confidential under the Act will be withheld from public disclosure, unless disclosure is compelled by law. 
(8)  Medical marihuana is to be grown, processed, manufactured, or cultivated with the filtration, heating, lighting and electrical wiring, and chemical storage, water disposal, and usage methods and equipment approved by the division of building inspections and the fire department, following administrative safety inspections. 
(9)  All discarded marihuana must be disposed of in non-transparent containers that are placed in waste receptacle containers, or by any other means necessary to prevent persons or animals from accessing the marihuana plant materials. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-84. - Cost recovery. 
In the event of any explosion, release, hazard that results from the growth, cultivation or processing of medical marihuana, the responsible party will be responsible for reimbursement of any emergency response costs which were deployed to remediate, contain or respond to the explosion, fire, release or hazard, including transportation, overtime costs, special equipment or testing, and shall be responsible for the repair of property damages, remediation, or medical expenses for injuries resulting from such explosion, release, harmful emission, or hazard. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-85. - Consumption or use by qualifying a patient. 
A person within the City of Warren who has been issued and possesses a lawful registry identification card as a qualifying patient as set forth in MCL 333.26421, et seq. (the Act), shall not consume or use marihuana in any of the following places: 
(a)  Any public place; 
(b)  A common area of a hotel, motel, apartment building, condominium complex, or other business establishment, including the driveways, entrance areas, parking lots, areas open to the public or other residents and/or guests; 
(c)  A hotel, motel, apartment building, rental dwelling or similar facility or any other establishment at which the owner or property manager has prohibited marihuana growth, cultivation, manufacture, or transfer on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-86. - Punishment. 
The growth, cultivation, storage, or processing marihuana in violation of section 22-83(g)(ii), (v), (vi) and (viii) is a misdemeanor punishable by up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or ninety (90) days in jail. Any use, manufacturing, growth, or cultivation of medicinal marihuana shall otherwise be in compliance with the Act, and the provisions of this article are intended to supplement the requirements and remedies provided under the Act. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Secs. 21-87—21-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ODORS CAUSING NUISANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 21; Local Requirements for Medical Marihuana, § 21-81 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-90. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by prohibiting offensive odors, protecting citizens from harmful air quality, and preserving the comfortable and enjoyable use of property. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-91. - Short title. 
This section shall be known and cited as "The Fresh Air Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-92. - Definitions. 
An offensive odor is a strong or foul odor, which includes, but is not limited to odors caused by: 
(a)  Animals; 
(b)  Stagnant pools, garbage; 
(c)  Chemicals or industrial activities; 
(d)  Burning garbage, rubber, and/or other materials or substances; or 
(e)  Growth, cultivation, and/or excessive use or consumption of marihuana. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-93. - Prohibition. 
(a)  Except as listed in section 21-94, a person is prohibited from causing or allowing the transmission or emission of an odor from his or her property that: 
(1)  A reasonable person would consider an offensive odor; 
(2)  Endangers the public health or welfare; or 
(3)  Unreasonably interferes with another person's health, safety, peace, comfort, or enjoyment of property. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-94. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Offensive odors do not include ordinary odors associated with: 
(1)  Cooking or preparing food; or 
(2)  Composting food. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-95. - Odor nuisance determination. 
An authorized code official may determine that an odor violates section 21-93 by: 
(a)  Detecting an odor that he or she determines is exceedingly pungent or foul and of such intensity that it does any of the following: 
(1)  Potentially causes distress, discomfort or injury to a person with ordinary sensibilities; 
(2)  Substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of residential dwellings by a person of ordinary sensibilities; or 
(3)  Has the propensity to induce nausea in a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 21-96. - Punishment. 
Except for an offense that is designated as a misdemeanor, a violation of article VI and article VII is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation; and/ or costs; assessments; and damages and expenses, as provided by MCL 600.8727(3). 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— City crime commission, § 2-141 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 21; police Ch. 26; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 37. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Abolition of distinction between accessory and principal. 
Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this Code, whether he or she directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission may hereafter be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if he or she had directly committed such offense. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 767.39.  
Sec. 22-2. - Attempt to commit an ordinance violation. 
Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by ordinance, and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration, or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the same, shall be punished as follows: confinement in the county jail for a period of up to forty-five (45) days; and a fine in the sum not to exceed one-half (½) of the greatest punishment which might have been inflicted if the violation so attempted had been committed and probation for a period of up to one (1) year and court costs. 
(Ord. No. 80-311, § 1, 9-24-85) 
State Law reference— Attempt to commit crime, MCL 750.92.  
Sec. 22-3. - Spitting in public places. 
No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk, or upon the floor or interior of any public conveyance, or upon the floor or walls of any theater, hall, assembly room, church, school or public building. 
(Code 1967, § 8-214) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 22-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-719, § 1, adopted March 17, 2014, repealed § 22-4 which pertained to begging and derived from § 8-201(h) of the 1967 Code.  
Sec. 22-5. - Illegal occupation or business. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in an illegal occupation or business. 
(Code 1967, § 8-201(d)) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(d).  
Sec. 22-6. - Arrest without warrant; peace officer. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, "school property" means the term as defined in section 7410 of the public health code. 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7410 
(b)  When a person is arrested without a warrant in any of the following cases, the arrested person shall without unreasonable delay, be taken before a magistrate who is nearest or most accessible within the judicial district as provided in section 13 of Chapter IV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Act No. 175 of the Public Acts of 1927 (MCL 764.13), or, if a minor, taken before the probate court within the county in which the offense charged is alleged to have been committed. A peace officer, without a warrant, may arrest a person in any of the following situations: 
(1)  When a person commits a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation in the peace officer's presence. 
(2)  When a person has committed a felony although not in the peace officer's presence. 
(3)  When a person commits a felony in fact and the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person committed it. 
(4)  When the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for more than ninety-two (92) days or a felony has been committed and reasonable cause to believe that the person committed it. 
(5)  When the peace officer has received positive information by written, telegraphic, teletypic, telephonic, radio, electronic, or other authoritative source that another peace officer or a court holds a warrant for the person's arrest. 
(6)  When the peace officer has received positive information broadcast from a recognized police or other governmental radio station, or teletype, that affords the peace officer reasonable cause to believe a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for more than ninety-two (92) days or a felony has been committed and reasonable cause to believe the person committed it. 
(7)  When the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person is an escaped convict, has violated a condition of parole from a prison, has violated condition of probation imposed by a court, or has violated a condition of pardon granted by the executive. 
(8)  When the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of the accident in this state, the operator of the vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of section MCL 257.625(1), (3), (6), (7) or section 257.625 (m) of the Michigan Vehicle Code. Pursuant to Warren Code of Ordinances Section 37-1:625(1), (3), (6), (7) or (m). 
(9)  When the person is found in the driver's seat of a vehicle parked or stopped on a highway or street within this state if any part of the vehicle intrudes in the roadway and the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person operating the vehicle in violation of MCLA Section 257.625(1), (3), (6) or (7) or Section 257.625 (m) of the Michigan Vehicle Code. Pursuant to Warren Code of Ordinances Section 37-1:625(1), (3), (6) or (7) or (m). 
(10)  When the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that person was, at the time of an accident, the operator of a snowmobile involved in the accident and was operating the snowmobile in violation of Section 82127(1) or (3) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act. Violations of this subsection shall be enforced in a manner pursuant to the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act. 
(11)  When the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of the accident, the operator of an ORV involved in the accident and was operating the ORV in violation of Section 81134(1) or (2) or 81135 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act. Violations of this subsection shall be enforced in a manner pursuant to the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act. 
(12)  When the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe a violation of Section 356 (c) or 356 (d) of the Michigan Penal Code MCL 750.356c or 356d, has taken or is taking place and reasonable cause to believe the person has committed or is committing the violation, regardless of whether the violation was committed in the peace officer's presence. 
(13)  When the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe a misdemeanor has taken place or is taking place on school property and reasonable cause to believe the person committed or is committing the violation, regardless of whether the violation was committed in the peace officer's presence. 
(Ord. No. 80-569, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 22-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, adopted Jan. 13, 1998, repealed § 22-7, which pertained to tobacco products on school property and derived from Ord. No. 80-481, § 1, 4-25-95.  
Sec. 22-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, adopted Jan. 13, 1998, repealed § 22-8, which pertained to providing tobacco products to persons under eighteen and signs required for sale of tobacco products at retail and derived from Ord. No. 80-403, § 1, 4-28-92 and Ord. No. 80-481, § 1, 4-25-95.  
Sec. 22-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, adopted Jan. 13, 1998, repealed § 22-9, which pertained to severability and derived from Ord. No. 80-403, § 1, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 80-420, § 2, 11-24-92; and, Ord. No. 80-481, § 1, 4-25-95.  
Sec. 22-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-469, adopted Oct. 25, 1994, transferred the provisions of former § 22-10, relative to beepers and paging devices to § 22-241 of Art. X hereof.  
Secs. 22-11—22-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; interference with enforcement of dog laws, § 7-31. 
 
Sec. 22-21. - Disobeyance of signs and persons supervising public places. 
No person shall disobey or act in a manner contrary to the notice on any sign or the instructions of a police officer, attendant or other person having supervision over the operation or use of any park, playground or other public place with regard to the use of such an area, its buildings, equipment or facilities. 
(Code 1967, § 7-132(b)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 22-22. - Hindering officers and employees. 
(a)  No person shall hinder, resist or oppose any city officer or employee, including police officers and firefighters, in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  No person shall furnish to a police officer false, forged, fictitious or misleading verbal or written information identifying the person as another person, if the person is detained for a violation under the Warren Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in the prosecution as a misdemeanor; upon the finding of guilt, the violator shall be subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of the section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion of this section and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-382, § 1, 8-14-90) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479.  
Sec. 22-23. - Obeying lawful command of police officer, etc. 
No person shall refuse to obey the lawful command of any police officer, member of the national guard of the state, or member of the armed forces of the United States of America. No person shall fail to disperse when directed to do so by a police officer.  
Sec. 22-24. - False alarms. 
(a)  No person shall willfully turn in, sound or cause to be communicated to any department of the city any false alarm of fire. 
(b)  No person shall summon, as a joke or prank, or otherwise without good reason therefor, in any manner whatsoever, the police or fire department, or any public or private ambulance, or any public service, to go to any address where such service is not required. 
(Code 1967, § 8-217(1), (2)) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false report on crime, MCL 750.411a.  
Sec. 22-25. - Interference with police and fire emergency alarm system. 
No person shall post, paint, impress or in any way affix to any pole on which there is any alarm box or telephone connected with the emergency police or fire reporting system, any placard, sign, notice or announcement of any kind, or cut, mutilate, mar, deface, cover, obstruct or connect to or interfere with such pole, alarm box or telephone in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1967, § 8-217(3)) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13.  
Secs. 22-26—22-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 22-41. - Assault and battery; pregnant woman. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to commit an assault or an assault and battery against another person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to commit an assault or an assault and battery against a pregnant individual when that person knows the individual is pregnant. 
(c)  Penalty. A person who violates section 22-41(a) or (b) is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be imprisoned not more than ninety-three (93) days and/or not fined more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Previous convictions. Pursuant to MCL 750.81, enhanced penalties may be sought against a person who has previously been convicted of an assault or an assault and battery of an individual described in section 22-41(b) or section 22-42. 
(Code 1967, § 8-202; Ord. No. 80-468, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 80-523, § 1, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 80-593A, § 1, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 80-759, § 1, 8-8-17) 
State Law reference— Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq.  
Sec. 22-42. - Domestic assault. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Domestic assault means an assault, or an assault and battery, by an individual of his or her spouse, his or her former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household. 
(2)  Dating relationship as used in this section means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectionate involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two (2) individuals in a business or social context. 
(b)  Domestic assault prohibited. No individual shall assault, or assault and batter, his or her spouse, his or her former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household. 
(c)  Warrantless arrest. An officer of the police department may arrest an individual for violating any of the provisions of this section, regardless of whether the officer has a warrant or whether the violation was committed in his or her presence, if the officer has reasonable case to believe that the violation occurred or is occurring and that the individual is a spouse or former spouse of the victim, has or has had a dating relationship with the victim, has a child in common with the victim, or resides or has resided in the same household as the victim. When a person has been arrested without a warrant pursuant to this subsection and a magistrate is not available, said person shall be held until he or she can be arraigned or have interim bond set by a judge or district court magistrate. 
(d)  Notice of availability of shelter programs and other resources. After investigating or intervening in a domestic violence incident, a police officer shall provide the victim with a copy of the notice in this section. The notice shall be written and shall include all of the following: 
(1)  The name and telephone number of the responding police agency. 
(2)  The name and badge number of the responding police officer. 
(3)  Substantially the following statement: "You may obtain a copy of the police incident report for your case by contacting this law enforcement agency at the telephone number provided. The domestic violence shelter program and other resources in your area are (include local information). Information about emergency shelter, counseling services, and the legal rights of domestic violence victims is available from these resources. Your legal rights include the right to go to court and file a petition requesting a personal protection order to protect you or other members of your household from domestic abuse which could include restraining or enjoining the abuser from doing the following: 
a.  Entering onto premises. 
b.  Assaulting, attacking, beating, molesting, or wounding you. 
c.  Threatening to kill or physically injure you or another person. 
d.  Removing minor children from you, except as otherwise authorized by a custody or parenting time order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
e.  Engaging in stalking behavior. 
f.  Purchasing or possessing a firearm. 
g.  Interfering with your efforts to remove your children or personal property from premises that are solely owned or leased by the abuser. 
h.  Interfering with you at your place of employment or education or engaging in conduct that impairs your employment relationship or your employment or educational environment. 
i.  Engaging in any other specific act or conduct that imposes upon or interferes with your personal liberty or that causes a reasonable apprehension of violence. 
j.  Having access to information in records concerning any minor child you have with the abuser that would inform the abuser about your address or telephone number, the child's address or telephone number, or your employment address. 
k.  Your legal rights also include the right to go to court and file a motion for an order to show cause and a hearing if the abuser is violating or has violated a personal protection order and has not been arrested." 
(e)  Reports by police officer. The police officer shall prepare a domestic violence report after investigating or intervening in a domestic violence incident. A police officer shall use the standard domestic violence incident report form developed by the department of state police or a form substantially similar to that standard form to report a domestic violence incident. The report shall contain, but is not limited to containing, all of the following: 
(1)  The address, date, and time of the incident being investigated. 
(2)  The victim's name, address, home and work telephone numbers, race, sex, and date of birth. 
(3)  The suspect's name, address, home and work telephone numbers, race, sex, date of birth, and information describing the suspect and whether an injunction or restraining order covering the suspect exists. 
(4)  The name, address, home and work telephone numbers, race, sex, and date of birth of any witness, including a child of the victim or suspect, and the relationship of the witness to the suspect or victim. 
(5)  The following information about the incident being investigated: 
a.  The name of the person who called the law enforcement agency. 
b.  The relationship of the victim and suspect. 
c.  Whether alcohol or controlled substance use was involved in the incident, and by whom it was used. 
d.  A brief narrative describing the incident and the circumstances that led to it. 
e.  Whether and how many times the suspect physically assaulted the victim and a description of any weapon or object used. 
f.  A description of all injuries sustained by the victim and an explanation of how the injuries were sustained. 
g.  If the victim sought medical attention, information concerning where and how the victim was transported, whether the victim was admitted to a hospital or clinic for treatment, and the name and telephone number of the attending physician. 
h.  A description of any property damage reported by the victim or evident at the scene. 
i.  A description of any previous domestic violence incidents between the victim and the suspect. 
j.  The date and time of the report and the name, badge number, and signature of the police officer completing the report. 
(f)  Police department requirements. The police department shall retain the completed domestic violence report in its files. The police department shall also file a copy of the completed domestic violence report with the city attorney within forty-eight (48) hours after the domestic violence incident is reported to the police department. The police department shall further, upon arrest, forward sufficient sets of fingerprints to the 37th Judicial District Court to ensure proper transcription of the disposition of any complaint brought pursuant to section 22-42 to the department of state police. 
(g)  Penalty. A person who violates section 22-42 is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be imprisoned not more than ninety-three (93) days and/or fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(h)  Deferral of proceedings and order of probation. 
(1)  When an individual who has not been convicted previously of a violation of section 81 or 81a of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.81 and 750.81a, or a violation of a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 81 of that act, pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a violation of section 81 or 81a of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.81 and 750.81a, and the victim of the assault is the offender's spouse or former spouse, an individual who has had a child in common with the offender, an individual who has or has had a dating relationship with the offender, or an individual residing or having resided in the same household as the offender, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused and of the city attorney in consultation with the victim, may defer further proceedings and place the accused on probation as provided in this section. However, before deferring proceedings under this subsection, the court shall contact the Department of State Police and determine whether, according to the records of the Department of State Police, the accused has previously been convicted under section 81 or 81a of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.81 and 750.81a, or under a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 81 of that act, or has previously availed himself or herself of this section. If the search of the records reveals an arrest for a violation of section 81 or 81a of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.81 and 750.81a, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 81 of that act but no disposition, the court shall contact the arresting agency and the court that had jurisdiction over the violation to determine the disposition of that arrest for purposes of this section. 
(2)  Upon a violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided in this section. 
(3)  An order of probation entered under subsection (h)(1) may require the accused to participate in a mandatory counseling program. The court may order the accused to pay the reasonable costs of the program. 
(4)  The court shall enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided in this chapter if any of the following circumstances exist: 
a.  The accused commits an assaultive crime during the period of probation. As used in this section, "assaultive crime" means one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  An offense against a person described in any of the following sections of the Michigan Penal Code: 82 to 89, 316, 317, 321, 349 to 350, 397, 520a to 520g, 529 and 530 of 1931 PA 328, as amended, being MCL 750.82 to 750.89, 750.316, 750.317, 750.321, 750.349 to 750.350, 750.397, 750.520a to 750.520g, 750.529 and 750.530. 
2.  A violation of Chapter XI of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, as thereto. 
3.  The accused violates an order of the court that he or she receive counseling regarding his or her violent behavior. 
4.  The accused violates an order of the court that he or she have no contact with a named individual. 
b.  Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against the person. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. 
c.  There may be only one (1) discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any individual. The department of state police shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section. This record shall be furnished to a court or police agency upon request pursuant to subsection (1) for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action under section 81 or 81a of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.81 and 750.81a, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 81 of that act has already once availed himself or herself of this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-593, § 1, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 80-643, § 1, 3-13-07)  
Sec. 22-43. - Neglect of family. 
It shall be unlawful for a person of sufficient ability to refuse or neglect to support his or her family. 
(Code 1967, § 8-201(a)) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(a).  
Sec. 22-44. - Harassment, stalking. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Course of conduct means a pattern of conduct composed of a series of two (2) or more separate noncontinuous acts, evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
(b)  Emotional distress means significant mental suffering or distress that may, but does not necessarily require, medical or other professional treatment or counseling. 
(c)  Harassment means conduct directed toward a victim that includes, but is not limited to, repeated or continuing unconsented contact, that would cause a reasonable individual to suffer emotional distress, and that actually causes the victim to suffer emotional distress. Harassment does not include constitutionally protected activity or conduct that serves a legitimate purpose. 
(d)  Stalking means a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment of another individual that would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested, and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested. 
(e)  Unconsented contact means any contact with another individual that is initiated or continued without the individual's consent, or in disregard of that individual's expressed desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued. Unconsented contact includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(i)  Following or appearing within the sight of that individual. 
(ii)  Approaching or confronting that individual in a public place or on private property. 
(iii)  Appearing at the workplace or residence of that individual. 
(iv)  Entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
(v)  Contacting that individual by telephone. 
(vi)  Sending mail or electronic communications to that individual. 
(vii)  Placing an object on, or delivering an object to, property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
(f)  Victim means an individual who is the target of a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment. 
(2)  Penalties. 
(a)  An individual who engages in stalking is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both. 
(b)  The court may place an individual convicted of violating subsection (2) on probation for a term of not more than one year. If a term of probation is ordered, the court may, in addition to any other lawful condition of probation, order the defendant to do any of the following: 
1.  Refrain from stalking any individual during the term of probation. 
2.  Refrain from having any contact with the victim of the offense. 
3.  Be evaluated to determine the need for psychiatric, psychological, or social counseling and, if determined appropriate by the court, to receive psychiatric, psychological, or social counseling at his or her own expense. 
(c)  A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense arising from the same conduct or for any contempt of court arising from the same court. 
(3)  Rebuttable presumption. In a prosecution for a violation of this section, evidence that the defendant continued to engage in a course of conduct involving repeated unconsented contact with the victim after having been requested by the victim to discontinue the same or a different form of unconsented contact, and to refrain from any further unconsented contact with the victim, shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the continuation of the course of conduct caused the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested. 
(4)  Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this section full force and effect. 
(5)  Severability. Should any subsection, subdivision, clause or phrase of this section be declared by the courts to be involved, the same shall not affect the validity of this section as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so invalidated. 
(Ord. No. 80-429, § 1, 4-13-93)  
Sec. 22-45. - Harassing or indecent telephone calls. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the following term shall be defined as follows: 
Minor means any person under the age of seventeen (17). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to telephone another person or cause another person to be telephoned in order to convey vulgar, indecent, obscene, threatening or offensive language, or to suggest a lewd or lascivious act. No person shall harass, terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, annoy or molest another person or his or her family by repeatedly telephoning or causing such person or family to be repeatedly telephoned, whether or not conversation ensues and regardless of the time of day or night. 
(c)  If an adult is convicted of violating subsection (b) and the victim/complainant is a minor, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Upon the first conviction of a violation of this section the defendant shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for not less than five (5) days and shall not be fined less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(2)  If the defendant has been previously convicted of this section or any other local ordinance or state law substantially corresponding to this section, the defendant shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for not less than forty-five (45) days and shall not be fined less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). 
(d)  If an adult is convicted of violating subsection (b) and the victim/complainant is a minor, the court may, in addition to any other imposition of sentence and term of probation, order the defendant to do any of the following: 
(1)  Refrain from making harassing or indecent telephone calls as described in subsection (b) to any individual during a term of probation. 
(2)  Refrain from having any contact with the victim(s) of the offense. 
(3)  Be evaluated to determine the need for psychiatric, psychological, or social counseling, and if determined appropriate by the court, receive psychological, or social counseling at his or her own expense. 
(e)  Any other individual convicted under this section shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(f)  In setting bond for pretrial or presentence release the court may, in addition to any other imposition of bond conditions: 
(1)  Order the defendant to refrain from making harassing or indecent telephone calls as described in subsection (b) to any individual. 
(2)  Order defendant to refrain from having any contract with the alleged victim(s) of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-469, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 80-501, § 1, 8-13-96) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCLA 750.540e.  
Sec. 22-46. - Malicious annoyance by writing. 
It shall be unlawful to knowingly send or deliver a letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene or threatening language, whether signed or unsigned, with the intent to cause annoyance to any person within this city or with the intent to extort or gain any money or property belonging to another. 
(Ord. No. 80-469, § 1, 10-25-94) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCLA 750.390.  
Sec. 22-47. - Improper exposition or disposition of a dead human body. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and unnecessarily, and in an improper manner, indecently expose, throw away, or abandon, any human body, or the remains thereof, in any public place or place held out to the public for use. 
(b)  Any person convicted pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-534, § 1, 5-26-98) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.505.  
Secs. 22-48—22-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Littering, § 16-10; destruction of public property in parks, § 23-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-61. - Damage to public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, or in any manner interfere with or hinder the use of any public building or any public property whatsoever. 
(Code 1967, § 8-208; Ord. No. 80-545, § 1, 5-25-99) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.  
Sec. 22-62. - Malicious destruction of property. 
Any person who does any of the following causing destruction or injury in an amount less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) is guilty of malicious destruction of property, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00): 
(1)  Willfully and maliciously destroys or injures the personal property of another. 
(2)  Willfully and maliciously destroys or injures another person's house or other buildings or its appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 80-545, § 3, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 22-63. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
It shall be unlawful to throw any stone, brick or other missile at a car, truck, bus, taxi, train or other motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 80-469, § 2, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 80-545, § 2, 5-25-99) 
State Law reference— Authority, MCLA 750.394.  
Sec. 22-64. - Graffiti. 
(a)  No person shall use any paint, spray paint, pigment or similar means to injure, deface or destroy public or private property, including the making of any drawing, inscription, design, scribbling, motto, picture, pictograph or other markings, commonly referred to as "graffiti." 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property marked or defaced as defined in this section to remove or paint over such markings after discovery of their existence so as to minimize the addition of further markings and other blight upon the property. Any owner removing such markings pursuant to this section may be entitled restitution in an amount determined by the court for the cost of removing those markings, such restitution to be paid by any person convicted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-469, § 2, 10-25-94)  
Secs. 22-65—22-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRESPASS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Trespass upon lands or premises of another. 
Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or after such lands or premises have been previously posted by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, with a conspicuous notice forbidding any trespass thereon, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days or by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1967, § 8-251) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.552.  
Sec. 22-72. - Unauthorized entrance upon private parking area. 
(a)  Any person who enters upon any private parking area, either in a vehicle or on foot, without the express or implied permission of the owner, lessee, occupant or agent, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Before this section shall be effective in any parking area, suitable signs must be first posted which would apprise the ordinarily observant person of the restricted use of the parking area. For the purpose of this section, implied permission shall be deemed granted to any person for the use designated by such signs. 
(c)  Complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner, lessee or occupant of the parking area, or the agent thereof, and the police department shall enforce this section. 
(Code 1967, § 8-252)  
Sec. 22-73. - Walking on lawns by delivery persons. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to protect the value of residential property in the city by prohibiting certain delivery persons, who serve residential properties on a recurring basis, from walking on residential lawns, thus preventing deterioration and destruction thereof and maintaining the value of the property and preserving the tax base of the city. 
(b)  No person, who shall have first been personally shown a copy of this section, and who is engaged in the activity of delivering on a repetitive or recurring basis, any materials, goods or services to the owner or occupant of any residential property in the city, including readers of gas, water, electric or other utility metering devices, route delivery persons, mail carriers or newspaper delivery persons, shall enter upon and walk over or trample upon the lawn of the property, including the grass, sod, flowers or shrubs growing therein, or otherwise cross the lawn, except upon a sidewalk, driveway, porch, step or other area designated as a pathway; provided, however, that where such person cannot otherwise deliver such materials or goods or services except by walking upon the lawn as aforesaid, then this section shall not apply. 
(c)  An owner or occupant of any residential property in the city may obtain a copy of this section from the office of the city clerk. Any delivery person described in subsection (b) who has been shown a copy of this section by the owner or occupant, and who shall at any time subsequent thereto, do any of the acts prohibited by subsection (b), may be prosecuted for a violation hereof. 
(Code 1967, §§ 8-253—8-255)  
Sec. 22-74. - Entering certain structures prohibited. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to enter a structure on property required to be registered under article III of chapter 28 unless the person is: 
(a)  The owner of the property; 
(b)  A person with the owner of the property's express permission to enter the property; or 
(c)  A person with legal authority to enter the property. 
(Ord. No. 80-711, § 1, 7-9-2013)  
Sec. 22-75. - Breaking and entering structures. 
Any person who breaks and enters or enters without breaking any structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 80-715, § 1, 1-14-14)  
Secs. 22-76—22-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - THEFT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Larceny, MCL 750.356 et seq.; false pretenses and false representations, MCL 750.217a et seq.; gross frauds and cheats at common law, MCL 750.280. 
 
Sec. 22-86. - Larceny generally. 
(a)  Any person who steals or attempts to steal the property of another of a value less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) is guilty of larceny, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  The word "property," for the purpose of this section, shall include any money, goods, or chattels, or any bank note, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or any other valuable contract in force or any receipt, release of defeasance, or any writ process to public record. 
(Code 1967, § 8-207; Ord. No. 80-545, § 4, 5-25-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.356.  
Sec. 22-86.1. - Retail fraud. 
A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity with the intent to defraud the store an amount less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00): 
(a)  While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(b)  While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(c)  With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property. 
(Ord. No. 80-364, § 1, 9-27-88; Ord. No. 80-545, § 4, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 22-87. - Larceny from libraries. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section "library material" means any material owned by or under the control of the public library of the city, including but not by way of limitation, the following: book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, toy, puppet, photograph, film, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, exhibit, phonographic record, video cassette disk, sculpture, projection equipment, or any part thereof. 
(b)  Any person who shall procure or take in any way from the public library of the city, any library material and who fails to return same within ten (10) days after a notice is sent as provided herein shall be guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and/or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days in the discretion of the court. 
(c)  The notice provided herein may be given by certified mail directed to the last known address of the person to be notified. 
(Ord. No. 80-288, § 1, 7-26-83) 
State Law reference— Larceny from libraries, MCL 750.364.  
Sec. 22-88. - Misrepresentation of identity of motors, appliances, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or misrepresent the identity of any motor, household appliance or mechanical device by removing or defacing the manufacturer's serial or motor number, or by altering or replacing any part of such motor, appliance or device, bearing the serial or motor number, with a new or replaced part upon which the proper serial or motor number has not been stamped or placed. 
(b)  Possession by any dealer, distributor, wholesaler or other person engaged in the business of buying and selling, of any motor, household appliance or mechanical device upon which the manufacturer's serial or motor number has been removed, defaced or altered, or the part bearings such number replaced by one on which the proper number does not appear, shall constitute, prima facie evidence that such person has violated the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 8-215) 
State Law reference— Altering serial number on motor vehicle engine, MCL 257.230.  
Secs. 22-89—22-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 22-106. - Loitering. 
(a)  In this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Harass, as used in this section shall include but not be limited to, the use of any personally abusive epithets or words, language or conduct of an offensive nature, which epithets, words, conduct or language, when addressed to or directed at a reasonable person, are, as a matter of common knowledge inherently likely to provoke a reaction of fear, anger or apprehension. 
Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)  it shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto; 
(3)  Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises; 
(4)  By words or conduct, harass, assault, molest or intimidate any other person; or create a reasonable belief that a breach of the peace is imminent or a reasonable concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether there is a reasonable belief that a breach of the peace is imminent or a reasonable concern for the safety of persons or property is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer or endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Prior to any arrest under subsection (b) (4) above, an officer must allow a person an opportunity to dispel any concern or belief which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to explain his or her presence and conduct unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable or futile. 
(d)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section. No person shall be convicted of an offense under section 22-106 (b)(4) if the officer did not comply with subsection (c) above or, if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the officer at the time, would have dispelled the belief or concern. 
(Code 1967, § 8-212; Ord. No. 80-346, § 1, 10-27-87) 
State Law reference— Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(i—k).  
Sec. 22-107. - Disturbing the peace generally. 
No person shall make, aid, give countenance to, or assist in making any improper noise, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace, in any place within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 8-205) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170.  
Sec. 22-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-724, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 2014, repealed § 22-108 which pertained to jostling and derived from § 8-201(l) of the 1967 Code.  
Sec. 22-109. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
A person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his or her conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person willfully uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to any other person when such words by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
State Law reference— Indecent language in presence of woman or child, MCL 750.337; disorderly persons, MCL 750.167; cursing and swearing, MCL 750.103.  
Sec. 22-110. - Disorderly person. 
(a)  A person is a disorderly person if he/she is any of the following: 
(1)  A person who is intoxicated in a public place and who is either endangering directly the safety of another person or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(2)  A person who possesses or controls alcoholic beverages in a container which is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken, on any public street, sidewalk or in a motor vehicle located in a private parking area open to the public. 
(3)  A person who causes the improper diversion of motor vehicle traffic upon any public highway, street, road or thoroughfare by motion or gesture. 
(4)  A person who urinates or defecates in a public place when said public place is not a bathroom. 
(5)  A person who is engaged in indecent and obscene conduct in a public place. 
(6)  A person who is unnecessarily jostling, or roughly crowding people in a public place. 
(7)  Any person whom a peace officer encounters under circumstances which reasonably indicate that the person has committed, is committing or is about to commit a crime. The officer may detain the person pursuant to this section only to ascertain the person's identity and the suspicious circumstances surrounding the person's presence. Any person so detained shall identify him or herself, but may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry by the peace officer. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in the prosecution as a misdemeanor; upon the finding of guilt, the violator is subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion of this section and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 8-201(e); Ord. No. 80-381, § 1, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 80-618, § 1, 3-8-05; Ord. No. 80-724, § 2, 9-9-14) 
State Law reference— Disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e).  
Sec. 22-111. - Disturbance of religious worship. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making any noise or profane discourse or engaging in any indecent behavior in or near the place of worship as to disturb the solemnity of the meaning. 
(Code 1967, § 8-204) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.169; disturbing public places, MCL 750.170.  
Sec. 22-112. - Window peeping. 
No person shall be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the city, in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1967, § 8-201(c)) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c).  
Sec. 22-113. - Responsibility for disorderly residence/premises; regulating use of alcoholic beverage and drugs. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Adult means a person seventeen (17) years of age or older. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half ½ of one (1) percent of alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Michigan Compiled Laws, Section 436.2, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Minor, when applied to any provision of this section relating to alcoholic beverages, means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess alcoholic beverages pursuant to Michigan Compiled Laws, Section 436.33(b), as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(d)  Residence or premises means a motel room, hotel room, home, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, including the curtilage of the dwelling unit, or a hall, meeting room or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for social functions, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. 
(e)  Drug means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are defined by MCL 333.7105(7). 
(f)  Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
(g)  Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence or premises, with person's in attendance other than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family members. 
(2)  [Unlawful assembly.] It shall be unlawful for any person, who is either the owner or person responsible for sponsoring or organizing a social or cultural event, to permit any noisy or riotous person or persons to assemble in or at any residence or premises, including their respective parking lots and other surrounding open areas, which are owned, rented, occupied or controlled by said person to the annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood and the public peace. 
(3)  [Open house parties.] No adult having control of any residence or premises shall allow an open house party to take place at the residence or premises if any alcoholic beverage or drug is possessed or consumed at the residence or premises by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that any alcoholic beverage or drug was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at the residence or premises, where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at the residence or premises. 
(4)  Exception. The provisions of section 22-113(3) shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities. 
(5)  Penalties. The penalties for violation of section 22-113 shall be as follows: 
(a)  For the first violation, a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  For subsequent violations, a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(6)  Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this section full force and effect. 
(7)  Severability. Should any subsection, subdivision, clause or phrase of this section be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this section as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so invalidated. 
(Code 1967, § 8-203; Ord. No. 80-351, § 1, 2-9-88; Ord. No. 80-405, § 1, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 80-537, § 1, 8-11-98)  
Sec. 22-114. - Funeral, memorial service, viewing, procession or burial. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to do any of the following within five hundred fifty (550) feet of a building or other location where a funeral, memorial service, or viewing of a deceased person is being conducted or within five hundred fifty (550) feet of a funeral procession or burial: 
(1)  Make any statement or gesture or engage in any conduct that would make a reasonable person attending that funeral, memorial service, viewing, procession, or burial under the circumstances feel intimidated, threatened, or harassed. 
(2)  Make any statement or gesture or engage in any conduct intended to incite or produce a breach of the peace among those attending that funeral, memorial service, viewing, or burial or traveling in that procession and that causes a breach of the peace among those attending that funeral, memorial service, viewing, or burial or traveling in that procession. 
(3)  Make any statement or gesture or engage in any conduct intended to disrupt the funeral, memorial service, viewing, procession, or burial and that disrupts the funeral, memorial service, viewing, procession, or burial. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in the prosecution as a misdemeanor; upon the finding of guilt, the violation shall be subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion of this section and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-700, § 1, 4-24-12)  
Sec. 22-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-469, adopted Oct. 25, 1994, transferred the provisions of former §§ 22-114 and 22-115, relative to curfew for minors and parental responsibility, to §§ 22-239 and 22-240 of Art. X hereof.  
Sec. 22-116. - Anti-camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, use camp facilities, including but not limited to tents, huts or temporary shelters, or use camp paraphernalia, including but not limited to cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, tarps, in the following areas except as otherwise permitted: 
(1)  Any street; 
(2)  Any park; 
(3)  Any sidewalk; 
(4)  Any alleyway; 
(5)  Any catwalk; 
(6)  Any public easement; 
(7)  Any public lot or public area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. No. 80-578, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 22-117. - Operation of skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, scooters, or similar non-motorized wheeled devices. 
(a)  A person is prohibited from using a skateboard, roller skate, roller blade, scooter, or similar non-motorized wheeled device on: any ramp and their railing; staircase and their railing; landscape structures; seating benches and all area(s) within or contiguous to a parking structure, on city/Downtown Development Authority ("DDA") owned property within the Downtown District, 
(b)  Outside of the prohibitions listed in subsection (a) above, no person shall use a skateboard, roller skate, roller blade, scooter, or similar non-motorized wheeled device on any sidewalk, bike path, or roadway in such a manner that: 1) may cause or does cause harm, destruction, damage or the defacing of city/DDA property; or 2) in such a manner that may interfere with the carrying on of public or private business. 
(c)  The city/DDA shall post warning signs within the Downtown District of the above cited ordinance sections. 
(d)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(1)  The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine, not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus any costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions as authorized by Chapter 87 of Act 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(2)  Increased civil fines of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed for repeated violations of the above section. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second or any subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision committed by a person within any twelve (12) month period and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
(3)  In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other processes against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate a violation of this section. 
(4)  A police officer apprehending a person for a violation of this section may impound the skateboard, roller skate, roller blade, scooter or similar non-motorized wheeled device. The skateboard, roller skate, roller blade, scooter, or similar non-motorized wheeled device shall be released by the police department only after payment of the fines and costs and upon proper identification and proof of ownership. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) must appear at the police department with a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 80-642, § 1, 1-23-07)  
Secs. 22-118—22-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
 
Sec. 22-136. - Indecent exposure. 
No person shall knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his or her person in any public place. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a.  
Sec. 22-137. - Prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to commit or afford an opportunity to commit prostitution or to do any act involving the touching or contacting of the genitals of another. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or offer to engage the services of another person for an act of prostitution, or an act involving the touching or contacting of the genitals of or by another, by the payment in money or other forms of consideration. 
(b)  This section does not apply to law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties as a law enforcement officer. 
(c)  Upon conviction for violation of this section, if the violation occurred in a public place outside of a building, the defendant shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for not less than thirty (30) days and shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
Upon conviction for violation of this section, occurring other than in a public place outside of a building, the defendant shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1967, § 8-201(b); Ord. No. 80-283, § 1, 4-26-83; Ord. No. 80-373, § 1, 3-14-89) 
State Law reference— Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq.  
Sec. 22-138. - Gambling. 
(a)  Maintaining, permitting or using. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any common gambling house or gaming room, or to permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or her, any apparatus or devices used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus or device or to assist any other person to use the same for gaming or gambling purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any policy or pool slips, tickets, checks, or any paper which is marked with any kind of notation indicating any form of gambling, and the possession of such writing or device shall constitute, prima facie evidence of intention to use same for gambling. 
(b)  Frequenting, loitering or attending gaming places. No person shall attend, loiter in or about, or frequent any place where gaming or gambling is offered or permitted, or any place operated or occupied as a common gaming or gambling house or room, with the knowledge that this activity, business or occupation is being conducted, and with the intent to participate in the unlawful activity. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to any exemption set forth in the Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIV, entitled Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq., as amended, and all other applicable state and federal laws where there is an exemption or where gaming is permitted. 
(Code 1967, § 8-206; Ord. No. 80-727, § 1, 1-13-15) 
Cross reference— Gambling devices prohibited as vending machines, § 40-3. 
State Law reference— Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq.  
Sec. 22-139. - Public display of sexually explicit pictures. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Sexually explicit pictures means any picture, photograph, drawing, or other visual representation or image depicting uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post pubertal human genitals or pubic areas, or depicting human sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation or touching of genitals or pubic areas of the human male or female, or sexual stimulation. The visual representation shall be judged without regard to any covering which may be affixed or printed over the material in order to obscure genital areas in a depiction otherwise falling within the definition of these subsections. Works of art or of anthropological significance are not included within the definition of this paragraph. 
(2)  Public display means the display or placement of sexually explicit pictures, as defined in subsection (a)(1), on or in a newsstand, display rack, window, showcase, display case or similar place so that said pictures are easily visible from an aisle or passageway in a premises open to the public or from an outside window, observable from a common walk or mall, or from any portion of the interior of a premises, generally open to minors at the time of such display. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person acting in a managerial capacity or being the owner, proprietor, operator, or manager of a premises to knowingly and intentionally place sexually explicit pictures upon public display, for purposes of sale or distribution of any material covered by the sexually explicit picture, or fail to take prompt action to remove such a display from property in his possession or under his control after learning of its existence. 
(Ord. No. 80-535, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 22-140. - Registered sex offender restrictions. 
(1)  Purpose. This ordinance is intended to protect children and other potential victims of sex crimes in certain public areas owned, maintained, and operated by the City of Warren. 
(2)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  City park or playground. The complete list of city parks shall be available from the director of parks and recreation, which includes, at the time of adoption of this section, the following: Altermatt Park, Austin-Dannis Park, Bates Park, Burdi Park, Busse Park, Butcher Park, Eckstein Park, Groesbeck Park, Halmich Park, Hartsig Park, Jaycee Park, Licht Park, McGrath Park, Miller Park, Rentz Park, Rinke Park, Shaw Park, Steinhauser Park, Trombly Park, Veterans Park (Formerly Council Park), Warren Community Park, Wiegand Park, Winters Park, and Underwood Park. 
(b)  Premises. The building structure or curtilage surrounding the building, parking lot, playground area, playing field, or other area designated for parks or recreation activities. 
(c)  Recreation facilities. Includes the premises and facilities located at the Owen Jax Recreation Center and Warren Community Center; or any other recreation facility that may be established and operated from time to time by the department of parks and recreation. 
(d)  Registered sex offender. A person convicted of a certain offense or offenses that is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to MCL 28.721, et seq. 
(3)  Restrictions. Registered sex offenders as defined in subsection 1(d) shall be restricted from entering upon the premises of the any city park or playground or any city recreation facility, except that any individual may enter the premises for the limited purpose of attending a public meeting of the Warren City Council or any other government agency that conducts regular or public meetings pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261, et seq. Further, registered sex offenders are prohibited from obtaining a pass or maintaining a paid membership with the Warren Community Center for use of the facilities. 
(4)  Exemption. The restrictions contained within this Ordinance shall not apply: if an individual was convicted of committing or attempting to commit a violation solely described in Section 520e (1) (a) of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520e, and at the time of the violation was 17 years of age or older but less than 21 years of age and is not more than 5 years older than the victim (pursuant to MCL 771.2a (12) (b)). 
(5)  Penalties. A person who violates section 22-140 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both. 
(Ord. No. 80-661, § 1, 10-9-07)  
Secs. 22-141—22-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Fireworks, explosive toys and devices, § 13-16 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-151. - Abandonment of refrigerators, etc., with air-tight doors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling, or in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, trunk, or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator, trunk or other container, without first removing the locks or doors therefrom. 
(Code 1967, § 8-213) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d.  
Secs. 22-152—22-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Firearms and weapons, MCL 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-161. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or other instrument producing a like effect and noise within the city, except in the lawful defense of his or her person or property or as otherwise permitted by law. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the police department pistol range. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the use of any instrument producing an effect and noise simulating the firing of a firearm. The instrument must be a stage prop and must be incapable of firing live ammunition. The stage prop must be operated by licensed and insured film crews or their employees or agents working within the City of Warren. A certificate of proof of insurance and schedule of dates, times and locations for filming shall be submitted to the commissioner of police, the mayor, the city clerk, and the director of public works not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of filming within the City of Warren. 
(Code 1967, § 8-209(1); Ord. No. 80-483, § 1, 6-13-95)  
Sec. 22-162. - Discharge of bow and arrow. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a bow and arrow having a penetrating tip or head within the city, except in lawful defense of his or her person or property or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Code 1967, § 8-209(2))  
Sec. 22-163. - Discharge of air gun. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 8-209(5)) 
State Law reference— BB guns, MCL 752.851.  
Sec. 22-164. - Hunting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 8-209(3)) 
State Law reference— Game law, MCL 311.1 et seq.  
Sec. 22-165. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-690, § 1, adopted Oct. 26, 2010, repealed § 22-165, which pertained to carrying loaded firearms and derived from Code 1967, § 8-209(4).  
Sec. 22-166. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-690, § 2, adopted Oct. 26, 2010, repealed § 22-166, which pertained to carrying concealed weapons and derived from Code 1967, § 8-209(7).  
Sec. 22-167. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-690, § 3, adopted Oct. 26, 2010, repealed § 22-167, which pertained to carrying firearms over 30 inches and derived from Code 1967, § 8-209(8).  
Sec. 22-168. - Dangerous weapons. 
(a)  No person shall possess on their person, on a bicycle, on a motorcycle or motor bike, or in the passenger compartment of any vehicle, any machine gun, sawed-off shotgun, sling shot, sand club, sand bag, switch-blade knife, stiletto, dagger, dirk, razor, knife having a blade over three (3) inches in length, metal knuckles, martial arts weapon, gun, handgun, pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, BB gun, pellet gun, air gun, imitation pistol, or any dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument, or any instrument attached to or designed to be attached to any firearm for the purpose of silencing, lessening, or muffling the noise of the firing of any firearm; except as otherwise permitted by law. A person convicted of a violation of this section shall forfeit to the city such weapon or instrument. 
(b)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall possess a blow gun or a crossbow. 
(c)  No person shall sell blow guns or crossbows to any one under the age of eighteen (18). 
(d)  Sections (b) and (c) shall not prohibit the possession of or sale of a crossbow to physically disabled persons twelve (12) years or older when said possession and/or purchase is pursuant to a permit granted by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, and such person is in possession of said permit. 
(Code 1967, § 8-210; Ord. No. 80-452, § 1, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 80-502, § 1, 10-22-96) 
State Law reference— Dangerous weapons, MCL 750.224 et seq.  
Sec. 22-169. - Exemption for skeet, trap or bow and arrow shooting range. 
None of the provisions of sections 22-161—22-167 shall operate so as to prevent any person or organization from maintaining and operating a skeet, trap or bow and arrow shooting range, or other shooting facility, at any location within the city, provided the written approval of the police commissioner is obtained annually; and provided, further, that such written approval shall be at all times posted upon the premises when such skeet, trap or bow and arrow shooting range or other shooting facility shall be in operation; and provided, further, that such approval may be suspended by the city council pending investigation by and recommendation from the police commissioner whereupon such approval may be revoked by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 8-209(6))  
Sec. 22-170. - Forfeiture and disposal of pistols declared contraband. 
(a)  The word "pistol," as used in this section, shall be defined in accordance with MCL 8.3t and MCL 28.421(e). 
(b)  All pistols carried or possessed contrary to the provisions of this Code or state or federal law are hereby declared contraband and are forfeited to the chief of police to be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 80-638, § 1, 10-10-06)  
Secs. 22-171—22-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, amended Art. VIII, §§ 22-191—22-211, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VIII, §§ 22-191—22-211, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1967, §§ 8-221—8-228; Ord. No. 80-331, § 1, adopted Dec 23, 1986; Ord. No. 80-547, adopted Nov. 23, 1999; and Ord. No. 80-636, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2006. 
State Law reference— Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-191. - Marihuana possession, use, or transfer prohibited; medical marihuana transport or possession in a vehicle limited to a locked case. 
(a)  Except as permitted by state or federal law, it is unlawful for person to possess, use, or transfer marihuana as defined in the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq., as amended; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Section 801 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Except as lawfully permitted by state or federal law, it is unlawful for a person to use marihuana as defined in the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq., as amended; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Section 801 et seq., as amended. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person to transport or possess usable marihuana as defined by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421, et seq., as amended, in or on a motor vehicle or self-propelled vehicle designed for land travel, except if the usable marihuana is either: 
(1)  Enclosed in a closed case that is carried in the trunk of the vehicle; or 
(2)  Enclosed in a closed case that is not readily accessible from the interior of the vehicle, if the vehicle in which the person is traveling does not have a trunk. 
(d)  A case is a portable, non-transparent container with a lid, top, cover, or cap which can be used to enclose an object, substance, or material. 
(e)  A person who violates subsection (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. A person who violates subsection (b) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days and/or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who violates subsection (c) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days and/or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 80-716, § 1, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 80-737, § 3, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 22-192. - Loitering, frequenting, living in premises connected with illegal controlled substance. 
No person shall loiter in or about, frequent, or live in any building, structure, automobile, trailer, boat, boathouse, airplane, or on any premises or other place whatsoever where controlled substances as defined by the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq., or narcotic paraphernalia as defined in division 2 herein, are illegally used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away or possessed with the knowledge that the illegal use, sale, distribution, possession, business, occupation or other activity is being conducted, and with an intent to participate in the unlawful activity. 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11)  
Sec. 22-193. - Fraudulent representation relating to the medical use of marihuana to avoid arrest or conviction. 
(a)  It is illegal for a person or entity to make a fraudulent representation of any fact or circumstance relating to the medical use of marihuana, as defined by Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26423(e), (f), to a police officer in order to avoid arrest or prosecution. 
(b)  A violation of subsection (a) is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  A violation of this section may be grounds for an arrest or charges under a separate ordinance or law for making a false statement to a police officer, and may otherwise be subject to penalty or punishment under such other offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-737, § 4, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 22-194. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-195. - Exemption for common carriers, public officers, etc., while engaged in lawful transportation or performance of duties, etc. 
The provisions of this chapter restricting the possession of controlled substances as defined by the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq., or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq., or narcotic paraphernalia as defined in division 2 herein, shall not apply to common carriers or warehouses or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation or lawful storage of such controlled substances or narcotic paraphernalia or to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties, nor to temporary incidental possession on the part of employees or agents of persons lawfully entitled to possession. 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11)  
Secs. 22-196—22-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 22-206. - Definitions. 
(a)  The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq., including but not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substance; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)  Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing illegal controlled substances; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in the parenteral injection of illegal controlled substances in the human body; 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing illegal marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion mask; 
e.  Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials, razor, mirror, bullet or snorter; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia" the following factors shall apply: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use or intended use; 
(2)  The proximity of the object to a controlled substance as defined by the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq.; 
(3)  The existence of any residue on the object from a controlled substance as defined by the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq.; 
(4)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq.; 
(5)  Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(6)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(7)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(8)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(9)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(10)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(12)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
(13)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11)  
Sec. 22-207. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia, as defined herein, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11)  
Sec. 22-208. - Manufacture, delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, as defined herein, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; or the United States Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sec. 801 et seq. 
(b)  Pursuant to MCL 333.7453, before a person is arrested for a violation of subsection (a), the attorney general, prosecuting attorney or city attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less than two (2) business days before the person is to be arrested, that the person is in possession of specific, defined material that has been determined to be drug paraphernalia, as defined herein. The notice also shall request that the person refrain from selling or offering for sale the material and shall state that if the person complies with the notice, no arrest will be made for a violation of subsection (a). If a person complies with the notice, the compliance is a complete defense for the person against a prosecution, as long as the compliance continues. 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11)  
Sec. 22-209. - Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. 
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster, or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as illegal drug paraphernalia, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11)  
Sec. 22-210. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists, and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from an other medical condition lawfully utilizing a controlled substance and or drug paraphernalia, as defined herein, in accordance with applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 80-692, § 1, 3-8-11)  
DIVISION 3. - SYNTHETIC MARIHUANA AND DANGEROUS PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 22-211. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of this city from the threat posed by the availability of synthetic marihuana and other dangerous products by prohibiting persons from trafficking in, possessing, and using them in the city. 
(b)  Findings. 
(1)  The city finds that synthetic marihuana, consisting of plant or other material treated with chemicals or other substances that have not been approved for human consumption by the FDA, is being marketed and sold as herbal incense, potpourri, or other uses unrelated to inhalation or ingestion and is being used in the same manner and for the same purposes as marihuana, with that use having become increasingly popular, particularly among teens and young adults. 
(2)  The city further finds based on information and reports from health centers, hospitals, doctors, and police agencies, that individuals who use synthetic marihuana experience dangerous side effects including convulsions, tremors, seizures, hallucinations, unconsciousness, anxiety attacks, dangerously elevated heart rates, increased blood pressure, vomiting, and disorientation, evidencing that these herbal incense products are harmful if consumed and present an imminent and significant public health danger to persons consuming such products and other persons coming in contact with them. 
(3)  The city further finds that, notwithstanding the high potential for abuse, and lack of any accepted medical use, the ability of the state to prohibit all forms of synthetic marihuana as a controlled substance has been frustrated due to the changing nature of the chemicals used in the manufacturing process. 
(4)  The city further finds that in addition to synthetic marihuana, there may be other dangerous products or materials containing chemicals or substances, that while not approved for human consumption, are or may be marketed and sold in a form that allows for such consumption and which, upon consumption, may result in the same serious side effects and public health dangers as synthetic marihuana. 
(Ord. No. 80-701, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 22-212. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words and phrases have the meanings indicated: 
Act means the controlled substances provisions in Article 7 of the Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7101 to MCL 333.7545, as amended, which is hereby adopted by reference as a part of this division. 
Chemical agent means any chemical or organic compound, substance, or agent that is not made, intended and approved for consumption by humans. 
Consumable product or material means a product or material, that regardless of packaging disclaimers or disclosures that it is not for human consumption or use, is in a form that readily allows for human consumption by inhalation, ingestion, injection, or application, through means including but not limited to smoking, or ingestion by mouth with or without mixing with food or drink. 
Controlled substance means a substance included as a controlled substance in schedules 1 through 5 of the Act or a substance temporarily scheduled or rescheduled as a controlled substance as provided in the Act. 
Controlled substance analogue has the same meaning as defined in the Act, which is a substance, the chemical structure of which is substantially similar to that of a controlled substance in schedules 1 and 2 of the Act. 
Dangerous product means a consumable product or material containing a dangerous substance. 
Dangerous substance means: (i) a chemical agent that under Section 2451 of the Act, MCL 333.2451, has been determined by the local health officer to be or present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans when present in a consumable product or material; and (ii) a chemical agent in a consumable product or material unless that chemical agent is conspicuously identified and described in writing on the packaging of the product, and has not been previously determined by the city or other governmental authority to be or present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans when present in that type of consumable product or material. 
Synthetic cannabinoids means a chemical compound, substance or agent including but not limited to the following: 
AM cannabinoids being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents created by Alexandros Makriyannis or his research group and identified as AM-087; AM-251; AM-281; AM-356; AM-374; AM-381; AM-404; AM-411; AM-630; AM-661; AM-678; AM-679; AM-694; AM-855; AM-881; AM-883; AM-905; AM-906; AM-919; AM-926; AM-938; AM-1116; AM-1172; AM-1220; AM-1221; AM-1235; AM-1241; AM-1248; AM-2201; AM-2212; AM-2213; AM-2232; AM-2233; AM-2120; AM-4030; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with the state and federal law. 
CP cannabinoids being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents identified as CP-47, 497; (C6)-CP-47, 497; (C7)-CP-47, 497; (C8)-CP-47, 497; (C9)-CP-47, 497; CP-50, 556-1; CP-55, 244; CP-55, 940; CP-945, 598; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
HU cannabinoids being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents synthesized at the Hebrew University and identified as HU-210; HU-211; HU-243; HU-308; HU-320; HU-331; HU-336; HU-345; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law. 
JWH cannabinoids being synthetic chemical compounds, substances or agents created by John W. Huffman or his research group and identified as JWH-007; JWH-015; JWH-018; JWH-019; JWH-030; JWH-047; JWH-048; JWH-051; JWH-057; JWH-073; JWH-081; JWH-098; JWH-116; JWH-120; JWH-122; JWH-133; JWH-139; JWH-147; JWH-148; JWH-149; JWH-161; JWH-164; JWH-166; JWH-167; JWH-171; JWH-175; JWH-176; JWH-181; JWH-182; JWH-184; JWH-185; JWH-192; JWH-193; JWH-194; JWH-195; JWH-196; JWH-197; JWH-198; JWH-199; JWH-200; JWH-203; JWH-205; JWH-210; JWH-213; JWH-229; JWH-234; JWH-249; JWH-250; JWH-251; JWH-253; JWH-258; JWH-300; JWH-302; JWH-307; JWH-336; JWH-350; JWH-359; JWH-387; JWH-398; JWH-424; and other substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with the state and federal law. 
Synthetic marihuana means a consumable product or material that contains a synthetic cannabinoid or other dangerous substance, which on the date this division was added to the Code, included herb and herbal incense products marketed and most commonly known as K-2 and Spice. 
Traffic and trafficking means to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, transfer, or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, or transfer. 
Transfer means to dispose of a controlled substance to another person without consideration and not in furtherance of commercial distribution. 
(Ord. No. 80-701, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 22-213. - Trafficking prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to traffic, or knowingly allow trafficking on property owned or controlled by that person, in any of the following: 
(a)  A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance or controlled substance analogue. 
(b)  A dangerous product. 
(c)  Synthetic marihuana. 
(Ord. No. 80-701, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 22-214. - Possession and use prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use, or knowingly allow the possession and use on property owned or controlled by that person, of any of the following: 
(a)  A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance or controlled substance analogue. 
(b)  A dangerous product. 
(c)  Synthetic marihuana. 
(Ord. No. 80-701, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 22-215. - Probable cause evidentiary presumption. 
In recognition that the presence of a controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, synthetic cannabinoid, or dangerous substance in a consumable product or material may require laboratory testing that cannot be done at the time a violation of this division is believed to have occurred, for purposes of determining the existence of probable cause, it shall be presumed that a consumable product or material contains one (1) or more of those substances if it is being or has been marketed or sold for a price that is substantially higher than the price at which the same quantity of a similar and comparable product or material that is known to not contain such substances can be purchased. 
(Ord. No. 80-701, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 22-216. - Penalties. 
The penalty for a violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 80-701, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 22-217. - Severability. 
Should any subsection, subdivision, clause or phrase of this section be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this section as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so invalidated. 
(Ord. No. 80-701, § 1, 6-12-12)  
Secs. 22-218—22-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES ON SCHOOL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 22-231. - Permission of principal required for presence on school premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not a student or employee of any school located in the city, or parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein, to remain within any school during normal school hours, or on any lands owned, occupied or used by any school within the city and adjacent to a school, without reporting directly to the main office of the school and securing the written permission of the principal or person in charge of the school. 
(b)  The term "student" as used herein is hereby defined as any person of school age and enrolled in the school at which he or she then is present. 
(Code 1967, § 8-238(1))  
Sec. 22-232. - Hours grounds and buildings closed to public; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or remain upon any school grounds or in any school building between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to employees of the school, and provided further that this section shall not apply during the conduct of any activity under the direction, supervision or auspices of the school. 
(Code 1967, § 8-238(2))  
Sec. 22-233. - Defacing buildings, etc. 
No person shall mark with any substance, or in any other manner deface or do damage to, any building owned, occupied or otherwise used as a school within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 8-233) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.  
Sec. 22-234. - Damaging fences, fixtures, etc. 
No person shall mark with any substance, or in any other manner deface or do damage to, any fence, tree, lawn or other fixture situated on lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 8-234) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.  
Sec. 22-235. - Disturbing peace or good order. 
No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building in which a school or any class thereof is in session, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet or good order of such school session or class thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 8-235) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170.  
Sec. 22-236. - Disturbing gatherings or functions. 
No person, while on public or private lands adjacent to any building or lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city, in or on which any gathering or function is in progress, whether in the day or nighttime, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of such gathering or function. 
(Code 1967, § 8-236) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170.  
Sec. 22-237. - Alcoholic liquors prohibited. 
No person shall consume, possess or keep any alcoholic liquors, in any public school building, land or premises. 
(Code 1967, § 8-238(3)) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquors generally, Ch. 4.  
Sec. 22-238. - Borrowing money or valuable thing from student. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow or attempt to borrow any money or thing of value from any student in any public, private or parochial school or on any public, private or parochial school property in the city or during any time when any such student is going to or returning from any regularly scheduled session of any such school, without first obtaining the written approval of the principal of such school or other person designated by the principal to issue such written approval. 
(Code 1967, § 8-239)  
ARTICLE X. - MINORS AND PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 80-527, adopted Jan. 13, 1998, transferred the provisions of former §§ 22-239 through 22-242 to §§ 22-250 through 22-253. Previously, Ordinance No. 80-469, adopted Oct. 25, 1994, transferred the provisions of former §§ 22-114 and 22-115 to §§ 22-239 and 22-240 and transferred former § 22-10, to § 22-241 of this Art. X. 
 
Sec. 22-239. - Tobacco products on school property. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  School district means a school district, local act school district, or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the school code of 1976, Public Act. No. 451 of 1976, being MCL 380.1 to 380.1852; a joint high school district formed under Part 3a of Public Act. No. 451 of 1976, being MCL 380.171 to 380.187; or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these. 
(2)  School property means a building, facility, or structure and other real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district. 
(3)  Tobacco product means any product or substance that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, dipping tobacco, dissolvable tobacco, snus, and chewing tobacco; or any product or substance that is used in creating vapor (aerosol) containing nicotine or other toxicants meant for human consumption, including, but not limited to, all electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), e-cigars, e-hookah, vape pens, personal vaporizers, electric pipes, and liquid nicotine product (e-liquid, e-fluid, e-juice, etc.). This does not include any product approved by the Food and Drug Administration for sale as a drug or medical device and used by a person with a valid prescription for its use. 
(4)  Use of tobacco product means any of the following: 
a.  Possessing a lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, lighted pipe, or other lighted tobacco product. 
b.  Activating an electronic cigarette or other device used for creating vapor containing nicotine or other toxicants. 
c.  Inhaling or chewing a tobacco product. 
d.  Placing a tobacco product in a person's mouth. 
(b)  A person shall not use a tobacco product on school property, except as otherwise provided. A violation of this section is a civil infraction which, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(c)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to that part of school property consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open air stadium, during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours. 
(2)  After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-747, § 1, 12-20-16) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on the Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products, 81 Fed. Reg. 28974 (May 10, 2016) (to be codified at 21 C.F.R. pts. 1100, 1140, and 1143).  
Sec. 22-240. - Fighting on school property. 
No person shall, while in any building or on any property owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school incite, participate or otherwise be involved in any fight or other physical confrontation with another. The violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 22-241—22-249. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-250. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Hours. No person age twelve (12) and under shall be permitted, caused or allowed to be upon the public streets or in any public place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No person age sixteen (16) and under shall be permitted, caused or allowed to be upon the public streets or in any pubic place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall loiter, idle, wander or play upon any public street, alley, park, mall, playground or other public place within city during the hours when the minor is required to attend school as required by state law. 
(c)  Responsibility of parents, guardians, etc, for compliance with section. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of a minor under seventeen (17) years of age to knowingly permit such minor to violate any provision of this section. 
(d)  Aiding and abetting violations of section. It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Amusement places; responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a place or places of amusement and entertainment to permit any minor or minors to enter or remain in such places of amusement and entertainment during the hours prohibited in this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply if an extension as noted in paragraph (h) is in force. 
(f)  Effect of section on state laws relative to employment of minors. Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with the state laws relative to employment of minors. 
(g)  Suspension of section by chief of police. The police commissioner or his designate shall have the authority to suspend the operation of this section upon the application of any school district, church, exchange club or similar organization for the sole purpose of permitting minors attending any function sponsored or conducted by such organization to attend the same and proceed to and from the same by the most direct route between the residence of the minor and the location of such function, and provided further that the police commissioner shall maintain in the official public safety records a written permit setting forth the periods during which the operation of this section was suspended. 
(h)  Exception upon obtaining a permit. 
(1)  To remain on public streets or in public places during the prohibited hours, all such persons must have, in addition to the consent of their parents or guardian, a written permit to be issued by the police commissioner or his designate. If the reason for being on any public streets or public places within the city by any person under the age of seventeen (17) years during the prohibited times is determined to be a necessity, then a permit valid for thirty (30) days may be issued to such person, permitting such person to be on the public streets and in public places during the prohibited times for a period not exceeding one and one-half (1½) hours beyond the prohibited time, but in no case shall a permit be issued, or a renewal thereof, for a longer period than thirty (30) days. Such thirty-day permit or a renewal thereof shall cease to be valid if the necessity for being on any public streets or in any public places terminates. 
(2)  A permit in either case, shall be issued only after a parent or guardian shall have submitted to the police commissioner or his designate a notarized written statement explaining why it is that such person for whom a permit is requested be upon the public streets or in public places during the prohibited times. The police commissioner or his designate will approve or deny said requests in writing within ten (10) working days of application. 
(3)  A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged by the police commissioner or his designate for issuing a permit as required in subsection (g)(1). Such fees shall be turned over to the city treasurer. 
(i)  Exceptions to section. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  A minor accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or 
(2)  A minor going to or returning from work; provided, that the minor's hours of employment do not violate state law; provided further, that the minor possesses a signed statement issued by his or her employer within the previous ninety (90) days setting forth the minor's hours of employment; and provided further, that such minor shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for not more than one (1) hour before the minor's work day begins and for not more than one (1) hour after the minor's work day ends; or 
(3)  A minor going to or returning from night school; provided that the minor possesses proof of enrollment in a public or private school, college, or other educational institution licensed or recognized by the Michigan Department of Education; provided further, that such minor shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for not more than one (1) hour before the minor's class at such recognized educational institution begins and for not more than one (1) hour after the minor's class ends. 
(j)  Violations and penalties. Any minor violating the provisions of this section shall be responsible for a municipal infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Any parent, guardian or other adult person, having the care and custody of a minor violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 80-374, § 1, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 80-469, § 3, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 80-477, § 1, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 22-251. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Delinquent acts shall mean those acts which violate the laws of the United States, or the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court as defined by MCL 712A.2, but does not include traffic violations. 
Illegal drugs means controlled substances obtained without a legal prescription. 
Juvenile delinquent means those minors whose behavior interferes with the rights of others or menaces the welfare of the community. 
Minor means any person under the age of seventeen (17) years residing with a parent. 
Parent means mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody of a minor or any person acting in the parent's stead who has custody or control of the minor. 
(b)  Parental duties include the following responsibilities: 
(1)  It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act; 
(2)  To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal firearms locked in places that are inaccessible to the minor; 
(3)  To know the curfew ordinance of the city (Ordinance No. 80-374, Code Section 22-250) and to require the minor to observe the curfew ordinance; 
(4)  To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school permission; 
(5)  To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be absent; 
(6)  To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from maliciously or will fully destroying real, personal, or mixed property which belongs to the city, or is located in the city; 
(7)  To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile delinquents, or from consuming alcohol beverages or illegal drugs, and to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary. 
(8)  To allow a minor to associate with or attend functions where there is a reasonable likelihood that alcoholic beverages or drugs will become available to the minor. 
(c)  Notification of parents; record of notification. 
(1)  Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any delinquent act within the city, the parent(s) of the minor shall be immediately notified by the city police department, advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason therefor, and the parent's responsibility under this section. A record of such notifications shall be kept by the youth bureau of the city police department. 
(d)  Parental violation and penalty. 
(1)  Any violation of the parental duties set forth in this section is a misdemeanor which shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. 
(2)  If a minor commits a delinquent act, the parent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor violation of this section if it is proven that any act, word, or non-performance of parental duty by the parent encouraged, contributed toward, caused, or tended to cause the commission of the delinquent act by the minor. 
a.  Upon the first conviction of a violation of this section, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
b.  Upon the second conviction of a violation of this section, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and, in addition, may be sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent participate in and complete, a court approved, community based treatment program (such as parenting skills, family services, employment and training, etc.) or, in the discretion of the court, be imprisoned for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. 
c.  Upon the third or subsequent violation and conviction, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and in the discretion of the court, imprisoned for a period of not more than ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 80-431, § 1, 4-27-93; Ord. No. 80-469, § 3, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 22-252. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-603, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2004, repealed § 22-252, which pertained to beepers and paging devices. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 22-253. - Contributing to the neglect or delinquency of a minor. 
No person shall by any act or word encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under seventeen (17) years of age to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court. 
(Ord. No. 80-469, § 5, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98) 
State Law reference— Authority, MCLA 750.145.  
Sec. 22-254. - Providing tobacco products to persons under eighteen (18) years old; signs required for sale of tobacco products at retail. 
(a)  Except as defined in subsection (c), tobacco product, as used in this section, any product or substance that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, dipping tobacco, dissolvable tobacco, snus, and chewing tobacco; or any product or substance that is used in creating vapor (aerosol) containing nicotine or other toxicants meant for human consumption, including, but not limited to, all electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), e-cigars, e-hookah, vape pens, personal vaporizers, electric pipes, and liquid nicotine product (e-liquid, e-fluid, e-juice, etc.). This does not include any product approved by the Food and Drug Administration for sale as a drug or medical device and used by a person with a valid prescription for its use. 
(b)  A person shall not sell, give, or furnish any tobacco product to a person under eighteen (18) years old. 
(c)  A person who sells tobacco products, as defined by MCL 722.644, as amended, at retail shall post the sign required by the Youth Tobacco Act, MCL 722.641, as amended. 
(d)  A person who violates any provision of this section is responsible for a misdemeanor which, is punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), plus costs and other sanctions. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-747, § 2, 12-20-16) 
Federal Law Reference — Restrictions on the sale and distribution of tobacco products, 81 Fed. Reg. 28974 (May 10, 2016) (to be codified at 21 C.F.R. pts. 1100, 1140, and 1143).  
Sec. 22-255. - Use and possession of tobacco products by persons under eighteen (18) years old. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Tobacco product means any product or substance that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, dipping tobacco, dissolvable tobacco, snus, and chewing tobacco; or any product or substance that is used in creating vapor (aerosol) containing nicotine or other toxicants meant for human consumption, including, but not limited to, all electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), e-cigars, e-hookah, vape pens, personal vaporizers, electric pipes, and liquid nicotine product (e-liquid, e-fluid, e-juice, etc.). This does not include any product approved by the Food and Drug Administration for sale as a drug or medical device and used by a person with a valid prescription for its use. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense, plus costs and other sanctions. Pursuant to a probation order, the court may require a person who violates this section to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, if available. A probationer who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is responsible for the costs of participating in the program. In addition, a person who violates this section is subject to the following: 
(1)  For the first violation, the court may order the person to do one (1) of the following: 
a.  Perform not more than sixteen (16) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility; or 
b.  Participate in a health promotion risk reduction program, as described in this section. 
(2)  For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than thirty-two (32) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than forty-eight (48) hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(c)  A person who (1) furnishes fraudulent identification to a person under eighteen (18) years old; or (2) is under eighteen (18) years old and uses fraudulent identification to purchase tobacco products, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceed ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit a person under eighteen (18) years old from possessing tobacco products, during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment, if employed by a person licensed to sell, possess, or transport tobacco products in the regular course of business. This subsection does not exempt a person under eighteen (18) years old from liability under subsection (b), (c), and (d) of this section, if they possess tobacco products for personal use or consumption. 
(Ord. No. 80-747, § 3, 12-20-16) 
Federal Law Reference — Restrictions on the sale and distribution of tobacco products, 81 Fed. Reg. 28974 (May 10, 2016) (to be codified at 21 C.F.R. pts. 1100, 1140, and 1143).  
Sec. 22-256. - Spray paint; possession by persons under age eighteen; sale or transfer to persons under age eighteen. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "spray paint" shall mean any cans or similar containers of paint, varnish, lacquer, stain, pigment or similar solvent or substance commonly used in painting and applied by a spraying method, atomizer or similar method. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, no person under eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase or possess spray paint, nor shall any person sell or transfer possession of any spray paint to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following: 
(1)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age may possess spray paint for use at or in the course of lawful employment or for other lawful uses with written proof of the same from an employer, parent, or guardian. 
(2)  A person may sell or transfer possession of spray paint to a person under eighteen (18) years of age if the person under eighteen (18) years of age exhibits written consent from his or her employer, parent or guardian. A person selling or giving the spray paint to a person under age eighteen (18) shall record the name, address, sex, and age of the individual under age eighteen (18), in addition to the name and address of the consenting employer, parent or guardian. All data required by this section shall be kept in a permanent register available for inspection by the police department for a period of at least six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 80-469, § 2, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 22-257. - Loitering by minors. 
No minors under the age of seventeen (17) shall loiter in any place open to the general public for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose by remaining idle in essentially one (1) location either individually or in consort with others in such a manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises; or 
(3)  No minor under the age of sixteen (16) shall loiter, idle, wander, or play upon the public streets, highways, parks, malls, playgrounds or other public places of entertainment within the city during the hours when the minor is required to be in school as required by state law. The violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus cost and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 17, 1-13-98)  
Chapter 23 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for parks and recreation, § 3.1(b)(5)(b); department of parks and recreation, 17.24. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; design standards for public sites and open spaces, § 35-71. 
State Law reference— Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Authority of director of parks and recreation. 
(a)  All organized activities in public parks and playgrounds shall be at the places designated by the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  All organized games shall be at the places designated and at the times prescribed by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-503)  
Sec. 23-2. - Hours closed to public; exception. 
(a)  No person shall loiter or remain upon any public park or playground between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to employees of the department of parks and recreation, and provided further that this section shall not apply during the conduct of any activity under the direction, supervision or auspices of the department. 
(b)  If the mayor shall determine that it is to the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, he or she may amend the hours any person may lawfully use or remain on any park or playground by clearly posting on the park or playground premises a notice indicating the amended park hours. 
(Code 1967, § 4-520)  
Sec. 23-3. - Destruction of public property; prohibited. 
No person shall destroy or deface any city property placed in a public park or playground. A person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-501; Ord. No. 80-527, § 18, 1-13-98) 
Cross reference— Offenses against property, § 22-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.  
Sec. 23-4. - Destruction of flowers, shrubs, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall mutilate, destroy or injure any tree, branch, shrub, flower, flower bed, or turf in any public park or playground. 
(Code 1967, § 4-502) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.  
Sec. 23-5. - Interference with rails, posts, fences, etc. 
No person shall take down, climb over or upon, interfere with, disturb or displace or work upon any rails, posts, chains, boards, fences or other structures enclosing any public park or playground or portion thereof, except with written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-518; Ord. No. 80-571, § 1, 7-24-01)  
Sec. 23-6. - Driving and parking vehicles restricted. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, motor scooter or motor bicycle, in parks and playgrounds except on designated roadways, and no person shall park such vehicles therein except in designated parking places. Motor carts, commonly known as go-carts are prohibited in parks and playgrounds. 
(Code 1967, §§ 4-504, 4-506) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference— Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.  
Sec. 23-7. - Repairing, cleaning, etc., vehicles restricted. 
No person shall clean, wash, polish or repair or in any manner service any motor vehicle or trailer in any public park or playground, or cause same to be done. For the purpose of this section, the term "repair" shall be deemed to mean the replacement of old, worn-out parts of the vehicle with new parts, and the term "service" shall be deemed to mean the draining of oil, sludge, gasoline and water and other engine cooling fluids, for the purpose of replacing same with a new supply. This prohibition shall not apply to the changing of deflated tires or the performing of necessary emergency work on a disabled care for the purpose of immediate movement. 
(Code 1967, § 4-505) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 23-8. - Bicycle riding, model airplanes and archery restricted. 
Bicycle riding, model airplane operation and archery shall be permitted in public parks and playgrounds only at the times and in those places designated by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-507)  
Sec. 23-9. - Snowmobiles prohibited. 
The department of parks and recreation shall include as part of the notice posted at city parks words to the effect that snowmobiles are prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 5-304)  
Sec. 23-10. - Disposal of rubbish, garbage and waste materials. 
No person shall place or throw any rubbish, garbage or other waste material on the grounds of any public park or playground except in receptacles provided therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 4-508) 
Cross reference— Garbage and rubbish generally, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 752.901 et seq.  
Sec. 23-11. - Kindling fires restricted. 
No person shall kindle or build a fire in any public park or playground except in receptacles provided therefor for public use, or in private receptacles or grills provided same are placed in areas designated for the purpose. No campfires shall be kindled or built except by written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-509) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention generally, MCL 29.1 et seq.  
Sec. 23-12. - Use of drinking fountains and plumbing fixtures. 
No person shall in any manner use any drinking fountain or plumbing fixture or like appurtenances in any public park or playground except for the purpose for which the same were designed and intended. 
(Code 1967, § 4-511) 
Cross reference— Water generally, § 41-21 et seq.  
Sec. 23-13. - Hawking, peddling, sales, etc. restricted. 
No booth, tent, stall or other structure shall be erected for any purpose, and no hawking or peddling shall be done, or any article or thing sold or exposed for sale, in any public park or playground except by written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-513) 
Cross reference— Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants generally, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 23-14. - Advertising restricted. 
No person shall distribute, post, place or display political advertising matter of any kind or nature in any public park or playground. No person shall distribute, post, place or display any placard, notice or advertisement of any kind, other than of a political nature, in any public park or playground, except by written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-515) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 23-15. - Playing golf restricted. 
No person shall drive or putt a golfball or otherwise practice the game of golf in a public park or playground, except within such area or areas as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-517)  
Sec. 23-16. - Animals prohibited; exception. 
Dogs, cats or other animals within the confines of any park or playground, whether or not the animals are attached to a leash, are prohibited. 
(1)  Exceptions. 
a.  Dog parks. Upon written permission of the director of parks and recreation: 
1.  Leashed dogs shall be allowed in parks containing a dog park for the purpose of traveling directly to and from the designated dog park area. 
2.  Dogs, whether leashed or unleashed, shall be allowed in designated dog park areas consistent with posted rules as promulgated by the director of the department of parks and recreation. At a minimum, the rules shall include a provision requiring that dogs must be fully vaccinated against rabies, DHLP, bordatella, and parvovirus by a licensed veterinarian. 
3.  The director of the department of parks and recreation, or his/her department-employed designee, has the sole authority to revoke permission to use the designated dog park areas, including confiscation of key passes and swipe cards. Accordingly, when the director or his/her designee learns or discovers that a person or persons used the designated dog park areas in violation of or not consistent with the rules promulgated by the director, the director or his designee shall: (1) provide the person or persons with notice of the violation within fourteen (14) days upon learning or becoming aware of the alleged violation; and (2) provide the person or persons the opportunity to respond to the alleged violation in writing. The director or his/her designee shall make a determination based upon violation and response, if any. 
b.  City parks—General. Dogs may be permitted in city parks except as otherwise stated, and provided the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  The dog must be properly licensed, and fully vaccinated; 
2.  The dog shall be attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog in such manner as to be kept under the control of the person accompanying the dog, and the leash may not exceed the length of eight (8) feet; 
3  Any person having charge of any dog in the city park shall have in his her immediate possession a trowel, shovel or appropriate device, and a container, for the purpose of removing any feces released by the dog, and for proper disposal of the fecal material. All dog feces must be properly disposed of in accordance with subsection 7-5(a) of the Code of Ordinances. 
4.  The dog shall not be allowed within the playground area, playing fields or areas reserved for organized sporting events, or any other area restricting dogs as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation in accordance with this section, and other than a service dog or service animal, subject to section 7-9 of the Warren Code of Ordinances; 
5.  The person accompanying the dog or having charge of the dog in a park complies with: 
i.  All other ordinances of general applicability, including dog ordinances against dogs from running at large and vicious dogs; 
ii.  All rules as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation. 
6.  Restrictions. Privileges under this subsection (1)b may be restricted as follows: 
i.  The director of parks and recreation, or his or her designated employee, is authorized to order a dog to be removed from a park, or to suspend or revoke privileges to bring a dog into a park, for violations of one (1) or more conditions in this subsection have been violated. It is a misdemeanor to bring a dog into a park after any such privileges are suspended, or to remain in a park with a dog after being told to leave the park. 
ii.  A person aggrieved by a decision of the parks and recreation director or designee may respond in writing within fourteen (14) days of the decision. The director will make the final decision based upon the violation and the response. 
iii.  Upon review and recommendation of the parks and recreation commission, the director of parks and recreation, may exclude dogs from a certain park or from certain areas of a park, other than those restricted areas specified in this section, when there are recurring or severe violations of this section, the conditions for dog access in a park, designated park rules, city ordinances of general applicability, or if the presence of dogs at a park becomes a nuisance so as to disturb, annoy or interfere with the use or enjoyment other park patrons. No such restriction shall be imposed before a report is provided to the mayor and council. 
iv.  Dogs may be allowed in a park owned by or under the control of the downtown development authority or tax increment finance authority, or similar autonomous entity, if such entity adopts a resolution to authorize dogs in such park. 
7.  Remedies/reservation of rights. 
i.  In addition to the restrictions stated above, no person shall bring a dog into a city park in violation of the conditions set forth in subsections (1)b.1 through b.5. A violation of any provision is a municipal civil infraction, which will result in the penalty provided in section 23-19. 
c.  Venue agreement. Upon written permission of the director of parks and recreation, animals other than dogs may be permitted in a city park only if the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  The applicant enters into a written agreement ("venue agreement") with the department of parks and recreation setting forth the terms and conditions that would allow animals in a city park. This agreement shall be reviewed by the city attorney as to form and substance. 
2.  The city park is greater than thirty-five (35) acres. 
3.  The applicant obtains the proper permits, licenses, and/or approval from all necessary city departments. 
4.  The applicant procures the appropriate public liability insurance for the event or activity. Approval of the coverage shall be obtained from the insurance manager and a copy of the certificate of insurance listing the city as an additional insured shall be filed with the insurance division. 
5.  The applicant shall not be permitted to sell, assign, bequeath or transfer its exemption to any person or entity without the consent of the department of parks and recreation. Any transfer or attempt to transfer without consent may result in automatic termination of any permitted exception. 
(Code 1967, § 4-519; Ord. No. 8-566, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 80-586, § 1, 4-23-02; Ord. No. 80-613, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 80-666, § 1, 2-26-08; Ord. No. 80-749, § 1, 1-24-17) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 7.  
Sec. 23-17. - Possession of alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  [ Prohibited; penalty. ] No person or entity shall bring into, possess or consume alcoholic liquors in a city park, except as otherwise provided herein. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(b)  Exemption. Alcohol is permitted in a city park only if: 
(1)  The alcohol is sold for consumption on the premises, and 
(2)  The applicant seeking an exemption obtains city council approval by resolution authorizing the exemption. 
(c)  Definition. Civic organization. As defined by 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(4) as amended, which includes but is not limited to, an organization or association not organized for profit but operates exclusively for the promotion of social welfare, the membership of which is limited to the employees of a designated person or persons in a particular municipality, and the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to charitable, educational, or recreational purposes. 
(d)  [ Prerequisitions for exemption. ] The city council shall issue a resolution granting an exemption pursuant to section 23-17(b) if all of the following prerequisites are met: 
(1)  The applicant is a bone fide civic organization which has met the following conditions: 
a.  The civic organization maintains a mailing address in the city; 
b.  The city council has recognized by resolution the organization as a civic organization operating in the city; 
c.  The organization has been in continuous existence for one (1) year before filing its application for an exemption pursuant to section 23-17(b). 
(2)  The applicant possesses a duly authorized special license for the sale of beer and wine at retail for consumption on the premises issued by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission; 
(3)  The applicant obtains the proper permits, licenses, and/or approval from all necessary city departments, including but not limited to, the city clerk, the police department, and the planning department. Before any permit, license, or approval is authorized by any city department, the applicant must submit to the reviewing department(s) copies of all documents completed and filed with the liquor control commission, including but not limited to, Form LC 108 and any other data required pursuant to Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended, being MCL 436.1 et seq.; 
(4)  The applicant must procure the appropriate public liability insurance for the event and/or activity. Approval of the coverage shall be obtained from the city insurance manager and a copy of the certificate of insurance listing the city as a name insured shall be filed with the insurance division; 
(5)  The applicant and/or its agents are in compliance with all city ordinances; 
(6)  No person except the applicant and/or its agents is permitted to bring, carry or sell alcohol in a city park; 
(7)  The applicant shall not sell, assign, bequeath, or transfer its exemption pursuant to section 23-17(b) to any person or entity. Any attempt to transfer or any violation of any provision in section 23-17 will result in automatic revocation of any permitted exemption. 
(e)  Severability. If any part of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by any court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts or application of this section which can be given effect without the invalid part or application, provided such remaining parts are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end all provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(Code 1967, § 4-516; Ord. No. 80-314, § 1, 2-25-86; Ord. No. 80-500, § 1, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 80-527, § 18, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-644, § 1, 4-24-07) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquors generally, Ch. 4.  
Sec. 23-18. - Fighting contests prohibited. 
No person shall engage or aid in a fighting competition in a public park or playground that involves the use of such individual's hands, feet, head, or the use of weapons. This section does not apply to those persons participating in a recreational contact sport at a public park or playground, including but not limited to, football, soccer, basketball, and other organized activity approved by the parks and recreation director pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by that director. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 18, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-637, § 1, 10-10-06)  
Sec. 23-19 - Penalty. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of article I is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, except for offenses designated as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to other misdemeanor offenses provided in article I, remaining in a park with a dog after being told to leave, or bringing a dog into a park after being prohibited from doing so, as provided in this article, is a misdemeanor, which upon conviction, may be punished by up to ninety (90) days in jail and/or a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs. 
(c)  In addition to the above penalties or remedies, the city reserves all rights to enforce other city ordinances relating to animals, conduct in a park, or any other ordinance of general applicability, and to pursue the penalty or costs associated with that particular offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-637, § 2, 10-10-06; Ord. No. 80-749, § 2, 1-24-17)  
Secs. 23-20—23-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Department of parks and recreation, § 7.24. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-31. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the city a commission hereafter to be known as the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-601)  
Sec. 23-32. - Composition, appointment. 
(a)  The parks and recreation commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  One (1) member of the council, to be selected by the council annually on the Monday following the election date in November, shall serve as a nonvoting member of the parks and recreation commission for a term of one (1) year, beginning on the first day of December following his or her appointment. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-601, 2-603)  
Sec. 23-33. - Terms. 
The terms of the members of the parks and recreation commission shall be staggered so that subsequent appointments shall not all recur at the same time. The term of office for appointments to the commission commencing June 1, 2011, shall be as follows: three (3) appointments to terms of one (1) year; three (3) appointments to terms of two (2) years; and three (3) appointments to terms of three (3) years. All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years, except when an appointment is made to fill a vacancy, in which case the term of the member shall be for the duration of the unexpired term. Members shall be eligible for re-appointment to succeeding term. 
(Code 1967, § 2-601; Ord. No. 80-685, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 23-34. - Officers. 
The parks and recreation commission shall each year elect one of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. The director of parks and recreation shall serve as secretary of the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-606)  
Sec. 23-35. - Meetings. 
The parks and recreation commission shall meet monthly and hold a minimum of ten (10) meetings a year. 
(Code 1967, § 2-601)  
Sec. 23-36. - Procedure; records. 
The parks and recreation commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings.  
Sec. 23-37. - Rules and regulations. 
The parks and recreation commission shall adopt at its first meeting, or as shortly thereafter as possible, such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out its purposes as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-604)  
Sec. 23-38. - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the parks and recreation commission to study and make recommendations to the mayor and the city council with regard to recreational policy, present and future requirements for park and recreational facilities and estimates as to the costs of acquisition and maintenance of the facilities. 
(Code 1967, § 2-605)  
Sec. 23-39. - Expenditures. 
Neither the parks and recreation commission, nor any of its members, shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1805)  
Chapter 24 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 21; unlawful noise from hawking, § 21-25; hawking, peddling, sales, etc., restricted in parks, § 23-13; precious metal and gem dealers, Ch. 27; secondhand goods, Ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Charitable organizations and solicitations, MCL 400.271 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; home solicitations sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; exception for a veteran's license, MCL 35.441. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor, which shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 19, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 24-2—24-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-16. - Defined. 
In this article, "peddler" means any person who goes about from place to place, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other type of conveyance selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, and includes "hawkers" and "hucksters." 
(Code 1967, § 3-301) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-17. - Location. 
(a)  No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall be permitted a stationary location. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler to operate in a congested area where his or her operations might impede traffic or inconvenience the public. 
(Code 1967, § 3-308)  
Sec. 24-18. - Hours permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler except during the hours between 9:00 a.m and 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1967, § 3-313)  
Sec. 24-19. - Loud noises and speaking devices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any person in his or her behalf, to shout, cry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including loud speakers or sound amplifiers, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city, or upon any private premises, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell. 
(Code 1967, § 3-309) 
Cross reference— Unlawful noise from hawking, § 21-25; similar provisions for transient merchants, § 24-74; similar provisions for charitable solicitations, § 24-150.  
Sec. 24-20. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any police officer to require any person whom he or she may observe engaged in the business of peddling to exhibit his or her license, and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to exhibit his or her license, upon request, to any private citizen or police officer. 
(Code 1967, § 3-310)  
Secs. 24-21—24-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 24-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler without first having obtained a license from the city clerk as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-302)  
Sec. 24-32. - Application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be filed with the city clerk in the form and manner required by the clerk. Such application shall contain, among other things, the following information: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  The address (permanent and temporary) of the applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If the applicant be employed, the name and address of his or her employer, together with credentials establishing such relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which a license is desired; 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license number and other information that may be required; 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing such application, which photograph shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant; 
(9)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any city ordinance, and, if so, full particulars as to the nature of the offense, the court before whom conviction was had or a plea of guilty entered, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(10)  A statement by a duly licensed physician, residing or practicing within the state, dated not more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free of any infectious, contagious or communicable disease. 
(Code 1967, § 3-303)  
Sec. 24-33. - Investigation, issuance. 
(a)  The city clerk shall forward the application under this division to the police commissioner who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's moral character. After such investigation, the police commissioner shall endorse upon such application his or her approval or disapproval and forward the application to the city clerk. No license shall be issued except upon approval of the police commissioner. 
(b)  Whenever the city clerk shall be satisfied that the applicant will comply with the provisions of this article and Code, and that the results of the investigation indicate that the moral character of the applicant justify the issuance of the license, he or she shall issue the license. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-302, 3-304) 
Cross reference— Approval of city officers or department heads for issuance of licenses, § 18-7.  
Sec. 24-34. - Fees; veterans' exemption. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay the license fee as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(b)  Every honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the United States who served at least one hundred eighty (180) days of active duty service in the armed forces or has a service connected disability as a result of that service and is a resident of this state has the right to sell his or her own goods within this state if the proceeds from the sale of the goods are to be used for the direct personal benefit or gain of that former member, by procuring a license for that purpose from a clerk of any county of the State of Michigan. A veteran considering such a license under provisions of state law may peddle within the city but must comply with relevant police regulations pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 3-305; Ord. No. 80-406, § 1, 4-14-92) 
State Law reference— Exemption for a veteran's license, MCL 35.441.  
Sec. 24-35. - Plates and badges. 
The city clerk shall issue to each licensee, at the time of delivery of the license, two (2) license plates for each vehicle to be used. Such plates shall bear the words "Licensed Peddler," and the term for which the license is issued and the number of the license. License plates shall be affixed to the front and rear or on both sides of the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 3-306)  
Sec. 24-36. - Special permits to non-profit enterprises and blind persons. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue special permits after city council approval without the payment of any license fees or other charges therefor to any person or organization for the conducting or operation of a nonprofit enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when the clerk finds that the applicant operates without private profit, for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose, and to any person who is blind. For the purposes of this section, a person is blind if he is totally devoid of sight, or if his or her central visual acuity does not exceed 20/200 in the better eye with correcting lenses, or if his or her visual acuity is greater than 20/200 but is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends to an angle no greater than twenty (20) degrees, and when such fact is certified in writing by a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in the state. 
(b)  An applicant for a special permit shall submit an application therefor to the city clerk, upon forms prescribed by the city clerk, and shall furnish such additional information as shall be required by the city clerk to a determination that the applicant comes within the provisions of this section. 
(c)  A person granted a special permit under the provisions hereof shall be exempt from the requirements of the provisions of this division relative to the application for a peddler's license, but shall conform to all other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 3-312)  
Sec. 24-37. - Records required. 
The city clerk shall maintain a record of each license issued under this division and shall indicate therein all reports of violation. 
(Code 1967, § 3-311)  
Secs. 24-38—24-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 24-51. - Defined. 
An "ice cream vending vehicle," for the purpose of this article, is any vehicle used for the carrying and selling of ice cream, snow cones and similar confectionary products including, but not limited to, cotton candy, popcorn, carmel corn and peanuts upon public streets or parks. 
(Code 1967, § 5-401) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-52. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply only to ice cream vending vehicles operated on residential streets and one-half mile roads within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 5-406)  
Sec. 24-53. - Licensing. 
All ice cream vending vehicles shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18. 
(Code 1967, § 5-402) 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 24-54. - Equipment. 
(a)  Every ice cream vending vehicle shall, in addition to any other equipment required by law, be equipped with signal lamps mounted as high and widely spaced laterally as practicable which shall be capable of displaying to the front, two (2) alternately flashing amber lights located at the same level and to the rear, two (2) alternately flashing amber lights located at the same level. The light shall have sufficient intensity to be visible from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet in normal sunlight and shall be actuated by the driver of the vehicle whenever, but only whenever, the vehicle is stopped on a residential street or one-half mile road for the purpose of vending its products or is about to stop for that purpose. 
(b)  In addition to the equipment requirements mentioned in subsection (a), each ice cream vending vehicle, when operating on a residential street or one-half mile road, shall be required to letter upon the vehicle itself or to prominently display a sign attached to the vehicle warning other approaching motor vehicles to stop and then proceed with caution when the signal lamps are actuated. The warning required by this section shall be located both on the front and the rear of the ice cream vending vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 5-403)  
Sec. 24-55. - Overtaking or meeting ice cream vending vehicles. 
The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting any ice cream vending vehicle which is stopped and is displaying two (2) alternately flashing amber lights shall bring his or her vehicle to a complete stop and then proceed with caution. 
(Code 1967, § 5-404)  
Sec. 24-56. - Unlawful to vend from other than curb side. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any food or other products from an ice cream vending vehicle unless the vehicle is legally parked or to sell or offer for sale from other than the curb of a legally parked ice cream vending vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 5-405)  
Secs. 24-57—24-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-450, adopted Feb. 22, 1994, amended former Art. IV, relative to transient merchants, in its entirety to read as herein set out. The provision of former Art. IV derived from Code 1967, §§ 3-601—3-612 and Ord. No. 80-376, § 1, adopted July 25, 1989. 
State Law reference— Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 24-71. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, these words and phrases shall have the following definitions ascribed to them: 
Public sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street which is between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines and which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Public street shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Seasonal shall mean for the duration of a season or special event. 
Temporary shall mean for a duration of less than six (6) months consecutively. 
Transient merchant shall mean any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, who engages temporarily or seasonally in the retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise in this city and who for the purpose of conducting business occupies any lot, building, room, flea market space or booth, or structure of any kind. The term transient merchant shall not include: 
(a)  A person selling goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind raised, produced, or manufactured by the individual offering the same for sale from the person's own appropriately zoned property. 
(b)  A person soliciting orders by sample, brochure or sales catalog for future delivery or making sales at residential premises pursuant to an invitation issued by the owner or legal occupant of the premises. 
(c)  A person handling vegetables, fruits or perishable farm products at any established city market. 
(d)  A person operating a store or refreshment stand at a resort or having a booth on or adjacent to the property owned or occupied by him or her. 
(e)  A person operating a stand on any fairgrounds. 
(f)  A person selling at an art fair, festival or similar event at the invitation of the event's sponsor if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The sponsor is a governmental entity or nonprofit organization. 
(2)  The person provides the sponsor with the person's sales tax license number. 
(3)  The sponsor provides a list of the event's vendors and their sales tax license numbers to the city clerk. 
(g)  An organization that qualifies for exemption from taxation pursuant to Title 26 USC § 501(c)(3)(4) or § 501(d). 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 1, 2-13-96)  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-72. - Prima facie evidence of doing business. 
The transaction of business as defined in section 24-71 for a period of less than six (6) months consecutively shall be prima facie evidence that such person is a transient merchant within the meaning and intent of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 2, 2-22-94) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 445.376.  
Sec. 24-73. - Association with local merchant. 
A transient merchant shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this ordinance merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local merchant, dealer, trader, auctioneer or by conducting business in connection with, as part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 2, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 24-74. - Loud noises, speaking devices restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in his or her behalf, to shout, cry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device, including loud speakers or sound amplifiers, upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises where the sound emitted is capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 2, 2-22-94) 
Cross reference— Unlawful noise from hawking, § 21-25; similar provisions for peddlers, § 24-19; similar provisions for charitable solicitations, § 24-150.  
Sec. 24-75. - Use of public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store, display, exhibit, sell or deliver any goods, wares or merchandise or any other objects or materials, in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, park, or other public place without first securing a special permit from the city council pursuant to section 34-4 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 2, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 24-76. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Police officers and other authorized inspectors of the City of Warren shall be permitted ready access to the licensee's premises at any time during business hours for purposes of inspection, investigation, observation or to otherwise ascertain the manner in which such business is conducted. The licensee shall at all times provide the police officers or other authorized representatives with access to the books of the business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of police officers and the city inspectors of the city to examine all places of business and persons subject to the provisions of this article, to determine if this article has been complied with, and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be in violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 2, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 2, 2-13-96)  
Secs. 24-77—24-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 24-91. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in such business without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 24-92. - Application. 
Applicants for a transient merchant license shall file a sworn application with the clerk signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all the partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation and containing the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person who will manage or supervise the applicant's business while conducted in the city; the local address of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise; the name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any, and if a corporation under the laws of what state the same is incorporated; 
(2)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the person who will manage or supervise the applicant's business while conducted in the city; 
(3)  The location where the applicant proposes to conduct the business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business will be conducted; 
(4)  Any other location, other than the permanent place of the applicant's business, where the applicant conducted a transient business within the last six (6) months, including a statement as to the nature of the business and the complete address of any building or office in which the business was conducted; 
(5)  A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale by the applicant, the invoice value, whether the products are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or from stock in possession and sample, whether they are to be sold at auction, by direct sale or by direct sale and by taking orders for future delivery, where the products are manufactured or produced and where the products are located at the time the application is filed; 
(6)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed in order to attract customers and, if required by the city clerk, to attach a copy of all the advertising used, including handbills, circulars, newspaper advertising or otherwise; 
(7)  A statement as to whether the person who will manage or supervise the applicant's business has been convicted of any crime or violation of any city ordinance including the nature of the offense(s) and the punishment imposed; 
(8)  Credentials from the person for whom the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as representative; 
(9)  A copy of the applicant's transient merchandise license issued by the county pursuant to P.A. 51 of 1925, MCL § 445.371 et seq. 
(10)  Proof of insurance in policies an amounts as required by section 24-97. 
(11)  Proof of worker's compensation insurance or if applicable a M-D 337 form. 
(12)  Obtain and show proof of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to section 22.10 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(13)  Any other information the city clerk may deem necessary to protect the public good relating to the identity or character of the person who will manage or supervise the business or the method or plan of doing such business. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-93. - Agents. 
If the applicant is acting as agent for another person, or the applicant will have an agent performing the applicant's duties, the applicant shall be required to file with the application an instrument acknowledging the agent as the true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process on behalf of the principal in respect to any matters arising out of the business transacted under the license and the bond given pursuant to this article. The instrument shall also contain recitals that the principal consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon the agent, and when made shall be considered valid as if personally served upon the principle and shall further waive any claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgement of service or manner of service. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 24-94. - Investigation. 
No license shall be issued without the required investigation and approvals. The city clerk shall forward the application for investigation and approval as follows: 
(a)  To the police commissioner who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's moral character pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in section 18-8 of the Code of Ordinances. After such investigation, the police commissioner shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and forward the application to the city clerk. 
(b)  To the zoning official who shall review the application to determine whether the property is properly zoned for the proposed use. The zoning official shall endorse upon the application his or her approval or disapproval and forward the application to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 24-95. - Outdoor retail sales. 
In addition to the licensing requirements contained in this article, applicants proposing to conduct outdoor retail sales must obtain an outdoor retail sales permit pursuant to sections 4.44—4.55 of the Zoning Ordinance prior to the issuance of a transient merchant license. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-96. - Fee. 
Every applicant for a transient merchant license shall at the time of filing application, pay a fee based on the length of time the applicant requests to conduct business in the city as specified in section 18-18. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-97. - Insurance required. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of a transient merchant license, the applicant shall file with the city proof of a general liability insurance policy or policies issued by a company licensed to do business in this state for public liability covering injuries to persons and wrongful deaths from the negligence or wilfulness of the licensee, his or her agents, servants or employees in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 each occurrence. In addition, the policy shall name the City of Warren as an additional insured and shall state that the first named insured shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Warren for any and all liability arising out of said operations. The policy shall also include a provision that the insurer shall notify the City of Warren of any modifications or cancellation of the insurance policy or policies. 
(Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-98. - License issuance. 
Whenever the applicant has received police commissioner approval, zoning approval, and otherwise fulfilled the requirements of this article and is further in compliance with all other regulations contained in the Code of Ordinances for the City of Warren, the city clerk shall issue the transient merchant license for the time period and location specified. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-99. - License contents. 
The license shall contain the number of the license, the date the license is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of the license, the place where the business may be carried on under the license and the name of the person authorized to conduct the business. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-100. - Display of license. 
The license issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously on the licensed premises. If the person applying for the license shall desire to do business in more than one (1) place within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. Any license issued pursuant to this article is non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-101. - Records required. 
The city clerk shall deposit the fingerprint records together with the license number with the police commissioner. The police commissioner shall report to the city clerk any complaints received against the licensee and any conviction(s) for violation of this article. In addition, the city clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued, of all complaints received and of any violations. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 24-102. - Denial, revocation and suspension. 
Any license issued pursuant to this article may be denied, revoked or suspended pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 18, section 18-12. 
(Ord. No. 80-450, § 3, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 80-493, § 4, 2-13-96)  
Secs. 24-103—24-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ROUTE SALESPERSONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-111. - Defined. 
In this article, "route salesperson" means any person whether self-employed or employed by another, who travels by any vehicle on a regularly established route, from time to time in the city calling at various residences with the intention of offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or offering any service, for immediate or future delivery. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1201; Ord. No. 80-427, § 1, 3-23-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-112. - Council determination. 
The city council having determined that route salespersons call at various residences in the city, and for the protection of the occupants of such residences the city council finds that it is a matter of public welfare and safety to determine the moral character of such route salespersons and to achieve this purpose finds regulation of route salespersons is required and necessary. The city council having further determined that route salespersons generally sell items of food or services which may affect the health and welfare of the people of the city, and that regulation of route salespersons and the vehicle they use is necessary and desirable to protect and promote the public welfare, therefore to achieve this purpose, the city council adopts this article. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1202; Ord. No. 80-427, § 2, 3-23-93)  
Sec. 24-113. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer to require any person seen route selling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his or her route selling license and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1209)  
Secs. 24-114—24-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 24-126. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any route salesperson to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1203)  
Sec. 24-127. - Application. 
Applicants for a license under this division shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in the form and manner required by the city clerk, which shall state the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(10)  If the applicant proposes to engage in the sale of food or foodstuffs, a certificate from a doctor of medicine, duly licensed to practice in the state, to the effect that the applicant is free from any contagious or infectious disease. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1204)  
Sec. 24-128. - Investigation; issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application under this division, the original shall be referred to the police commissioner, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's moral character to be made as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation the moral character of the applicant is found to be satisfactory, the police commissioner shall endorse on the application his or her approval, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall issue a license to the applicant. The license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued, and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance, and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such route selling. 
(c)  If as a result of the investigation the applicant's moral character appears to be unsatisfactory, the police commissioner shall endorse on the application his or her disapproval, which shall be submitted, along with the results of his or her investigation, to the city clerk who shall not issue the license. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1207)  
Sec. 24-129. - Fees; exemption. 
(a)  Each applicant for a license under this division shall, at the time of making the application, pay the license fee specified in section 18-18. 
(b)  Any honorably discharged member of the coast guard, soldier, sailor or marine of the military or naval service of the United States, who is a resident of the state and a veteran of any war in which the United States of America has been or shall be a participant, shall have the right to take orders for, or sell, his or her own goods, wares and merchandise within the city by procuring a license therefor as herein prescribed. Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed in this division and, upon presentation to the city clerk of a certificate of honorable discharge from the coast guard, army, navy or marine corps of the United States, which certificate shall show that the applicant is a veteran of any war in which the United States has been or shall be a participant, a veteran's license shall be issued to the applicant without cost. Any person exempt by law from the payment of license fees as prescribed herein, shall comply with all other provisions of this article and upon submission of satisfactory evidence to the city clerk of such exemption, the city clerk shall issue to such applicant a license without requiring the payment of any fee, and the city clerk shall indicate upon the face of the license that same was issued, pursuant to such exemption without any fee being paid therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1206) 
State Law reference— Exemption for a veteran's license, MCL 35.441.  
Sec. 24-130. - Bond required. 
Every applicant under this division shall file with the city clerk a surety bond, running to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety acceptable and approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the business of route salespersons and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the route salesperson and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with the route salesperson, that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the route salesperson. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1208)  
Sec. 24-131. - Records required. 
The police commissioner shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this article and the city clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violations therein. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1210)  
Secs. 24-132—24-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1994, amended former Art. VI, relative to charitable solicitations, in its entirety to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Art. VI derived from Code 1967, §§ 3-2201—3-2208 and Ord. No. 80-458, adopted June 28, 1994. 
State Law reference— Charitable organizations and solicitations, MCL 400.271 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-146. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Canvass means to go about to seek orders, contributions, support, subscriptions, or aid on behalf of charitable organizations, religious organizations and community action groups. 
Canvasser means a person who canvasses on behalf of a charitable organization, religious organization or community action group. 
Charitable organization means a benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic or eleemosynary organization of persons which solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable purposes. A person, chapter, branch, area office, or similar affiliate or person soliciting contributions within the state for a charitable organization which has its principal place of business outside the state is a charitable organization. This definition does include duly constituted religious organizations no part of the net income of which inures to the direct benefit of any individual if it has received a declaration of current tax exempt status from the United States. 
Community action group means a nonprofit organization of persons whose purpose it is to canvass, solicit or obtain contributions solicited from the public for projects sponsored by that organization. 
Religious organization means any number of persons brought together for the purpose of establishing any church organization for the purpose of teaching and spreading their religious beliefs and principles. 
Solicit means the door-to-door, building-to-building, or person-to-person request for money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value including the sale or offer to sell of any thing whether of value or not, on the representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value or any part thereof, will be used for a charitable, religious, political, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic purpose. 
Solicitor means a person who solicits on behalf of a charitable organization, religious organization or community action group. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-147. - Identification required. 
Solicitors or canvassers for religious organizations, charitable organizations or community action groups are required to identify themselves and the organizations they represent, in writing to the city council twenty (20) days in advance of any solicitation or canvassing for any religious organization, charitable organization or community action group. Such identification form shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, as well as, the charitable organization, religious organization or community action group seeking permission to solicit or canvass in the city; 
(2)  The names and addresses of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitations; 
(3)  The names and addresses of all persons who will be soliciting or canvassing; 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant is a charitable organization, religious organization or community action group; 
(5)  The length of time of the solicitation or canvassing, including the specific dates and times of the proposed solicitation or canvassing. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-148. - Authorization. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an identification form seeking permission to solicit or canvass in the City of Warren, the city clerk shall immediately forward the form onto the city council for their consideration. The city council shall place the matter on the agenda to be considered within twenty (20) days of the date the identification form was filed and notify the applicant of the date set for consideration. The applicant shall appear at the council meeting to address any concerns and questions the council may have. If the city council determines that the requirements of section 24-147 have been met, the city council shall endorse its approval upon the application and forward the identification form to the city clerk. 
(b)  If the city council determines that the requirements of section 24-147 have not been met, the application shall be returned disapproved to the applicant. 
(c)  If an approval or denial is not issued by the city council within twenty (20) days of the submission of an application, it shall be presumed that the application has been approved by the city council and the city clerk shall immediately thereupon notify the applicant by letter of the authorization from the city council. 
(d)  The city clerk shall keep on file such identification form and shall notify the applicant immediately by letter of the action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-149. - Authorization and licensing exemptions. 
(a)  The authorization and licensing requirements of this article do not apply to any charitable organization determined by the Attorney General to be exempt under section 13 of the Charitable Organizations and Solicitations Act, MCL § 400.271 et seq. upon the production of a certification of exemption from the state. 
(b)  The authorization and licensing requirements of this article do not apply to any minors who reside within the city that are engaged in soliciting for an educational, religious or youth organization. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-150. - License contents. 
The license issued under this article shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is made, the date issued, the dates within which the license holder may solicit, the name of the organization or group the person is soliciting on behalf of, a picture of the solicitor or canvasser and shall contain a statement that the license does not constitute an endorsement by the city of the purpose of he solicitation or of the person or group conducting the solicitation. All licenses shall be endorsed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-151. - Display of license; transferability. 
Every solicitor or canvasser shall prominently display his/her license at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the city. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to refuse to exhibit his/her license upon request of a police officer or private citizen. Any license issued under this article shall be nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-152. - Alteration prohibited. 
No solicitor or canvasser shall change, remove, obliterate or alter in any way the license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-153. - Location. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to operate in a congested area where his/her operations impede traffic and endanger safety. 
(b)  No solicitor or canvasser shall enter onto any private premises where there is a sign posted prohibiting solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-154. - Loud noises and speaking devices restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to shout, cry, blow a horn, or use any sound device including loud speakers or sound amplifiers for the purpose of attracting attention to the solicitation or canvassing. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94) 
Cross reference— Unlawful noise from hawking, § 21-25; similar provisions for peddlers, § 24-19; similar provisions for transient merchants, § 24-74.  
Sec. 24-155. - Hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation or canvassing pursuant to this article except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Sec. 24-156. - Denial, revocation and suspension. 
Any license issued pursuant to this article may be denied, revoked or suspended pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 18, section 18-12. 
(Ord. No. 80-465, § 1, 9-13-94)  
Secs. 24-157—24-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PEDDLING OR SOLICITATION BY MINORS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Minors and parental responsibility, § 22-239 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-161. - Hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to engage in peddling, solicitation or canvassing pursuant to this chapter during school hours, unless legally excused from school; or to peddle, solicit or canvass after sunset or 8:00 p.m. whichever is earlier. 
(Ord. No. 80-484, § 1, 7-11-95)  
Sec. 24-162. - Severe weather. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to peddle, solicit or canvass pursuant to this chapter when there is a wind chill or temperature of fifteen (15) degrees above zero (Fahrenheit) or less. 
(Ord. No. 80-484, § 1, 7-11-95)  
Sec. 24-163. - Responsibility for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or organization to hire, employ, utilize or permit any minor to peddle, solicit or canvass on its behalf in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or organization that hires, employs or utilizes any minor to peddle, solicit or canvass on its behalf is responsible for the health, safety and welfare of the minors it utilizes, while peddling, soliciting or canvassing. 
(Ord. No. 80-484, § 1, 7-11-95)  
Sec. 24-164. - Display of license. 
Any minor peddling, soliciting or canvassing pursuant to a license issued under any of the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Code of Ordinances, unless exempt, shall carry and display upon request the original license issued. Duplicates or reproductions of the license which may include but are not limited to xerox copies and fax transmissions shall not constitute valid proof of licensing and any holder of such invalid license shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-484, § 1, 7-11-95)  
Secs. 24-165—24-168. - Reserved.  
Chapter 25 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); administration, Ch. 2; police, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 25-1—25-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mandate for civil service plan, § 7.28. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-21. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Appointing officer or authority means a department head or other person possessing the authority to appoint persons to fill job vacancies. 
City service means employment by the city in a position covered by civil service. 
Co-op student employee means an individual who is employed in a temporary position on an hourly basis, and who works no more than twenty-five (25) hours per week during the school year and thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) hours per week when school is not in session. Co-op student employees must be receiving educational credit for such employment. Co-op students shall not be considered to have seniority, shall receive no fringe benefits, and shall not share in equalization of overtime. 
Demotion means any change of job classification where the classification to which the employee is appointed involves less responsibility, authority or technical ability and where the maximum pay rate authorized for the position in the city pay plan is less than that authorized for the position vacated by the employee upon appointment to the new job classification. 
Eligible list means a list of individuals who are eligible for appointment to a position in the classified service. 
General employees promotional eligible list means a list of individuals in city service who are eligible for promotion to a position in the classified service, the list not being limited to individuals within a specific division or department. 
Part-time employee means an individual who is employed in a temporary position on an hourly basis, and who is routinely scheduled to work less than thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) hours per week. Part-time temporary employees shall not be considered to have seniority, shall receive no fringe benefits, and shall not share in equalization of overtime. 
Part-time seasonal employee means an individual who is routinely scheduled to work at least thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) hours per week, but for no more than one hundred twenty (120) calendar days at a time. 
Promotion means any change of job classification where the classification to which the employee is appointed and where the maximum pay rate authorized for the position in the city pay plan is greater than that authorized for the position vacated by the employee upon appointment to the new job classification. 
Qualification examination means an examination designed to determine whether or not a person possesses the minimum skill and knowledge which will enable him or her to perform the duties of a given position. 
Reemployment list means a list of individuals eligible for appointment to a position in the classified service by reason of the fact that they have been laid off. 
Residence means the place where a person has a true, fixed, permanent home, where he or she habitually sleeps, keeps his or her personal effects and has a regular place of lodging, and in which he or she is a legal voter. 
Special assignment means any appointment or employment of technical, expert or highly skilled nature to assist in or carry out a special work and which is not a regular part of the administration of the city affairs, whether or not such work shall be for a longer period than six (6) months or periodic in its nature. Special assignments shall be deemed to include audits of the city records by auditors outside the regular city employ, the employment of special counsel or special engineering services, employment of a zoning expert, employment of a person skilled in personnel problems to assist in the administration of this article or other services of similar nature to those mentioned. The specific mention of any special service shall not be deemed to exclude others that may properly come within the terms. 
Temporary appointment means any interim appointment or employment required because of an emergency or temporary vacancy caused by sick leave or other leave of absence, or pending regular appointment of eligible persons certified by the civil service board. 
Transfer means any change of job classification where the classification to which the employee is appointed involves the same degree of responsibility, authority or technical ability and where the maximum pay rate authorized for the position in the city pay plan is the same as that authorized for the position vacated by the employee upon appointment to the new job classification. 
Veteran means any person who is credited by the federal government of the United States, or any of its branches, with having wartime service between the dates specified by the federal government for the federal civil service preference in any uniformed rank of the air force, army, navy, or the marine corps of the United States, or any person in the above mentioned forces who has been issued a campaign badge for expeditionary service as specified in the federal civil service code; provided, however, in all cases the person shall have received an honorable discharge from the service in order to be entitled to the benefits of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-115; Ord. No. 80-343, § 1, 8-25-87) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-22. - Employees subject to article. 
All positions in the city's service shall be subject to the provisions of this article, except as hereinafter specifically qualified and exempted; except, however, that the city council and the mayor shall determine the status of all department heads and special personnel to be created and employed in the future. 
(Code 1967, § 2-113)  
Sec. 25-23. - Positions exempt from article. 
(a)  The following positions shall be exempt from the operation of this article, so far as appointments to, promotion in and dismissal from the service are concerned and shall serve at the will of the appointing authority: 
Members of all boards and commissions 
Deputy city clerk 
Deputy city treasurer 
Deputy council secretary 
Executive administrator to the mayor 
Private secretary—Mayor 
Stenographer-secretary, mayor's office 
Community relations coordinator, mayor's office 
Industrial commercial coordinator, mayor's office 
Sanitary engineer, waste water treatment plant 
City engineer 
Public works superintendent 
Sanitation superintendent 
Water superintendent 
Manager, insurance and safety division 
Personnel assistant 
Director of operations, housing commission 
Assistant director of operations, housing commission 
Maintenance assistant, housing commission 
Helicopter mechanic 
Crime M.I.S. specialist 
Computer programmer I 
Building and grounds superintendent 
Beautification coordinator 
Assistant controller 
Associate manager of public works 
Waste water specialist 
Administrative supervisor, public service division 
Building and safety engineering director 
Assistant library director 
Communications director 
All department heads as follows: 
City attorney 
Controller 
Director of public service 
Planning director 
Police commissioner and fire commissioner 
City assessor 
Parks and recreation director 
Library director 
Personnel director 
Labor relations director 
All part-time employees, part-time seasonal employees, co-op student employees, temporary appointments and special assignments. 
All positions fully or partially funded by grants from the federal government and which are, by virtue of such funding, subject to federal statutes, rules or regulations regarding the qualifications for such positions, but only for so long as they are so funded and subject to such federal statutes, rules or regulations. 
(b)  Provided, however, that any person hereinabove exempted except elected officials, who shall have been, prior to the adoption of this article, employed by the City of Warren, the Charter Township of Warren or the Village of Warren, in any capacity affected by this article, shall, upon discontinuance of employment in such exempted position, be reinstated to the employment and duties classification held by such person at the time of acceptance of such exempted position; and provided, further, that in the event any city employee shall be appointed to any position exempted by this article, such employee shall, upon written application therefor, receive a leave of absence for the period of time that such employee shall serve in such exempted position and such city employees who have been appointed shall, upon discontinuance of employment in such exempted position, be reinstated to the employment and duties classification held by such person at the time of acceptance of such exempted position. The titles listed above are not necessarily civil service titles but may represent working titles. 
(c)  Any person who appoints any person to a position not qualified or exempted under this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-114; Ord. No. 80-333, § 1, 2-24-87; Ord. No. 80-340, § 16, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-343, § 2, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 80-352, § 1, 5-10-88; Ord. No. 80-486, § 1, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 80-539, § 1, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 80-551, § 1, 1-25-00; Ord. No. 80-723, § 1, 8-19-14)  
Sec. 25-24. - Merit system established. 
There is hereby established a merit system for all positions in the civil service of the city, except as hereinafter qualified or exempted. All municipal personnel problems shall be approached so far as possible in a professional and impartial manner. Appointment to the city's service and promotions and transfers therein shall be based solely upon the fitness, training, seniority and experience of the individual, with no discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, height, weight, marital status, handicap, disabled veteran status or Vietnam veteran status. 
(Code 1967, § 2-101)  
Secs. 25-25—25-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Quorum of boards, § 2.4; mayor member of certain boards, § 7.7. 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions generally, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 25-36. - Created; purpose. 
There is hereby created a civil service board which shall administer the merit system for all positions in the city's service except as qualified or exempted in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102)  
Sec. 25-37. - Appointment, term. 
The civil service board shall consist of five (5) electors of the city, to be appointed by the mayor and to serve, after their initial appointment, for respective terms of three (3) years. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102)  
Sec. 25-38. - Holding public city office or participating in politics prohibited. 
No member of the civil service board shall hold any other public city office or serve on any city political committee or take active part in the management of any city political campaign. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102)  
Sec. 25-39. - Oath required. 
(a)  Every member of the civil service board shall take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by the constitution of this state before entering upon the discharge of the duties of office. 
(b)  The oath of office shall be certified by the officer administering it and filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 2-103)  
Sec. 25-39.1. - Compensation. 
Members shall receive as compensation twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month, excepting, however, that the member selected as chairperson as provided in section 25-43 shall receive thirty dollars ($30.00) per month. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102; Ord. No. 80-340, § 17, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-40. - Filling vacancies. 
If a vacancy occurs on the civil service board, the mayor shall appoint a member, as set forth in section 25-37, for the unexpired term of office. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102)  
Sec. 25-41. - Removal. 
Any member of the civil service board may be removed from office by his or her appointing authority upon notice in writing. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102)  
Sec. 25-42. - Meetings. 
The civil service board shall meet at least once during each month. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102)  
Sec. 25-43. - Officers. 
The civil service board shall elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson, and one (1) member to serve as secretary, each to serve for one (1) year. Thereafter these officers shall be elected annually. The secretary shall perform all secretarial and record-keeping functions of the board. 
(Code 1967, § 2-104)  
Sec. 25-44. - Facilities and supplies. 
The department of personnel management shall provide the civil service board with suitable and convenient quarters for carrying on its work and for conducting whatever examinations and tests are necessary and proper for the carrying out of the provisions of this article. The division of purchasing shall, upon proper requisition, supply the board with the necessary stationery, postage, stamps, and other supplies. The city council shall provide such secretarial and clerical help as may be determined by the board to be necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-105)  
Sec. 25-45. - Annual appropriation required. 
The city council shall annually make such appropriation as shall be necessary for meeting the expenses of effectually administering the merit system. All expenses incurred by the civil service board shall be paid out of the appropriation in the same manner and under the same conditions as near as may be as expenses for other departments are paid. 
(Code 1967, § 2-106)  
Sec. 25-46. - Powers and duties. 
The civil service board shall have the power to prescribe and enforce such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this article and may from time to time add to, amend or rescind any such rules. Any such amendments or changes in the rules shall be posted in conspicuous places in the respective departments of the city at least ten (10) days before their effective date. The board shall have the power to conduct and supervise qualifications of applicants for the city's service. It shall keep minutes of its own proceedings and records of its official actions. Copies of all proceedings of the board shall be furnished by the secretary to the mayor and the city council upon request. 
(Code 1967, § 2-107)  
Sec. 25-47. - Minutes, records, eligibility, tests and applications. 
The minutes of the official proceedings of the civil service board, a roster of all officers and employees in the city's service and all eligibility lists for appointment to city service shall be public records open to public inspection, subject to reasonable regulation. Applications, examination papers, tests or results, recommendations from former employers, reports of department heads concerning employees and other such memoranda as in the operation of the board are confidential, shall be kept on file for the use of the board, but shall not be open for public inspection. Such records may be made available to the employee concerned or the employee's duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1967, § 2-108)  
Sec. 25-48. - Investigations. 
The civil service board, or any member thereof authorized by the board, may make investigations of all matters pertaining to the enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations prescribed thereunder, concerning the action of any examiner or other subordinate of the board, or any person in the city service, in respect to the administration of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-109)  
Sec. 25-49. - Examiner. 
The civil service board may, subject to the approval of the mayor, appoint an examiner to conduct specific examinations and other tests held for testing the ability of applicants for the city's service. The city may, upon approval of the mayor and council, enter into a contract for the services of a person or organization skilled in public personnel administration work, to prepare and conduct such examinations and tests and otherwise assist the board in carrying out the merit system. 
(Code 1967, § 2-110)  
Sec. 25-50. - Classification system. 
The civil service board shall make or cause to be made a study of the duties and responsibilities of all positions in the city's service, to the end that a proper duties classification system and plan of compensation may be in effect at all times. 
(Code 1967, § 2-111)  
Sec. 25-51. - Schedule of compensation. 
The civil service board shall be furnished whenever requested by the board, a schedule showing the compensation for each position in the city's service. The board shall make a study of the compensation for each position in relation to the duties performed and shall from time to time make such recommendations as it deems advisable to the mayor, in order that proper pay differentials may be established between positions that differ materially in duties performed and responsibilities exercised. 
(Code 1967, § 2-112)  
Secs. 25-52—25-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NEW APPOINTMENTS 
 
Sec. 25-71. - Priorities. 
All new appointments to the civil service of the city except as hereinbefore exempted or qualified shall be made by the appointing authorities designated in the Charter and ordinances, and in accordance with the provisions of this article. All such appointments shall be based solely upon merit and the good of the service. All appointments shall be made from persons named on eligible lists furnished by the civil service board in the following order and priority: 
(1)  The name of the highest person on the reemployment list; if the list is exhausted, then will be furnished 
(2)  The name of the highest person on the general employees promotional eligible list; if the list is exhausted, then will be furnished 
(3)  The name of the highest qualified person on the police and fire civil service reemployment list. "Qualified" shall mean the person meets all the preliminary requirements of education and experience for the position; if the list is exhausted, then 
(4)  The appointing authority shall interview all individuals on the new hire eligible list who received the highest test score and appoint the person who, in the opinion of the appointing authority, is most qualified. If less than three (3) individuals received the highest score, then the appointing authority shall also interview all individuals who received the next highest score and appoint the most qualified, in his or her opinion. 
(Code 1967, § 2-118; Ord. No. 80-355, § 1, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 25-72. - Application; qualifications. 
All persons desiring employment in the city service, except to positions exempted under the provisions of this article, shall file applications with the civil service board. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older and otherwise qualified shall be eligible for the examinations and tests hereinafter provided and consequent appointment to the city's service. 
(Code 1967, § 2-119; Ord. No. 80-319, § 1, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 25-73. - Contents of applications. 
(a)  The civil service board shall require persons applying for positions in the city service to file in its office an application prior to any examination or test is given. The applicant shall state in the application, under oath or affirmation: 
(1)  His or her name, residence and post office address; 
(2)  Condition of health and physical fitness for service in the position for which the application is filed; 
(3)  Occupation and previous employment for the five (5) years immediately prior to the application; 
(4)  Such other information as may be reasonably required, touching the applicant's qualifications and fitness for public service, or otherwise as required by law, and the rules and regulations of the board. 
(b)  Blank forms for application shall be furnished by the civil service board without charge to all persons requesting same at a time and place designated by the board. 
(c)  All applications accepted in order to compile an eligible list shall be kept on file for one (1) year, except all applications received from applicants whose name was included on an eligible list shall be kept for the term of the eligible list. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-120, 2-121; Ord. No. 80-340, § 18, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-74. - Rejection; causes enumerated. 
The civil service board shall receive applications from any person desiring employment in the city service, but may reject the application of any person who is found to lack the established preliminary requirements or who is physically unfit for service in the position to which he or she seeks employment, or who is addicted to habitual use of alcoholic liquors or controlled substances, or who may have been guilty of any felony or disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed from the public service for cause, or who has made a false statement of any material fact or practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his or her application. The action of the board in rejecting an application shall be final, but the board may, prior to such final decision, in its discretion, hold a hearing and permit the applicant to appear and produce testimony in his or her behalf touching the matters concerning which his or her application is refused. 
(Code 1967, § 2-121)  
Sec. 25-75. - Physical fitness. 
All applicants for any regular position in the city service shall be required to furnish a statement relative to the applicant's physical fitness before assuming his or her duties. The director of personnel management shall determine the examining physicians to be used for this purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 2-122)  
Sec. 25-76. - Examinations—Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The civil service board shall prescribe such examinations or other tests to measure the applicant's qualifications as it shall deem reasonable and practicable for each class or kind of position in the city's service. Where practicable, such examinations or tests shall be competitive in nature. Such tests and examinations shall be held from time to time at the discretion of the civil service board to meet the prospective needs of the service. The civil service board shall adopt rules and regulations governing the giving of such tests and examinations, which rules and regulations shall give every applicant an equal opportunity for consideration and shall be open to the public. 
(b)  All examinations or tests for positions in the public service shall be practical in their character and shall relate to such matters and include such inquiries as will fairly and fully test the comparative merit and fitness of the person examined to discharge the duties of the employment sought by him or her. 
(Code 1967, § 2-123)  
Sec. 25-77. - Same—Time, place; notice. 
All examinations and tests under section 25-76 shall be open to all applicants who have fulfilled the preliminary requirements. Individuals deemed qualified by the Civil Service Board shall receive a letter through the United States Postal Service stating date, time and place upon which such examination will be held. 
(Code 1967, § 2-124; Ord. No. 80-340, § 19, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-78. - Same—Ratings. 
Each person taking any test or examination under the merit system shall be rated according to his or her attainments. The civil service board shall determine the method of making such ratings and prescribe a passing mark. The method of rating and passing mark shall be determined in advance of any examination or test. 
(Code 1967, § 2-126)  
Sec. 25-79. - Reserved.  
Sec. 25-80. - Employment lists enumerated. 
(a)  A reemployment list shall also be kept of all persons removed from the city service because of the abolishment of his or her position or for reasons of economy, or for any reason other than dismissal for cause or voluntary resignation. 
(b)  Persons already in the service who are applicants for a specific vacancy in some other position and are eligible for appointment thereto shall also be listed on a divisional promotional eligible list or general employees promotional eligible list, as the case may be. 
(c)  A reemployment list shall be kept of all persons removed from the police and fire civil service because of the abolishment of his or her position or for reasons of economy, or for any reason other than dismissal for cause or voluntary resignation. 
(d)  The names of all applicants for a position who have attained the required rating or better on the examination and who are otherwise eligible, shall be placed in the order to their relative attainment on the list of applicants eligible to appointment to the class of positions for which the examination was held. 
(e)  All eligible lists including promotional lists shall expire in two (2) years from date of certification. No eligible or promotional list shall be recertified once it has expired. This section shall not be construed to affect any reemployment list. 
(Code 1967, § 2-127; Ord. No. 80-355, § 2, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 25-81. - Filling vacancies; promotions; appointments, temporary appointments. 
(a)  An appointing officer shall immediately upon becoming aware that any position covered by civil service in his or her department is vacant or is to become vacant, give to the civil service board once it has been approved by the mayor, a written notice thereof and state whether or not he or she intends to fill the position. If the position is to be filled, the appointing officer shall specify the class, grade and title of the position, the salary, the duties thereof, and any other information regarding the same which the board may request. 
(b)  The rules provided for in this article shall provide, among other things, for the promotion in offices or positions on the basis of ascertained merit and seniority in service, or examination or test for the purpose of providing a list of eligible persons for certification and notify the appointing officer of the data and time for such examination or test. In the interval, the appointing officer may, if the needs of the service require, and with the consent of the board, make a temporary appointment for the period until a regular appointment can be made from the eligible persons certified by the civil service board. Successive temporary appointments shall not be made to the same positions; provided, however, when the number of persons on the eligible list shall be insufficient, or decline appointment, and it is impracticable to obtain a suitable eligible list due to an emergency or to special conditions over which the city has no control, the appointing authority may make successive temporary appointments, but only with the written consent of the civil service board. The term of such appointment or successive temporary appointments shall, unless otherwise stated by the board, terminate two (2) weeks following certification of an eligible list to the appointing officer. With the sole exception of temporary appointment as provided in this section and in section 25-82, all appointments to the service shall be permanent appointments, regardless of the duration of the appointment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-128; Ord. No. 80-340, § 20, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-82. - Temporary vacancies. 
In cases of emergency or to fill a temporary vacancy caused by sick leave or other leave of absence, an appointing officer may make a temporary appointment during the period of such temporary vacancy by filling the vacancy with the senior eligible employee in his or her department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-129)  
Sec. 25-83. - Positions requiring technical qualifications. 
In permanent and continuing positions employing only persons having professional or technical qualifications where there are likely to be few satisfactory applicants, and the persons qualified to serve are relatively few in number, then the civil service board may dispense with the requirements for formal tests and examinations and may prescribe other methods of determining the qualifications of the applicants; may dispense with its customary rules and regulations and proceed in an informal manner to assist the appointing authority in choosing a person qualified to fill any vacancy that may occur in such position. The board may in its discretion authorize either temporary or probationary status for such appointees; provided, however, that in case of permanent employment such employees shall become residents of the city within one (1) year from the date of such permanent employment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-130)  
Sec. 25-84. - Probationary period—Required; exceptions. 
All new appointments in the city service shall be for a probationary period of ninety (90) days. If at any time during the probationary period the appointing officer shall find the appointee unsatisfactory, he or she may dismiss such probationer and ask for the certification of new applicants. In case of such dismissal, the probationer, if he or she had civil service status in another position prior to his or her appointment to the position from which he or she is dismissed, shall automatically be restored to his or her former position; in other cases he or she may, in the discretion of the civil service board, be reinstated on the eligible list, if, after due inquiry, the board deems him or her worthy of such reinstatement. If, at the end of the probationary period, the appointing authority has found the services of the appointee satisfactory, he or she shall so notify the board and the probationer shall thereupon forthwith come under the merit system. 
(Code 1967, § 2-131)  
Sec. 25-85. - Reserved.  
Sec. 25-86. - Examinations, tests; record, inspection. 
A record shall be kept of all examinations and other tests and shall be kept on file for the private use of the members of the civil service board for no longer than one (1) year. Such records shall not be open to inspection by the general public without the consent of the civil service board except by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. Any applicant for a position or his or her duly authorized representative, however, shall at any time within sixty (60) days after taking the prescribed examination or test, be entitled to inspect any examination paper or other written test submitted by him or her and be fully informed as to his or her rating on the same. 
(Code 1967, § 2-133)  
Secs. 25-87—25-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY RESIDENCE 
 
Sec. 25-96. - Residence during employment required. 
All employees within one (1) year of appointment to a civil service position shall be required to maintain a bona fide residence within the corporate limits of the city during the period of their employment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-135)  
Sec. 25-97. - Failure to comply; separation authorized. 
Any employee who now or in the future fails to maintain a bona fide residence within the corporate limits of the city within one (1) year of appointment shall be separated from city service immediately or as soon thereafter as a qualified person can be appointed to the position held by the nonresident employee. 
(Code 1967, § 2-136)  
Sec. 25-98. - Establishment of residence. 
All individuals appointed to city service shall be required to establish a bona fide residence within one (1) year from the date of his or her appointment to the position. 
(Code 1967, § 2-137; Ord. No. 80-340, § 21, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-99. - Separation from service deemed resignation. 
All employees who are separated from city service under the provisions of this division shall be deemed to have resigned and such an entry shall be made upon their personnel records. 
(Code 1967, § 2-138)  
Secs. 25-100—25-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS 
 
Sec. 25-111. - Vacancies filled by promotion; procedure. 
Vacancies in higher positions in the classified service shall be filled insofar as practicable by promoting persons holding positions in the next lower grades in the service. Such promotions shall be based upon merit as ascertained where practicable by test, and as shown by the previous service and experience of the person promoted. When a vacancy occurs the civil service board shall determine, following consultation with the appointing authority, whether promotion is possible and practicable, and if so, what classes of employees are eligible for such promotions and whether an examination or test shall be held to determine the relative fitness of eligible employees, or whether such relative fitness shall be determined by their seniority and efficiency records or by both such examination and records. Upon the recommendation of the appointing authority, and with the approval of the civil service board, an employee may be promoted solely on the basis of a passing grade obtained on a qualification examination. 
(Code 1967, § 2-139)  
Sec. 25-112. - Promotions with classifications; related classifications. 
Promotion shall not necessarily be confined to positions within a department, but may be within a specific classification or closely related classifications of service or positions in different departments. Position vacancies shall be filled, wherever possible, in the following order: qualified personnel within the same division; qualified personnel within the same department; qualified personnel city wide. 
(Code 1967, § 2-140)  
Sec. 25-113. - Length of service required for promotion. 
No employee is eligible for promotion while serving in a probationary status. 
(Code 1967, § 2-141; Ord. No. 80-340, § 22, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-114. - Certification for promotion. 
Certification to appointing officers of the names of persons eligible for promotion shall be made in the same manner as certification of persons eligible to original appointment. A person failing to qualify for promotion shall retain his or her position and eligibility for future promotion. 
(Code 1967, § 2-142)  
Sec. 25-115. - Transfer of employees. 
An employee who desires a transfer within his or her classification to another division or department shall submit the request for a transfer in writing to the personnel director. When a vacancy occurs within the requested division or department, the employee with the greatest seniority who requested a transfer writing shall be given the opportunity to transfer, provided that promotional lists take precedence over transfer requests. 
(Code 1967, § 2-143)  
Secs. 25-116—25-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 25-126. - Employees' status after abolishment of departments and positions. 
In the case of such abolishment of any position, office or employment, the person holding such position, office or employment shall be thereby transferred to an equal job, demoted or laid off; provided, however, such person shall continue eligible for any other position in the civil service for which he or she may be qualified and shall be retained on the reemployment list by the civil service board. 
(Code 1967, § 2-144)  
Sec. 25-127. - Lay-offs—Causes enumerated. 
The department head may, for reasons of economy or for more efficient administration, or when rendered necessary by lack of sufficient appropriation, lay off any employee in his or her department. Such persons shall continue eligible for reappointment to any position or vacancy in the city's service, and the civil service board shall retain the names of any such persons on its eligible list for appointment to any position which such person is qualified to fill. 
(Code 1967, § 2-145)  
Sec. 25-128. - Same—Procedure; employees' status. 
When lay-off is necessary in a given classification, the employee with the least seniority shall be laid off and his or her name placed on the reemployment list for that classification, ranked in the inverse order of lay-off. If the employee had civil service status in another classification, he or she may request to be reemployed in that classification or may request demotion to the next lower grade in the service. Final disposition of such requests shall be made by the civil service board. When a vacancy exists in a given classification and a reemployment list exists for the classification, the person highest on the list will be notified of his or her appointment to fill the vacancy. If that person declines the appointment, such person shall be deemed to have resigned and his or her name removed from the reemployment list and the next highest person notified. A person on a reemployment list who declines appointment or who fails to respond within ten (10) days of notification, shall not be employed in that classification unless he or she completes another examination, is subsequently appointed pursuant to certification by the civil service board of an eligible list, and serves a new, full probationary period. A person's name may be removed from a reemployment list for other reasons satisfactory to the board, such as failure to maintain residency, failure of postal authorities to locate the person, and the like. 
(Code 1967, § 2-146)  
Sec. 25-129. - Demotions, suspensions, dismissals. 
Demotions, suspensions or discharges shall be made only for inefficiency, incompetency, physical or mental incapacity, insubordination, neglect of duty, misfeasance or malfeasance in office. In all cases of reduction, demotion, lay-off, suspension or dismissal of any employee or subordinate, the appointing authority shall, within five (5) working days of the effective date thereof, furnish such employee and the civil service board with written notice of the reason or reasons for such reduction, lay-off, suspension or dismissal. Such notice may be delivered to such employee by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, or in the alternative, may be delivered personally by such appointing authority to such employee. In the latter case, such appointing authority shall make and deliver to the secretary of the civil service board a verified affidavit of such personal delivery. The employee or subordinate shall have the right to make and file a written answer to the charges placed against him or her, and to file same with the civil service board within ten (10) working days from and after receipt of the notice. Nothing herein contained shall limit the power of an appointing officer or department head to suspend without pay for purposes of discipline any person under his or her supervision for a reasonable period not to exceed five (5) days; provided, however, that the civil service board shall have jurisdiction to review such suspension and to make a final determination regarding same. 
(Code 1967, § 2-147)  
Sec. 25-130. - Tenure in office, requisites; dismissal, review. 
The tenure of a position in the city's service shall be only during good behavior and efficient service. The civil service board shall have the power to review all dismissals and all suspensions imposed for more than five (5) days. 
(Code 1967, § 2-148)  
Sec. 25-131. - Filing of charges against employees, filing. 
Any charge preferred by a citizen against any person under the merit system employed by the city during his or her working hours shall be made in writing and under oath and filed with the civil service secretary. All communications to the civil service board or any member thereof touching their duties as such shall be made in writing and filed with the civil service secretary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-149)  
Sec. 25-132. - Hearing for discharge, removal, suspension—Hearing. 
In case of discharge or removal or suspension for more than five (5) days, any officer or employee feeling himself or herself aggrieved thereby shall have a right to file a petition with the civil service board within ten (10) working days from the effective date of such removal or suspension asking for reinstatement in the service or other relief and giving reasons therefor. The civil service board shall grant the petitioner a hearing, which shall be either private or public at the option of the petitioner, provided that the petitioner may be represented by a representative of his or her own choice. 
(Code 1967, § 2-150)  
Sec. 25-133. - Same—Evidence, counsel. 
The civil service board shall grant such hearing within ten (10) working days after the petition is filed. The hearing shall be deemed an investigation and not a trial, and the board shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence and procedure. It shall, however, conduct the hearing in an orderly manner, confine the scope thereof to matters set forth in the reasons for dismissal, and secure both to the petitioner and the dismissing officer a full and impartial hearing in regard thereto. Both parties shall be permitted to be represented by counsel and to produce witnesses or any other testimony they may have pertinent to the matter. The petitioner shall be entitled to first hear the testimony against him or her and to face his or her accuser. The petitioner and his or her witnesses shall then be permitted to be heard in his or her own defense. Hearsay evidence, as the term is commonly understood, excepting declarations against interest, shall not be deemed sufficient proof to warrant removal, demotion or suspension. 
(Code 1967, § 2-151; Ord. No. 80-340, § 23, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-134. - Same—Determination; appeal to court. 
The civil service board shall make its decision on any appeal within ten (10) working days after the hearing. It shall have the power to pass upon the discharge or removal, suspension for more than five (5) working days, or other action from which the appeal has been taken, and may confirm, modify or reverse such action. The action of the civil service board on all such matters shall be final, except, however, that if such action results in removal or dismissal from employment, then such employee shall have rights of appeal to the circuit court of the county. If reinstated without discipline in the position from which he or she was removed, the employee shall be entitled to compensation from the time of his or her demotion or discharge until the time of his or her reinstatement. The dismissing authority and the petitioner shall be entitled to a copy of the findings of the civil service board upon request. 
(Code 1967, § 2-152)  
Sec. 25-135. - Determination of strike activity. 
If an employee of the city, who is disciplined for activity deemed to be a strike under the provisions of Section 6 of Act 379, Public Acts of 1965 (MCL 423.206), requests a determination as to whether he or she did violate the provisions of that act, such determination may be undertaken by the civil service board if the disciplined employee so requests in writing. In such event, the determination shall be made by a hearing conducted by the civil service board. 
(Code 1967, § 2-153)  
Secs. 25-136—25-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - VETERANS' PREFERENCE 
 
Sec. 25-146. - Veteran defined. 
The term "veteran" as used in this article shall mean an honorably discharged veteran, as defined by Act No. 190 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965 (MCL 35.61 et seq.), as amended. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-147. - Evidence of status of veterans. 
In all instances the records of the duly constituted federal bureau covering the respective veteran's service and status shall be accepted as final evidence of his or her service and physical status in determining whether he or she is entitled to the benefits under this division. 
(Code 1967, § 2-155)  
Sec. 25-148. - Passing grade required. 
All veterans in order to be eligible for the preference granted under this division must attain a minimum passing mark of seventy (70) percent or more. 
(Code 1967, § 2-156)  
Sec. 25-149. - Additional points granted. 
All veterans who have a service-connected disability record with the veteran's bureau of administration or the federal bureau of pensions, may, upon obtaining the required minimum grade for original employment with the city, in the discretion of the civil service board, be granted an additional ten (10) points, which shall be added to their respective passing marks as attained in their examination. 
(Code 1967, § 2-157)  
Sec. 25-150. - Additional points for no service disability. 
All veterans not having a service-connected disability as described in section 25-149, may, on obtaining the required passing mark for initial employment in the city's service, in the discretion of the civil service board, have an additional five (5) points added to their respective passing marks obtained in their examinations, but shall not be entitled to such additional five (5) points in any promotional examination for promotion to a higher position in the service after they have already been in the city's employment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-158)  
Sec. 25-151. - Waiver of age limit, physical disability. 
Age limits and physical disability shall be waived for all veterans, provided they present to the civil service board a certificate of physical fitness. Such certificates shall state that the applicant veteran is in proper physical condition to fill the position for which he or she applies. The director of personnel management shall determine the examining physicians to be used for this purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 2-159)  
Sec. 25-152. - Benefits of state, federal legislation. 
No provision in this division shall deprive any veteran of benefits granted by legislation which may later be passed by the national government of the United States or the state government. 
(Code 1967, § 2-160)  
Secs. 25-153—25-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Departments generally, § 2-76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 25-166. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department of personnel management. 
(Code 1967, § 2-161)  
Sec. 25-167. - Director. 
The director of the department of personnel management shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The department of personnel management shall be under the direct supervision and control of the director of personnel management. The director of personnel management shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Advise the mayor, city council and the civil service commission on matters pertaining to the enforcement of this article and policy including but not specifically limited to personnel administration, development of personnel rules, job classification plans and pay plans; 
(2)  Make recommendations relative to proposed revisions of the city job classifications plan to the mayor and the civil service board; 
(3)  Keep personnel records of all civil service employees, past and present; 
(4)  Provide applications and other necessary forms in order to carry out the civil service plan; 
(5)  Investigate employee applications; 
(6)  Prepare and monitor qualification examinations or hire the service of an organization skilled in such tasks; 
(7)  Prepare increment compensation plans for all civil service employees; 
(8)  Recommend to the civil service board the rules and regulations covering hiring, promotions, transfers, demotions and layoff procedures; 
(9)  Establish and maintain a centralized benefits section to serve all employees in regard to their benefits, which shall include but not be specifically limited to the following: 
a.  Sickness and accident insurance; 
b.  Hospitalization insurance; 
c.  Life insurance; 
d.  Workers' compensation insurance; 
e.  Seniority list; 
f.  Unemployment insurance; 
g.  Leaves of absence; 
h.  Dental program and insurance benefits. 
(10)  Establish training programs and safety programs for city employees or future city employees; 
(11)  Assist the director of labor relations in union contract negotiations by providing data as related to personnel practices; 
(12)  Process grievances for employees who elect to take such grievances to the civil service board and recommend to the civil service board solutions for such grievances; 
(13)  Prepare agenda for the meetings of the civil service board and make recommendations as needed; 
(14)  Participate in exchange of information with other communities, counties and state and national organizations relative to the city's position of personnel management. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-161, 2-162; Ord. No. 80-340, § 24, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 25-168. - Job classification plan. 
The director of personnel management shall make an analysis of the duties and responsibilities of all positions in the classification service and shall recommend to the civil service board a job classification plan and revise as required. The job classification plan will consist of various jobs descriptions. 
(Code 1967, § 2-163)  
Sec. 25-169. - Rules and regulations. 
The civil service board shall establish rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk which shall be made available to city employees upon request. 
(Code 1967, § 2-164)  
Secs. 25-170—25-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - DEPARTMENT OF LABOR RELATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Departments generally, 2-76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 25-181. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department of labor relations.  
Sec. 25-182. - Director. 
The director of labor relations shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The director of labor relations shall: 
(1)  Advise the mayor and the city council on matters of labor relations with respect to any and all labor unions formed or to be formed by the city employees; 
(2)  Investigate and make recommendations to the mayor and the city council relative to city employee union problems; 
(3)  Act as agent for the city in matters of negotiation, collective bargaining, agreements with the city employees; 
(4)  Negotiate union grievances and advise various departments in resolving union grievances and assist the processing of union grievances and recommend suitable solutions for the grievances; 
(5)  Represent the city's interest at hearings before the state or federal employment relations commissions; 
(6)  Advise management personnel regarding the interpretation of city collective bargaining agreements with the city's employees unions; 
(7)  Handle any and all matters in which unions are involved. 
(Code 1967, § 2-165)  
Sec. 25-183. - Rules and regulations. 
The director of labor relations shall, in consultation with the mayor, draft such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. Amendments to the rules shall be made in accordance with the above procedure. (Code 1967, § 2-167)  
Sec. 25-184. - Relationships with other city departments. 
(a)  The director of labor relations shall have information made available by all city departments when such information is needed in the proper function of the department of labor relations. 
(b)  The director of labor relations shall keep all city departments informed of matters which affect their operations. 
(c)  The city attorney or his or her designated assistant, the city controller of his or her designated assistant, and the director of personnel management or his or her designated assistant shall serve as an advisory committee to the director of labor relations. 
(Code 1967, § 2-168)  
Secs. 25-185—25-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal pension plans, Ch. 16; mandate for pension plan for the general employees, § 16.3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-206. - Establishment; election; officers and employees. 
(a)  Establishment. In accordance with section 16.3 of the City Charter, there is hereby established a general employees retirement system for the benefit of eligible employees and officers of the City of Warren. The general employees retirement system shall consist of a defined benefit plan and a defined contribution plan. Each plan shall be administered by a board of trustees as provided in this article. 
(b)  Member election. Before December 31, 1999, existing members of the defined benefit plan had an opportunity to elect to forfeit membership in the defined benefit plan, irrevocably waiving all benefits thereunder and electing participation in the defined contribution plan. Thereafter, said members shall receive all retirement benefits as provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement pursuant to the defined contribution plan. 
(c)  Closed membership in the defined benefit plan. Membership in the general employees defined benefit plan was closed on the following dates for each applicable collective bargaining unit: 
UAW Local 412 Unit 59 November 10, 1998. 
UAW Local 412 Unit 35 April 13, 1999. 
AFSCME Local 1250 November 23, 1999. 
AFSCME Local 1917 January 11, 2000. 
(1)  Members qualifying for retirement benefits from the defined benefit plan, who did not elect to forfeit membership, shall remain members in the defined benefit plan and shall receive their retirement benefits from the defined benefit plan. Members who leave the service of the city, for whatever reason, shall be considered to have a break in service and the applicable provisions of section 25-218 or 25-219 shall control for all credited service provided prior to the break in service. If that person returns to city service in a position eligible for retirement benefits, for all service provided after the break in service, the officer or employee shall receive retirement benefits provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement as a participant in the defined contribution plan. 
(2)  Officers and employees who elected to irrevocably forfeit membership in the defined benefit plan and participate in the defined contribution plan shall receive their retirement benefits provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement as a participant in the defined contribution plan. 
(3)  Officers and employees eligible for retirement benefits who join the service of the city after membership in the defined benefit plan closed, shall receive their retirement benefits provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement as participants in the defined contribution plan. 
(4)  City officers elected to office prior to the date membership in the defined benefit plan closed who leave the office elected to, for whatever reason, shall be considered to have a break in service and the applicable provisions of section 25-218 or 25-219 shall control for all credited service provided prior to the break in service. If that person is elected to another city office, is appointed to a city office or is hired to serve the city in a position eligible for retirement benefits, for all service provided after the break in service, the officer or employee shall receive retirement benefits provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement as a participant in the defined contribution plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-660, § 1, 10-9-07)  
Sec. 25-207. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
Accumulated contributions means the sum of all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member and credited to his or her individual account in the reserve for members' contributions, together with regular interest thereon as determined by the defined benefit board of trustees. 
Beneficiary means any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of, or who is designated to receive, a pension or other benefit, payable by the retirement system. 
City means the City of Warren and shall include its predecessors, the Township of Warren, the Warren Charter Township, and the Village of Warren. 
Compensation means a member's salary or wages including deferred compensation paid by the city for personal services rendered by him or her to the city. In case a member's pay includes lodging or meals, or both, the city council shall fix the value of the lodging and meals. 
Credited service means the number of years, and fraction of a year, of service credited a member by the board to the extent provided in this article. 
Defined benefit plan means the retirement benefit plan set forth in division 2. 
Defined contribution plan means the retirement benefit plan set forth in division 3. 
Defined contributions shall include all contributions and income accumulated in the defined contribution account including contributions made by the participant, the employer and any amounts transferred into the defined contribution plan. 
Employee means the employees providing service to the City of Warren or the 37th District Court. 
Final average compensation shall mean the average of the two (2) highest years of annual compensation received by a member. Each year utilized in the computation shall begin and end with the same month. If a member has less than two (2) years of credited service, the member's final average compensation shall be the annual average compensation received by the member during the total years of service. 
Fiscal year means the calendar period between January first and December thirty-first. 
Independent contractor means a person who contracts for a fee to do specific work using his/her own methods without being subject to the control of the employer. An independent contractor is not an employee, is not a member of any collective bargaining unit of the city and is not entitled to receive any fringe benefits. 
Member means any person who is included in the membership of the defined benefit plan. 
Participant means a present or former employee or officer for whom contributions have been made under the defined contribution plan and who has not yet received all of the payments of benefits to which he/she is entitled under the defined contribution plan. 
Pension means a monthly amount payable by the defined benefit plan throughout the future life of a person, or for a temporary period, as provided in this article. 
Pension reserve means the present value of all future payments to be made on account of any pension. Such pension reserve shall be computed upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience, and regular interest, as the defined benefit board shall from time to time adopt. 
Regular interest means such rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded annually, as the board shall from time to time adopt. 
Retirant means any member who retires with a pension payable by the defined benefit plan, including disability retirement. 
Retirement means a member's withdrawal from city employment with a pension payable by the defined contribution plan. 
Service means personal services rendered to the city by an officer or employee of the city. 
Trust means the trust created under the governmental money purchase plan which consists of all the assets of the plan derived from employer and participant contributions under the plan, plus any income and gains thereon, less any losses, expenses and distributions to participants and beneficiaries. 
Vesting means the member or participant's non-forfeitable interest in the applicable defined benefit plan or defined contribution plan account. 
Workers' compensation period means the period a member, retirant or beneficiary is in receipt of workers' compensation on account of a disability or death arising out of and in the course of a member's city employment. If he or she is paid a single sum in lieu of future workers' compensation payments, his or her workers' compensation period shall be designated as the period he or she was in receipt of weekly workers' compensation plus the period arrived at by dividing the said single sum by his or her weekly workers' compensation award. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-208. - Assignments prohibited; exceptions; eligible domestic relations order. 
(a)  The right of an individual to a pension, to the return of accumulated contributions, to the payment of accumulated participant contributions and earnings, to any optional benefit, to any other right accrued or accruing to any member, retirant, participant or beneficiary under the provisions of this article, and any moneys belonging to the defined benefit plan or the defined contribution plan, shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law, or any other process of law whatsoever, and shall be unassignable, except as is specifically provided in this article. The city shall have the right of setoff for any claim arising from embezzlement by or fraud of a member, retirant or beneficiary. 
(b)  If a member of the defined benefit plan is covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan participated in by the city, and should he or she be permitted to, and elect to, continue such coverage as a retirant, he or she may authorize the defined benefit board to have deducted from his or her pension the payments required of him or her to continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment plan. 
(c)  The prohibition of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the creation, assignment, or recognition of a right to any benefit payable to a member or participant pursuant to an eligible domestic relations order (EDRO) when such order is determined by the applicable board of trustees to be in accordance with the Eligible Domestic Relations Order Act, MCL 38.1701, as amended. If the EDRO is determined to apply to a member in the defined benefit plan, the distribution to the "alternate payee" identified in the order shall not commence until the member retires from the service of the city or until death of the member while in city service. If the EDRO is determined to apply to a participant in the defined contribution plan and the EDRO requires payment before the participant would have otherwise been entitled to payment, the plan administrator is authorized to make the distribution to the "alternate payee" identified in the EDRO only effective the first day of the month following the month that the EDRO is determined to be an EDRO or the first day of the month following the month that a distribution is payable under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-209. - Medical insurance benefits. 
In the event a person who has retired or left the employ of the city who is receiving medical benefits under either the defined benefit plan or the defined contribution plan is re-employed by the city, the person shall not be eligible for duplicate benefits. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
DIVISION 2. - THE DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN 
 
Sec. 25-210. - Membership. 
(a)  The membership of the defined benefit plan shall include officers and employees of the city, the judges, appointed personnel and employees of the 37th Judicial District Court, persons who have ceased to be an officer or employee of the city or 37th Judicial District Court and have satisfied the requirements of section 25-218 of this chapter, and retirants, except as provided in section (b). 
(b)  The membership of the defined benefit plan shall not include: 
(1)  Any person whose services are rendered to the city as an independent contractor; nor 
(2)  Any person, except an elected officer of the city, employed in a position that is part-time, part-time seasonal, co-op, temporary appointment or special assignment; nor 
(3)  Any person who has elected to participate in the defined contribution plan and forfeit membership in the defined benefit plan irrevocably waiving all benefits thereunder. 
(4)  Any officer or employee joining the service of the city on or after April 13, 1999 who is eligible for retirement benefits in the defined contribution plan, shall be excluded from the defined benefit plan, except any employee who is represented by a bargaining unit that has not agreed that its members can participate in the defined contribution plan, such employee shall become a member of the defined benefit plan. 
(5)  Any person who is covered under the City Policemen and Firemen Retirement System established under Act No. 345 of the Public Acts of 1937 (MCL 38.551 et seq.), as amended; nor 
(6)  Any police cadet enrolled in a police cadet training program as provided under Act No. 201 of Public Acts of 1970 (MCL 38.521); nor 
(7)  Any person who becomes re-employed by the city and is receiving a service pension from the defined benefit plan, or is a participant in the defined contribution plan. 
(c)  Should any doubt arise as to the membership status of any individual in the defined benefit plan, the defined benefit board shall decide the issue. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, should any member leave the employ of the city without having eight (8) or more years of credited service, for any reason except retirement or death, he or she shall thereupon cease to be a member. 
(e)  The defined benefit board shall fix and determine, by appropriate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this article, the amount of service to be credited any member; provided that in no case shall less than ten (10) days of service rendered by him or her in any calendar month be credited as a month of service; nor shall less than ten (10) months of service rendered by him or her in any calendar year be credited as a year of service; nor shall more than one (1) year of a service be credited any member for all service rendered by him or her in any calendar year. 
(f)  The defined benefit board may require a prospective member and members to submit to a medical examination to be conducted in a manner as required by the board. 
(Code 1967, § 2-210; Ord. No. 80-304, § 1(2-210), 2-26-85; Ord. No. 80-335, § 1, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 80-340, § 25, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-371, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-89; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-211. - Termination of membership. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, should any member of the defined benefit plan leave the office or employ of the city, for any reason except retirement or death, he or she shall thereupon cease to be a member and his or her credited service at that time shall be forfeited by him or her. Should a person again become a member of the retirement system and obtain credited service of thirty (30) months or more, and should the member return to the reserve for members' contributions any amount the member withdrew therefrom, together with interest compounded annually at the rate in effect from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment, the member shall be restored the credited service forfeited, except members who have elected to participate in the defined contribution plan have irrevocably forfeited membership in the defined benefit plan and shall not have credited service restored. 
(Code 1967, § 2-211; Ord. No. 80-305, § 1(2-211), 3-12-85; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-212. - Credited service for CETA participation and preceding governmental service. 
Any member who prior to membership in the defined benefit plan was employed by the city under the comprehensive employment and training act program or by a preceding governmental unit, as defined in the Reciprocal Retirement Act, Act 88, 1961 (MCL 38.1101 et seq.) as amended; or who served as a full-time military or civilian employee of the United States Government; may be credited with service actually provided during the employment provided that: 
(1)  Within fifteen (15) years from and after the date the participation in the program or employment in the preceding unit ended, the person becomes a member of the defined benefit plan and within two (2) years of becoming a member or until July 1, 1994, the person begins payment into the reserve for members' contributions: 
a.  For persons who become members prior to November 1, 1995 the sum of three (3) percent of the first four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) of base pay; and five (5) percent of the base pay in excess of four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00). The base pay amount shall be that members' base pay at the time of the request for credit; 
b.  For persons who become members on or after November 1, 1995 the actual cost as determined by the defined benefit plan's actuary without cost to the city. 
The base pay amount shall be that member's base pay at the time of the request for credit. 
(2)  Payment of the member's contribution shall be made in full within three (3) years if buying two (2) years or less and within five (5) years if buying more than two (2) years; 
(3)  The amount credited to the member's defined benefit plan credit does not exceed six (6) years; 
(4)  For purposes of this section, service is qualifying if it is not and will not be recognized for the purpose of obtaining or increasing a benefit under another retirement system. A member may qualify service by making an irrevocable forfeiture of all rights in and to the actual or potential benefit from the other retirement system. 
(5)  Should a member that has received a credit of service hereunder subsequently obtain a credit for the service upon which the credit in this system is based, then the service credit obtained hereunder shall be revoked, and the contributions returned together with interest compounded annually at the rate in effect on the date of forfeiture. 
(6)  The payment under subsection 25-212(1) shall be credited to the member's individual account in the reserve for members' contributions. 
(7)  A person who becomes a member after the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 80-490], will not be credited with service credit until the member completes eight (8) years of actual full time service with the City of Warren. 
(Code 1967, § 2-212; Ord. No. 80-304, § 2(2-212), 2-26-85; Ord. No. 80-340, § 26, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-366, § 1, 11-22-88; Ord. No. 80-437, § 1, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 80-488, § 1, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 80-490, § 1, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-213. - Military service credit. 
(a)  A member who, while employed by the city, entered or enters any armed service of the United States during time of war or period of compulsory military service, shall be credited with such armed service actually required of him or her in the same manner as if he or she had served the city uninterruptedly; provided that: 
(1)  He or she is re-employed by the city within six (6) months from and after the date such armed service required of him or her terminates; 
(2)  He or she returns to the reserve for members' contribution the amount he or she might have withdrawn therefrom at the time he or she entered or while in such armed service, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment; and 
(3)  In no case shall more than six (6) years of service be credited any member for all such armed service rendered by him or her. In any case of doubt as to the period of such armed service to be credited any member, the defined benefit board shall have final power to determine such period. During the period of such armed service and until his or her return to city employment, his or her contributions to the defined benefit plan shall be suspended and any balance standing to his or her credit in the reserve for members' contribution and members supplemental voluntary contribution fund shall be accumulated at regular interest. 
(b)  A member, who before employment with the city, served in any armed service of the United States during a time of war or period of compulsory military service, shall have the option to buy credited service subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Members are allowed two (2) years from the date they became a member of the defined benefit plan to elect this option. Current members of the defined benefit plan shall have until July 1, 1986, to elect this option. 
(2)  The member must have been discharged or released from the military service under honorable conditions and may only apply for the years that he or she was in the active service in the armed forces. In any case of doubt as to the period of such armed services or as to the nature of the discharge, the defined benefit board shall have final power to determine same. 
(3)  The maximum amount of time that may be purchased and credited to the member's service shall be six (6) years. 
(4)  For each year of military time purchased, the member shall pay as follows: 
a.  For persons who become members prior to November 1, 1995—the sum of three (3) percent of the first four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) of base pay; and five (5) percent of the base pay in excess of four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00). The base pay amount shall be that member's base pay at the time of the request for credit; 
b.  For persons who become members on or after November 1, 1995—the actual cost as determined by the defined benefit plan's actuary without cost to the city. 
(5)  Members electing this option may pay same in one lump sum payment or in deductions from pay so that the total amount is paid within three (3) years, if buying two (2) years or under, and within five (5) years, if more than two (2) years. If a member dies before the entire amount is repaid, the surviving spouse may pay the amounts remaining to be paid. 
(6)  In no event will the military service credit be given until the entire amount is paid in full, except in case of death or retirement, the amount that has been paid by the member will be prorated and credited to the member. 
(c)  No military service credit shall be allowed for members that have received credit for military service in another retirement system, nor shall military service credit be allowed for members that are receiving or will be eligible to receive a pension from the United States government for services in the armed forces. 
(d)  A person who becomes a member after the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 80-490], will not be credited with service credit until the member completes eight (8) years of actual full time service with the City of Warren. 
Code 1967, § 2-213; Ord. No. 80-309, § 1, 8-27-85; Ord. No. 80-489, § 1, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 80-490, § 2, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-214. - Voluntary retirement. 
Any member, who has eight (8) or more years of credited service and has attained age fifty-five (55) years, may retire upon his or her written application filed with the defined benefit board setting forth at what time, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, he or she desires to be retired. Upon his or her retirement he or she shall be paid a pension provided in section 25-216. 
(Code 1967, § 2-214; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-215. - Normal retirement. 
Upon his or her separation from city employment, a member who has attained the age of fifty-five (55) and who has eight (8) years or more of credited service, shall be paid a pension as provided in section 25-216. 
(Code 1967, § 2-215; Ord. No. 80-371, § 3, 1-24-89; Ord. No. 80-397, § 1, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 80-491, § 1, 10-24-95; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-216. - Straight life pension. 
(a)  Upon a member's retirement, as provided in this article, he or she shall be paid the applicable straight life pension hereinafter provided in this section. Prior to the date the first payment of his or her pension becomes due, he or she may elect to receive his or her pension under an option provided in section 25-220 in lieu of a straight life pension. 
(b)  The straight life pension for a member who retires after June 30, 1970, shall be: 
(1)  For a member who retires prior to age sixty-two (62) years, the straight life pension payable to attainment of age sixty-two (62) years shall be equal to the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her credited service multiplied by 2.5 percent of his or her final average compensation, subject to subsection (c). 
(2)  Upon attainment of age sixty-two (62) years if retirement occurred prior to such age, or upon retirement if retirement occurs at or after such age, the straight life pension shall be equal to the number of years and fraction of a year of his or her credited service multiplied by the sum of 1.10 percent of the first three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) of his or her final average compensation plus 2.5 percent of the portion, if any, of his or her final average compensation in excess of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). 
(c)  If a member retires before the age of sixty (60) years, except as provided in sections 25-221, 25-222 and 25-224, his or her pension shall be reduced one-half of one percent multiplied by the number of complete months in the period from the date he or she requests his or her pension to begin to the date he or she would attain age sixty (60) years. If a member retires before the age of sixty (60) years, he or she shall be allowed to select an option as provided under section 25-220. The option so selected shall be reduced as provided in the above sentence. Effective January 1, 1979, a member with thirty (30) or more years of credited service may retire at any age with no decrease in benefits because of age. Effective July 1, 1984, a member with twenty-five (25) years of credited service may retire at age fifty (50) with no decrease in benefits because of age. 
(d)  Optional Annuity Withdrawal: Any member may elect, not less than thirty (30) days or greater than ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of retirement, to be paid all or part of the accumulated contributions (excluding interest for military buy back and CETA buy back contributions) in the reserve for members' contributions. If a member makes such an election, the member's monthly pension shall be reduced by an amount which is the actuarial equivalent of the accumulated contributions paid. The actuarial equivalent shall be determined on the basis of the interest rate established by the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation for immediate annuities. 
(Code 1967, § 2-216; Ord. No. 80-302, § 1, 8-28-84; Ord. No. 80-310, § 1, 8-27-85; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-217. - Straight life refund. 
If a retirant dies before he or she has received in straight life pension payments an aggregate amount equal to his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the reserve for members' contributions at the time of his or her retirement, the difference between his or her accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of straight life pension payments received by him or her shall be paid from the reserve for retirees' benefit payments to such person as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the defined benefit board. If there be no such designated person surviving the retirant, such difference, if any, shall be paid to his or her legal representatives. No benefits shall be paid under this section by the defined benefit plan on account of the death of a retirant if a pension becomes payable under option A or B, provided in section 25-220, on account of his or her death. 
(Code 1967, § 2-217; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-218. - Deferred retirement. 
Should any member who has eight (8) or more years of credited service leave the employ of the city prior to his or her attainment of age fifty-five (55) years, for any reason except his or her retirement or death, he or she shall be entitled to a pension provided in section 25-216, as the section was in effect at the time he or she left city employment. In the case of a death of a member on deferred retirement status who has not attained the age of fifty-five (55) years, the pension if any, shall be paid to the person that he or she nominated by written designation filed with the defined benefit board prior to his or her death. Payment of a pension under this section by the defined benefit plan shall begin on the first day of the calendar month in which: 
(1)  The member attains the age of fifty-five (55) years and files an application for payment of a pension with the defined benefit board; or 
(2)  If a beneficiary files an application for payment of a pension hereunder, on or after the date that the deceased member would have reached age fifty-five (55) years, had he or she survived. 
Until the beginning date of his or her pension, his or her balances in the reserve for members' contributions and the members supplemental voluntary contribution fund shall be accumulated at regular interest. If he or she withdraws his or her accumulated contributions from the reserve for members' contributions, he or she shall thereupon forfeit his or her rights and the right of his or her beneficiary, to a deferred pension provided in this section. 
(Code 1967, § 2-218; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-219. - City employment after retirement. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, if a retirant receiving a defined benefit pension is re-employed by the city or any entity that derives its revenue solely from the city, payment of his or her pension shall be suspended during the period of his or her re-employment, however, a retirant who is re-employed in a full time capacity may participate in the defined contribution system as a new participant. Upon termination of his or her re-employment, payment of the retirant's pension shall be resumed. However, during the period of re-employment the retirant: 
(1)  Shall not be a member of the defined benefit plan; and 
(2)  Shall not make contributions to the defined benefit plan; and 
(3)  Shall not be given credited service in the defined benefit plan while re-employed; and 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), any retirant receiving a defined benefit pension who is re-employed by the city in the capacity of a part-time employee working no more than six hundred and fifty (650) hours per year shall continue receiving pension payments during the period of re-employment; provided that during the period of re-employment, the retirant shall not earn any additional pension credits and shall not participate in the defined contribution pension plan. 
(Code 1967, § 2-219; Ord. No. 80-371, § 4, 1-24-89; Ord. No. 80-439, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-220. - Pension election; straight life; option A or B. 
Prior to the date the first payment of his or her pension becomes due, but not thereafter, a member may elect to be paid his or her pension as a straight life pension payable throughout his or her life, or nominate a beneficiary(ies), in accordance with the provisions of Option A or B, set forth below: 
(1)  Option A—one hundred (100) percent survivor pension. Upon the death of a retirant who elected Option A, his or her reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person having an insurable interest in his or her life, such beneficiaries shall be nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the defined benefit board prior to the date the first payment of his or her pension becomes due. If a minor is nominated beneficiary, the minor's pension shall terminate upon his or her adoption, marriage, attainment of age twenty-one (21), or death, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Option B-50 percent survivor pension. Upon the death of a retirant who elected Option B, one-half of his or her reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person having an insurable interest in his or her life, such beneficiaries shall be nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the defined benefit board prior to the date the first payment of his or her pension becomes due. If a minor is nominated beneficiary, the minor's pension shall terminate upon his or her adoption, marriage, attainment of age twenty-one (21), or death, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1967, § 2-220; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-221. - Disability retirement after leaving service of city. 
(a)  Upon the application of a member, (i) who has left the employment of the city, (ii) and has eight (8) or more years of employment with the city, and (iii) who has become totally and permanently disabled for employment, by reason of a personal injury or disease, (iv) and who has no other income over two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per year, including all other pensions, workers' compensation, either in a single sum settlement or weekly payments, except social security payments shall not be included as income, may be retired by the defined benefit board; provided that after a medical examination of the member, made by or under the direction of a medical committee consisting of three (3) physicians, one of whom shall be named by the defined benefit board, one by the member, and the third physician to be designated by the first two (2) physicians so named, the medical committee certifies to the defined benefit board, (i) the member is mentally or physically totally incapacitated for any employment, (ii) his or her incapacity will probably be permanent, and (iii) the member should be retired. Final determination as to whether a member shall be retired shall be determined by the defined benefit board. 
(b)  The amount of disability pension shall be equal to the amount of his or her deferred pension reduced by one-half of one percent for each month his or her age at the time of disability retirement is less than sixty-two (62) years of age, but in no event shall such reduction exceed fifty (50) percent of his or her deferred pension. 
(c)  A member with a disability pension shall submit to such physical examination as required by section 25-224. Upon his or her retirement a member shall have the right to elect an option provided for in section 25-220. Pension benefits received shall not be increased when the retired member shall reach the age of ordinary retirement. 
(Code 1967, § 2-221; Ord. No. 80-375, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-222. - Disability retirement. 
Upon the application of a member, or his or her department head, a member who (i) is in the employ of the city, (ii) has eight (8) or more years of credited service, and (iii) becomes totally and permanently disabled for duty in the employ of the city by reason of personal injury or disease, may be retired by the defined benefit board; provided, that after a medical examination of the member, made by or under the direction of a medical committee consisting of three (3) physicians, one of whom shall be named by the defined benefit board, one by the member, and one by the first two (2) physicians so named, the medical committee certifies to the defined benefit board that (i) the member is mentally or physically totally disabled for duty in the employ of the city, (ii) his or her disability will probably be permanent, and (iii) the member should be retired. The eight (8) years of service requirement contained in this section shall not apply to a member whom the defined benefit board finds: 
(1)  To be totally and permanently disabled for duty in the employ of the city as the natural and proximate result of a personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of his or her actual performance of duty in the employ of the city; and 
(2)  Is granted workers' compensation on account of his or her physical or mental disability. 
(Code 1967, § 2-222; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-223. - Disability pension. 
(a)  Upon a member's retirement on account of disability, as provided in section 25-222, he or she shall be paid a disability pension by the defined benefit plan computed according to section 25-216. His or her disability pension payable to his or her attainment of age sixty (60) years shall not be less than fifteen (15) percent of his or her final average compensation. Prior to the date the first payment of his or her pension becomes due, he or she may elect to receive his or her pension under an option provided in section 25-220 in lieu of a straight life pension. 
(b)  Upon termination of a disability retirant's workers' compensation period, if any, he or she shall be given service credit for his or her workers' compensation period and his or her disability credit. Such additional service credit shall not include any period beyond age sixty-two (62) years. 
(Code 1967, § 2-223; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-224. - Disability retirant; re-examination; earnings offset; return to work. 
(a)  At least once each year during the first five (5) years a retirant is in receipt of a disability pension, and at least once in each three-year period thereafter, the defined benefit board may require the retirant, if he or she has not attained age fifty-five (55) years, to undergo a medical examination to be made by or under the direction of a physician designated by the board. Should the retirant refuse to submit to such medical examination in any such period, the defined benefit board shall suspend payment of his or her disability pension until withdrawal of such refusal. If such refusal continues for one (1) year, his or her disability pension shall be forfeited by him or her. If upon such medical examination of the retirant, the physician reports to the defined benefit board that the retirant is physically able and capable of resuming employment with the city, he or she shall be returned to the employ of the city and his or her disability pension shall terminate, provided that the report of the physician is concurred in by the defined benefit board. In returning a retirant to city employment, reasonable latitude shall be allowed the city in placing him or her in a position commensurate to his or her type of work and compensation at the time of his or her retirement. 
(b)  If a disability retirant, who has not attained age sixty (60) years, becomes engaged in a gainful occupation, business or employment paying more than the difference between his or her annual rate of compensation at the time of his or her retirement and his or her disability pension, his or her disability pension shall be reduced to an amount which together with the amount so earned by him or her shall equal his or her annual rate of compensation. The disability retiree shall submit a copy of his or her U.S. income tax return and necessary supporting schedules and other information as required by the defined benefit board, so that his or her income may be determined for the purposes of this ordinance. Should the retirant refuse to submit the requested U. S. tax returns and supporting schedules, or any other information reasonably necessary to make the determination under this division, as determined necessary by the defined benefit board, the board shall suspend payment of his or her disability pension until withdrawal of such refusal. If such refusal continues for one (1) year, his or her disability pension shall be forfeited. 
(c)  A disability retirant who returns to the employ of the city, as provided in this section, shall have his or her credited service in force at the time of his or her retirement restored to his or her credit. He or she shall be given service credit for the period he or she was receiving both a disability pension and weekly benefits for workers' compensation on account of his or her total and permanent disability arising out of and in the course of his or her city employment; otherwise he or she shall not be given service credit for such period. 
(Code 1967, § 2-224; Ord. No. 80-371, § 5, 1-24-89; Ord. No. 80-396, § 1, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 80-464, § 1, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-225. - Non-duty death benefits. 
(a)  Any member who has eight (8) or more years of credited service may, at any time prior to the date of his or her retirement, elect option A provided in section 25-220 in the same manner as if he or she were then retiring from service, and nominate a beneficiary whom the defined benefit board finds to be dependent upon him or her for at least fifty (50) percent of his or her financial support. Prior to the date of his or her retirement, but not thereafter, the member may revoke his or her election of option A and nomination of beneficiary, and he or she may again, prior to the date of his or her retirement, elect option A and nominate a beneficiary as provided in this subsection. If a member who has an option A election in force dies while in city employment, his or her beneficiary if living shall immediately be paid a pension computed in the same manner as if the member had retired the day preceding the date of his or her death, notwithstanding that he or she might not have attained age fifty-five (55) years. If a member has an option A election in force at the date of his or her retirement, his or her election of option A and nomination of beneficiary shall thereafter continue in force, unless prior to the date of his or her retirement he or she elects to be paid his or her pension as a straight life pension or according to another option provided in section 25-220. Any pension payable under this subsection shall be subject to section 25-228. 
(b)  Any member who has eight (8) or more years of credited service and who does not have an option A election in force, dies while in the employ of the city, will be presumed to have retired the day preceding the age of his or her death, notwithstanding that he or she might not have attained age fifty-five (55) years, and the following applicable pensions shall be paid: 
(1)  If the deceased member leaves a spouse, the spouse shall be paid a pension equal to seventy-five (75) percent of the pension, computed according to section 25-216, earned by the member to the date of his or her death. If the spouse is more than five (5) years younger than the deceased, the seventy-five (75) percent is to be reduced by one (1) percent for each year over five (5). The percent, so reduced, shall not be less than fifty (50) percent, nor shall the spouse's pension be less than fifteen (15) percent of the member's final average compensation. The pension shall terminate upon the spouse's remarriage or death and shall be subject to section 25-228. 
(2)  If the deceased member does not leave a spouse, or if the spouse remarries or dies subsequent to the member's death, and the member leaves his or her unmarried child or children under age twenty-one (21) years, each such child shall be paid a pension of an equal share of fifty (50) percent of the pension, computed according to section 25-216, earned by the member to the date of his or her death; provided, that if the earned pension is less than fifteen (15) percent of his or her final average compensation. A child's pension shall terminate upon his or her adoption, marriage, attainment of age twenty-one (21) years, or death, whichever occurs first. The age twenty-one (21) years limit shall not apply in the case of the member's unmarried child whom the defined benefit board finds to be temporarily or permanently, mentally or physically disabled at the time of the member's death; such child's pension shall continue so long as the board finds the child to be so disabled. Upon termination of a child's pension it shall be divided into equal shares and added to the pensions being paid the deceased member's surviving eligible children, if any. A child's pension shall be subject to section 25-228. 
(Code 1967, § 2-225; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-226. - Duty death pensions. 
(a)  If a member dies as the result of a personal injury or disease arising solely and exclusively out of and in the course of his or her employment with the city, and such death, injury or disease resulting in death be found by the defined benefit board to have been the result of his or her actual performance of duty in the employ of the city, the applicable benefits hereinafter provided in this subsection shall be paid, subject to the condition that the beneficiaries are granted workers' compensation on account of the death of the member. 
(1)  His or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the reserve for members' contributions at the time of his or her death shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of section 25-229 subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  The spouse shall be paid a pension equal to the weekly workers' compensation converted to a monthly basis. A spouse's pension shall begin upon termination of the workers' compensation period and shall continue until remarriage or death. A spouse's pension shall be subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(3)  His or her unmarried child or children under age twenty-one (21) years shall each receive a pension equal to the child's weekly workers' compensation converted to a monthly basis. A child's pension shall begin upon termination of his or her workers' compensation period and shall continue until his or her adoption, marriage, attainment of age twenty-one (21) years, or death, which ever occurs first. If a spouse's pension is terminated, each child's pension shall be increased by an equal share of the spouse's pension. A child's pension shall be subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)  His or her parents shall each be paid a pension equal to such parent's weekly workers' compensation converted to a monthly basis. A parent's pension shall begin upon termination of the parent's workers' compensation period and shall continue until his or her remarriage or death. A parent's pension shall be subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "spouse" means the person to whom the member was married at the time of his or her employment with the city was last terminated. In no case shall any pensions or other payments be paid under subsection (a) of this section on account of the death of a member if any pensions are paid or will become payable under section 25-225 on account of his or her death. Pensions payable under this section shall be subject to section 25-228. 
(Code 1967, § 2-226; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-227. - Subrogation. 
If a person becomes entitled to a pension payable by the defined benefit plan as the result of an accident or disease caused by the act of a third party, the city shall be subrogated to the rights of the person against the third party to the extent of benefits which the city pays or becomes liable to pay. 
(Code 1967, § 2-227; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-228. - Pension maximum limit. 
The total of the pensions granted under any provision of this division on account of a member's retirement or death shall not exceed the difference between: 
• Seventy-five (75) percent of the member's final average compensation; and 
• The sum of the monthly equivalent of: 
(1)  Any workers' compensation payable on account of the member's city employment; and 
(2)  Any other benefit program, except social security and life insurance benefits, financed in whole or in part by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-228; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-229. - Payment of member's accumulated contributions. 
(a)  Should any member of the defined benefit plan cease to be employed by the city, for any reason except his or her retirement or death, before he or she has eight (8) years of service or has satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement provided in section 25-214, he or she shall be paid his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the reserve for members' contributions. 
(b)  Upon the death of a member of the defined benefit plan, if no pension is payable or will become payable by the defined benefit plan on account of his or her death, his or her accumulated contributions and interest standing to his or her credit in the reserve for members' contributions at the time of his or her death shall be paid to such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the defined benefit board. If there be no such designated person surviving the member, or if he or she did not designate a beneficiary, his or her accumulated contributions shall be paid to his estate. 
(c)  Payments of accumulated contributions and interest as provided in this section may be made in a single sum or in installments as the defined benefit board shall from time to time determine by appropriate rules and regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 2-229; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-230. - Reserve for members' contributions. 
(a)  The reserve for members' contributions is hereby created. It shall be the fund in which shall be maintained with accumulated interest, the contributions of members made in accordance with this article, and from which shall be made payments and transfer of accumulated contributions, as provided in this article. 
(b)  A member shall return to the reserve for members' contributions, by a single contribution or by a payment method approved by the defined benefit board, the amount, if any, he or she withdrew therefrom, together with regular interest from date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In no case shall any member be given credit for service rendered prior to the date he or she withdrew his or her accumulated contributions until he or she returns to the reserve for members' contributions all amounts due the fund by him or her. 
(c)  Upon the retirement of a member, or upon his or her death if a pension becomes payable by the defined benefit plan on account of his or her death, his or her accumulated contributions shall be transferred from the reserve for members' contributions to the retirees' benefit payments, unless otherwise specifically provided in this article. At the expiration of a period of three (3) years from and after the date of a person ceasing to be a member, without entitlement to a deferred pension provided in section 25-218, any balance of accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the reserve for members' contributions, unclaimed by the member or his or her legal representative, shall be transferred to the reserve for undistributed income. 
(Code 1967, § 2-230; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-231. - Member's supplemental voluntary contribution fund. 
(a)  The member's supplemental voluntary contribution fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated, at regular interest, member's supplemental deposits, and from which shall be made payments and transfers of accumulated deposits, as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(b)  Each member shall be permitted to make supplemental deposits in the defined benefit plan in addition to his or her contributions provided in section 25-230. A member's supplemental deposits in any year beginning July first, shall not exceed five (5) percent of his or her annual compensation, nor be less than one hundred and eighty dollars ($180.00). The supplemental deposits shall be made in accordance with such rules and regulations as the defined benefit board shall from time to time adopt. A member's supplemental deposits, when made, shall be credited to his or her individual account in the member's supplemental voluntary contribution fund. 
(c)  At least once each fiscal year, the defined benefit board shall credit each member's account in the members supplemental voluntary contribution fund with regular interest at such rate as the board shall from time to time determine. The interest so credited shall be transferred from the reserve for undistributed income to the member's supplemental voluntary fund. 
(d)  A member may at any time withdraw all or part of his or her accumulated supplemental deposits standing to his or her credit in the member's supplemental voluntary contribution fund. If a member makes a withdrawal, he or she shall not again be permitted to make deposits in the members supplemental voluntary contribution fund until the expiration of one (1) year from and after the date of his or her last withdrawal. 
(e)  When a member becomes a "retirant" as defined in section 25-208, his or her deposits standing to his or her credit in the members' supplemental voluntary contribution fund, along with interest earned, shall be paid upon application for retirement. He or she may elect to receive his or her voluntary contributions along with earned interest in a lump sum payment or to be prorated on a monthly basis until the funds are exhausted. 
(f)  Upon a member's death, his or her balance, if any, with interest earned, if any, in the members supplemental voluntary contribution fund shall be paid in a single sum to such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the defined benefit board. 
(Code 1967, § 2-231; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-232. - Reserve for employer's contribution. 
(a)  The reserve for employer's contribution is hereby created. It shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated the contributions made by the city to the defined benefit plan, and from which shall be made transfers as provided in this section. Upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience, and regular interest, as the defined benefit board shall from time to time adopt, the actuary shall annually compute the pension reserves (i) for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries, and (ii) covering service rendered and to be rendered by members. The portion of the pension reserves which are not financed by members' contributions shall be financed by annual appropriations to be made by the council, the appropriations to be determined according to the following: 
(1)  The annual appropriations for members' current service shall be a percent of their annual compensations, which if paid annually by the city for the periods of their future service will be sufficient to provide the city-financed portions of the pension reserves at the time of their retirements for the pensions to be paid based upon their future service. 
(2)  The annual appropriation for members' accrued service shall be a percent of their annual compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be determined by the council, will amortize, at regular interest, the unfunded pension reserves for the accrued service portions of the pensions to be paid. 
(3)  The annual appropriation for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries shall be a percent of the annual compensations of members which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be determined by the council, will amortize, at regular interest, the unfunded pension reserves, if any, for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries. 
(b)  Upon the retirement of a member, or upon his or her death if a pension becomes payable on his or her account, the difference between the pension reserve for the pension payable and the member's accumulated contributions shall be transferred from the reserve for employer's contribution to the reserve for retirees benefit payments. 
(Code 1967, § 2-232; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-233. - Reserve for retirees' benefit payments. 
The reserve for retirees' benefit payments is hereby created. It shall be the fund from which shall be paid all defined benefit pensions payable as provided in this article. Should any retirant who retired on account of disability return to the employ of the city, his or her pension reserve, at the date of his or her return, shall be transferred from the reserve for retirees' benefit payments to the reserve for members' contributions and the reserve for employer's contribution in the same proportion as the reserves were originally transferred. 
(Code 1967, § 2-233; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-234. - Reserve for administrative expense. 
The reserve for administrative expense is hereby created. The reserve for administrative expense shall be the fund to which shall be credited all money provided by the city to pay the administrative expenses of the defined benefit plan, and from which shall be paid all expenses necessary in connection with the administration of the defined benefit plan. 
(Code 1967, § 2-234; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-235. - Reserve for undistributed income; allowance of regular interest. 
(a)  The reserve for undistributed income is hereby created. It shall be the fund to which shall be credited all interest, dividends and other income from investments of the defined benefit plan, all transfers from the reserve for members' contribution by reason of lack of claimant, and all moneys received by the defined benefit plan the disposition of which is not specifically provided in this article. The defined benefit board may accept gifts and bequests and the same shall be credited to the reserve for undistributed income. There shall be transferred from the reserve for undistributed income to the reserve for members' contributions, reserve for employer's contribution, reserve for retirees' benefit payments and members supplemental voluntary contribution fund the amounts required to credit regular interest to the respective funds. Whenever the defined benefit board determines the balance in the reserve for undistributed income is more than sufficient to cover the current charges to the fund, such excess may be used to provide contingency reserves or may be used to cover special needs of the other funds of the defined benefit plan, as the defined benefit board shall determine. If the balance in the reserve for undistributed income is not sufficient to meet the charges to the fund, the amount of such insufficiency shall be transferred to the reserve for undistributed income from the reserve for employer's contributions. A member's accumulated contributions which were transferred to the reserve of undistributed income may be returned upon a valid claim approved by the defined benefit board. 
(b)  The defined benefit board shall, at the end of each fiscal year, allow and credit regular interest to each member's individual account in the reserve for members' contributions; such interest shall be computed upon the difference between his or her balance in the fund at the beginning of the fiscal year and any withdrawal he or she might have made from the fund during the year. Members who have individual accounts in the supplemental voluntary contribution fund, upon approval of the defined benefit board, shall be allowed and credited regular interest at the end of each fiscal year to each member's individual account in such fund. Such interest shall be computed upon the difference between his or her balance in the fund at the beginning of the fiscal year and any withdrawal he or she might have made from the fund during the year. At the end of each fiscal year the defined benefit board shall allow and credit regular interest on the reserve for employer's contribution and reserve for retirees' benefit payments; such interest shall be computed upon the mean balances in the respective funds during the year. The amounts of interest so allowed and credited shall be transferred from the reserve for undistributed income. 
(Code 1967, § 2-235; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-236. - Authorization; investment of assets; disbursements; transfer of funds. 
(a)  The defined benefit board shall be the trustees of the assets of the defined benefit plan and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such assets in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 314 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965, as amended, MCL 38.1132 et seq.) The defined benefit board shall have the power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer, and dispose of any securities and investments of the defined benefit plan, as well as the proceeds of such investments, and any moneys belonging to the defined benefit plan. 
(b)  There shall be kept on deposit available cash not to exceed five(5) percent of the total assets of the defined benefit plan. All assets of the defined benefit plan shall be held for the purposes of meeting disbursements for pensions and other purposes allowed under the provisions of Act No. 314 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965, as amended, and this article. 
(c)  Funds may be transferred from the defined benefit plan to the defined contribution plan for any member who forfeits membership in the defined benefit plan and elects participation in the defined contribution plan. The transfer amount shall be determined by the actuary designated by the defined contribution board of trustees. The defined benefit board is authorized to determine from which account the lump sum transfer amount will be transferred from, except funds may not be transferred from the reserve for retirees' benefit payments account to cover any transfer to the defined contribution plan. Once calculated, all transfer amounts shall be submitted by the actuary to the defined contribution plan administrator. Upon notification from the defined contribution plan administrator, the defined benefit board of trustees shall transfer the requested transfer amount in a total lump sum to the plan administrator as designated by the defined contribution board of trustees. 
(d)  The various funds of the defined benefit plan, namely, the reserve for members' contributions, reserve for employer's contribution, reserve for retirees' benefit payments, members supplemental voluntary contribution, the reserve for administrative expense, and the reserve for undistributed income, shall be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the defined benefit plan and not to the actual segregating of assets in the various funds. 
(e)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, the defined benefit board shall comply with the standards and obligations of an investment fiduciary as provided in Act No. 314 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965, as amended, and shall exercise the powers and authority granted to them as an investment fiduciary, under the provisions of such Act. 
(f)  The provisions of Act No. 314 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965, as amended, supersede any of the provisions of this article or rules established by the defined benefit board. 
(Code 1967, § 2-236; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-237. - Credit for service in a reciprocal retirement system. 
The Reciprocal Retirement Act, Act. No. 88 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 38.1101 et seq.), and its subsequent amendments are hereby adopted and all of the provisions of the Act, as amended, are made applicable to members covered under this defined benefit plan. 
(Code 1967, § 2-237; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-238. - Experience tables; regular interest. 
The defined benefit board of trustees shall from time to time adopt mortality and other tables of experience, and a rate or rates of regular interest, that is actuarially necessary for the operation of the defined benefit plan. 
(Code 1967, § 2-238; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-239. - Correction of errors. 
Should any change or error in the records of the city or defined benefit plan result in any person receiving more or less from the defined benefit plan than he or she would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the defined benefit board shall correct such error and as far as practicable, shall adjust the payment of the benefit in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the person was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(Code 1967, § 2-239; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Secs. 25-240—25-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2A. - DEFINED BENEFIT BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
 
Sec. 25-246. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the city a defined benefit board of trustees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-203; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-247. - Composition. 
The defined benefit board shall consist of five (5) trustees, as follows: 
(1)  The mayor, or a citizen of the city designated by the mayor as his or her alternate, to serve at the pleasure of the mayor; 
(2)  A councilperson to be selected by the council, to serve at the pleasure of the council; 
(3)  A citizen, who is an elector of the city and who is not eligible to participate in the retirement system as a member, retirant or beneficiary, to be appointed by the mayor; 
(4)  Two (2) members to be selected from and elected by the general membership of the defined benefit plan. 
(Code 1967, § 2-203; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-248. - Terms. 
The term of office for the trustees selected under the provisions of section 25-247(3) and (4) shall be for three (3) years. 
(Code 1967, § 2-204; Ord. No. 80-299, § 1, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-249. - Compensation, expenses. 
Compensation for trustees selected under the provisions of section 25-247(1) and (3) may be established by resolution of council. Member trustees selected under the provisions of section 25-247(4) shall not suffer a loss because of absence from their employment with the city. A board member shall be reimbursed by the defined benefit plan for all actual and necessary travel and other expenses incurred in the performance of official duties as a board member. 
(Code 1967, § 2-204; Ord. No. 80-299, § 1, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-250. - Filling of vacancies. 
If a member trustee provided in section 25-247(4) ceases to be employed by the city, or if any trustee provided in section 25-247 shall fail to attend scheduled meetings of the defined benefit board for three (3) consecutive meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the remaining trustees attending such meetings, the trustee shall be considered to have resigned from the defined benefit board and the board shall by resolution declare his or her office of trustee vacated as of the date of adoption of such, resolution. If a vacancy occurs in the office of trustee, the office shall be filled within thirty (30) days from and after the date of the vacancy. Vacancies occurring in the office of trustee shall be filled in the same manner as the original selection as provided in section 25-247. 
(Code 1967, § 2-205; Ord. No. 80-308, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-251. - Meetings. 
The defined benefit board shall hold meetings regularly and shall meet at 1 p.m. in the afternoon of any Wednesday of January, April, July, and October of each year and shall designate the place thereof. At any meeting of the defined benefit board, three (3) trustees shall constitute a quorum. Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on each question before the board, and at least three (3) concurring votes shall be required for a decision by the trustees. The defined benefit board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All meetings of the board shall be public. Special meetings may be held upon call by two (2) board members, with notice mailed or delivered forty-eight (48) hours before the special meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 2-206; Ord. No. 80-294, § 1, 11-22-83; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-252. - Officers. 
(a)  The defined benefit board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from its own members. 
(b)  The city controller or his or her assistant if so designated by the controller as his or her alternate, shall be the secretary to the defined benefit board of trustees and shall perform the duties as required in this article and as are required by the board. The secretary shall keep such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the defined benefit plan and provide an annual report to the defined benefit board before December 15 of each year or as otherwise required by the board. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall be treasurer of the defined benefit plan and shall make payments from the monies of the defined benefit plan as directed by the defined benefit board of trustees. Such payments shall be made only upon city vouchers signed by two (2) persons designated by the board. As the treasurer's authority to make payments upon such vouchers, a duly attested copy of the resolution shall be filed with the city treasurer bearing upon its face the signatures of the two (2) persons designated by the defined benefit board. 
(d)  The defined benefit board shall appoint an actuary; he or she shall be the technical advisor to the board on matters regarding the operation of the defined benefit plan and he or she shall perform such other duties as are required of him or her in this article. 
(e)  The legal advisor to the defined benefit board shall be the city attorney, his or her assistant or an attorney designated by the board. 
(f)  The defined benefit board shall have the authority to employ such professional and other services as are required for the proper operation of the defined benefit plan. Compensation for such services shall be fixed by the defined benefit board. 
(Code 1967, § 2-207; Ord. No. 80-300, § 1, 7-10-84; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-253. - Power and authority. 
The defined benefit board of trustees is vested with the power and authority to administer, manage and operate the defined benefit plan, and to construe and make effective the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-203; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-254. - Records, annual report. 
The defined benefit board shall annually render a report to the mayor and city council showing the fiscal transactions of the defined benefit plan for the preceding fiscal year. The board shall furnish such additional information regarding the operation of the defined benefit plan as the mayor or the city council shall from time to time request. 
(Code 1967, § 2-208; Ord. No. 80-300, § 2, 7-10-84; Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99;)  
Secs. 25-255—25-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - THE DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN. 
 
Sec. 25-301. - Establishment; internal revenue code qualification. 
(a)  A defined contribution plan is established as part of the general employees retirement system. It is intended that the defined contribution plan be a qualified pension plan under the Internal Revenue Code section 401, and that the trust be an exempt organization under the Code, section 501. Once established, the city shall not be entitled to receive or recover any part of its contributions to the trust or the earnings thereof and the corpus or income of the trust may not be diverted to or used for any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of the participants or their beneficiaries. 
(b)  Retirement benefits, including contributions and distributions, provided under this division shall conform to the requirements of the Internal Revenue Code, all regulations adopted thereunder and the Governmental Money Purchase Plan adopted herein. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-302. - Adoption of governmental money purchase plan and trust. 
In order to provide retirement benefits to employees and officers eligible for participation in the defined contribution plan and their beneficiaries in the event of death, the City of Warren hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, as if all provisions were set forth herein. The ICMA Retirement Corporation Governmental Money Purchase Plan and Trust, which document shall be included in the Code of Ordinances as Appendix B. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-303. - Amendment of money purchase plan document; notice; recommendation. 
The Governmental Money Purchase Plan and Trust shall be amended by city council in order to retain the plan's status as a qualified plan and as an exempt trust under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or for any other purpose specified in the plan document. The plan administrator shall be required to provide notice to the board of any amendment to the plan necessary to retain the plan's status as a qualified plan and an exempt trust. Prior to any amendment of the plan by city council, notice of the proposed amendment shall be granted to the defined contribution board who may provide its recommendation on the amendment to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-304. - Appointment or removal of plan administrator. 
(a)  The defined contribution board of trustees shall appoint the plan administrator to perform the duties and obligations as set forth in the Governmental Money Purchase Plan and Trust. The plan administrator shall serve at the discretion of the defined contribution board of trustees. Within seven (7) days of making an appointment or removal of the plan administrator, the defined contribution board shall notify the city council and the mayor of such action. 
(b)  In order to qualify for appointment as the plan administrator for the defined contribution plan, the plan administrator appointee must be: 
(1)  Currently administering a municipal defined contribution plan for a minimum of five hundred (500) participants; and 
(2)  At least a medium size company that employs at least twenty (20) employees; and 
(3)  A registered investment advisor under the laws of the State of Michigan; or 
(4)  A registered as a bank under the laws of the State of Michigan; or 
(5)  An insurance company duly authorized to perform services under the laws of more than one state. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-305. - Defined contribution retirement benefits. 
Participants in the defined contribution plan shall receive all retirement benefits pursuant to the applicable collective bargaining agreement or resolution, the adopted Governmental Money Purchase Plan and Trust and in accordance with the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code section 401 and the rules of the Internal Revenue Commission. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-306. - Non-application of Reciprocal Retirement Act. 
The defined contribution plan is not a reciprocal retirement system under the provisions of the Reciprocal Retirement Act, Public Act No. 88 of 1961, MCL 38.1101 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-307. - Participation eligibility. 
Officers, appointed personnel and employees of the City of Warren, Judges, appointed personnel and employees of the 37 th District Court are eligible to participate in the defined contribution plan, unless the employee is represented by a bargaining unit that has not agreed to participate in the defined contribution plan; however, the following persons are excluded from participation in the defined contribution plan: 
(1)  Any person whose services are rendered as an independent contractor; 
(2)  Any person, except an elected officer of the city, employed in a position that is part-time, part-time seasonal, co-op, temporary appointment or special assignment; 
(3)  Any person who is member in the defined benefit plan and elected to not transfer into the defined contribution plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-308. - Participant vesting. 
(a)  Members of the defined benefit plan eligible for participation in the defined contribution plan, who elect to forfeit membership in the defined benefit plan, irrevocably waive all benefits thereunder and elect participation in the defined contribution plan shall, upon transfer of the funds into the defined contribution plan, receive immediate vesting in the defined contribution plan. 
(b)  Officers and employees joining the service of the city, who are eligible for participation in the defined contribution plan shall receive vesting in the defined contribution plan according to the following schedule: 
One year of service 	20% vested 
Two years of service 	40% vested 
Three years of service 	60% vested 
Four years of service 	80% vested 
Five years of service 	100% vested 
 
(c)  All city contributions shall be allocated to the savings oriented model portfolio until the new participant is fully vested in the defined contribution plan. 
(d)  Except for participants who transfer into the defined contribution plan pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, prior credited service in the defined benefit plan shall not be utilized in calculating vesting within the defined contribution plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-309. - Transition rules for participants transferring from the defined benefit plan to the defined contribution plan. 
(a)  For members of the defined benefit plan who are eligible and elect to irrevocably transfer their interest in the defined benefit plan to the defined contribution plan shall have a lump sum amount transferred from the defined benefit plan to the defined contribution plan. The transfer amount shall be determined as of the date established by the collective bargaining agreement. In determining the transfer amount, the following provisions shall control: 
(1)  The amount shall be calculated by using the earliest eligibility date for normal retirement reduced to the present value at the time of the transfer. 
(2)  The actuary shall use the 1984 group annuity mortality table with a 50/50 unisex mix. 
(3)  Calculation of the amount shall be discounted to current age using only interest at 7.5%. 
(4)  Final average compensation shall be calculated as follows: 
• 0 to 3.0 years credited service 	• Current base pay plus 5% 
• 3.1 to 9.0 years credited service 	• Current base pay plus 10% 
• 9.1 to 18 years credited service 	• Current base pay plus 15% 
• 18.1 or more years credited service 	• Current base pay plus 19% 
 
(5)  Current base pay shall mean the base wages in effect on the date of conversion including all percentage increases, step increases and wage inequities. 
(6)  The transfer amount shall include interest at the rate of 7.5 percent for the first thirty (30) days and eleven (11) percent thereafter added for the period between the transfer date to the date the funds are actually transferred into the defined contribution plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-310. - Loans to participants. 
Participants may apply for a loan from the defined contribution plan pursuant to the Governmental Money Purchase Plan. The defined contribution board of trustees shall adopt written guidelines governing the granting of loans. The guidelines shall not conflict with the applicable terms of the Governmental Money Purchase Plan document, shall maintain the qualification of the plan and trust under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and shall be approved by the plan administrator. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-311. - Appeal of denial of claim for benefits. 
If any claim for benefits is denied, the claimant may appeal such denial, in writing, to the plan administrator pursuant to the procedure set forth in the Governmental Money Purchase Plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 25-312. - Termination of plan. 
The city council may terminate the Governmental Money Purchase Plan and Trust as provided in the plan document. Prior to termination of the plan, notice of the proposed termination shall be granted to the defined contribution board who may provide its recommendation for termination to the city council. In the event of termination of the defined contribution plan, no part of the trust shall be used or diverted to any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of the participants or their beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Secs. 25-313—25-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3A. - DEFINED CONTRIBUTION BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
 
Sec. 25-320. - Board of trustees. 
There is hereby created for the city a defined contribution board of trustees that shall consist of five (5) trustees as follows: 
(1)  The mayor, or a designee of the mayor; 
(2)  A councilperson to be selected by the council, to serve at the pleasure of the council; 
(3)  The city controller, or a designee of the controller; 
(4)  Two (2) members to be selected from and elected by the participants of the defined contribution plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-321. - Terms. 
The term of office for the trustees selected under the provisions of section 25-320(4) shall be for three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-322. - Power and authority. 
The defined contribution board of trustees is vested with the power and authority to facilitate administration of the defined contribution plan; the retirement health savings plan; and the deferred compensation plan governed by the Internal Revenue Code, Section 457(b). The defined contribution board shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the plan administrator(s) in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code and pursuant to the provisions of the defined contribution plan; the retirement health savings plan; and the deferred compensation plan; and 
(2)  To decide all questions of eligibility and plan participation for the defined contribution plan; the retirement health savings plan; and the deferred compensation plan; and 
(3)  To hear appeals by any participant, employee, officer or beneficiary for a denial of participation or payment of benefits; and 
(4)  To engage an independent qualified public accountant when necessary; and 
(5)  To engage an independent actuary when necessary; and 
(6)  To administer and keep all necessary records for any loan permitted under the defined contribution plan; the retirement health savings plan; and the deferred compensation plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-323. - Budget; expenses. 
(a)  Annually, the board shall prepare an itemized budget of the expected expenditures of the board for the next fiscal year. The budget shall be submitted to the city controller not later than the first Monday in February of each year. The city controller shall then submit the budget of the defined contribution board to the mayor following the required budget procedure. The city council shall approve a budget providing for the operating expenses of the defined contribution board. 
(b)  Member trustees selected under the provisions of section 25-320(4) shall not suffer a loss because of absence from their employment with the city while performing official board duties. A board member shall be reimbursed by the city for all actual and necessary travel and other expenses incurred in the performance of official duties as a board member. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-324. - Filling of vacancies. 
If a member trustee provided in section 25-320(4) ceases to be employed by the city, or if any trustee provided in section 25-320 shall fail to attend scheduled meetings of the board for three (3) consecutive meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the remaining trustees attending such meetings, the trustees shall be considered to have resigned from the board and the board shall by resolution declare his or her office of trustee vacated as of the date of adoption of such resolution. If a vacancy occurs in the office of trustee, the office shall be filled within thirty (30) days from and after the date of the vacancy. Vacancies occurring in the office of trustee shall be filled in the same manner as the original selection as provided in section 25-320. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-325. - Meetings. 
The defined contribution board shall hold meetings regularly and shall meet on the first Wednesday of January, April, July, and October of each year and shall designate a time and place thereof. At any meeting of the defined contribution board, three (3) trustees shall constitute a quorum. Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on each question before the board, and at least three (3) concurring votes shall be required for a decision by the trustees. The defined contribution board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All meetings of the board shall be public. Special meetings may be held upon call by two (2) board members, with notice mailed or delivered forty-eight (48) hours before the special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-326. - Officers. 
The defined contribution board shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary from its own members to serve a term of one (1) year pursuant to the procedure set forth in its rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-327. - Records; confidentiality; legal adviser. 
(a)  The city controller shall maintain all documents and records of the defined contribution board and shall maintain a record of all official action taken by the board. All information regarding individual participants' accounts shall be kept confidential, not subject to disclosure except by court order. 
(b)  The legal advisor to the defined contribution board of trustees shall be the city attorney, his or her assistant or an attorney designated by the board. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 25-328. - Appeal. 
A participant may appeal a denial of participation to the defined contribution board of trustees. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the defined contribution board within sixty (60) days of the date of the notification of denial. The request for appeal shall contain a statement of the reasons supporting the appeal. The defined contribution board shall schedule an appeal hearing within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request. The defined contribution board may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed from. The decision of the board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 80-546, § 2, 8-24-99; Ord. No. 80-754, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Secs. 25-329—25-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE QUALIFICATION 
 
Sec. 25-336. - Qualified status. 
The retirement system is intended and has been administered as a qualified pension plan under Section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and further the trust is an exempt organization under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-337. - Limitations on benefits and contributions. 
The amount of annual benefits and contributions credited to a member in any given year shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Defined benefit plans. The maximum permissible annual pension benefit with respect to any member shall be in accordance with IRC § 415(b) which provides that such annual pension benefit shall not exceed ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00), as adjusted for inflation, which for 2002 is one hundred sixty thousand dollars ($160,000.00) (the "dollar limit"). 
a.  Special dollar limitations. If the benefit is payable prior to age sixty-two (62), the dollar limitation shall be reduced to the actuarial equivalent of a benefit commencing at age sixty-two (62). In the case of any full-time police or fire employee, who is a qualified participant as defined in IRC § 415(b)(2)(G), there is no reduction in the dollar limitation. If the benefit is not payable until after age sixty-five (65), the dollar limitation shall be increased to the actuarial equivalent of a benefit commencing at age sixty-five (65). 
b.  In the case of an employee who has less than ten (10) years of participation in the plan, the dollar limitation shall be reduced one-tenth ( 1/10 ) for each year of participation in accordance in IRC § 415(b)(5). 
(2)  Defined contribution plans. 
a.  For limitation years beginning after December 31, 1986 the term "annual addition" means, for purposes for this section, the sum, credited to a participant's account for any limitation year, of: 
1.  Employer contributions; 
2.  Employee contributions, and 
3.  Forfeitures. 
b.  Annual additions that may be contributed or allocated to a participant's account for a limitation year will not exceed the lesser of: 
1.  One hundred (100) percent of participant's compensation, within the meaning of IRC § 415(c)(3), or 
2.  Forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), as adjusted for increases in the cost of living pursuant to IRC § 415(d). 
c.  Valuation of investments. Investments of the plan shall be valued as of the last day of each plan year in accordance with the methods consistently followed and uniformly applied to determine fair market value and in accordance with the requirements of revenue ruling 80-155. Contributions to the plan, along with earning thereon, shall be distributed in accordance with the terms of the plan. 
(3)  Excess benefit payment. The retirement system shall not pay any benefit that would exceed the benefit limitations for governmental plans as set forth in § 415 and regulations, as amended. 
(4)  Compensation. As defined by IRC § 415(c)(3)(D) and Treas. Reg. § 1.415-2(d)(2)(i), compensation means amounts actually paid to the employee during the limitation year, including: wages, salary, professional fees, percentage of profits, commissions, tips and bonuses paid or made available to the member during the limitation year for personal services actually rendered in the course of employment, any elective deferral, and any amount which is contributed or deferred by the employer at the election of the employee and which is not includable in the gross income of the employee by reason of IRC § 125 or 457. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-338. - Distributions. 
Distributions from the plan shall comply with the requirements of Code § 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder. A member's interest in the trust must begin to be distributed by the later of (i) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year that the employee attains the age of seventy and one-half (70½), or (ii) April 1 of the calendar year the member retires. With respect to distributions under the plan made for calendar years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, the plan will apply the minimum distribution requirements of IRC § 401(a)(9) in accordance with the regulations under IRC § 401(a)(9) that were proposed in January 2001, notwithstanding any provision in the plan to the contrary. This amendment shall continue in effect until the end of the last calendar year beginning before the effective date of final regulations under § 401(a)(9) or such other date as may be specified in guidance published by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-339. - Eligible rollover distributions. 
This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the retirement system, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee as a direct rollover. The following definitions shall apply with regard to this section. 
(1)  Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one (1) of series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint life (of joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more, and any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under IRC § 401(a)(9). For purposes of the direct rollover provision, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions which are not includable in gross income. However, such portion may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in IRC § 408(a) or (b), or to a qualified plan described in IRC § 401(a) or 403(b) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includable in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includable. 
(2)  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in IRC § 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in IRC § 408(a), an annuity plan described in IRC § 403(a), an annuity contract described in IRC 403(b), an eligible plan under IRC § 457 which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan or a qualified trust described in IRC § 401(a), that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a domestic relations order. 
(3)  Distributee. A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the surviving spouse. 
(4)  Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the retirement system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-340. - Maximum annual earnings. 
For plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1989 and before July 1, 1996, the annual compensation of each participant taken into account for determining all benefits provided under the plan for any determination period shall not include any amounts in excess of the annual compensation limit (originally two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) provided for in IRC § 401(a)(17) prior to the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ("OBRA "93") and adjusted for inflation in the manner provided by IRC § 401(a)(17). For plan years beginning on or after July 1, 1996, the annual compensation of each employee taken into account shall not exceed the annual compensation limit provided for in IRC § 401(a)(17), as amended by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ("OBRA "93") (two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) in 2002). This limit may be adjusted as required by federal law for qualified government plans and shall be further adjusted for inflation in the manner provided by IRC § 401(a)(17). Annual compensation means compensation during the plan year or such other consecutive twelve-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under the plan. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-341. - Actuarial assumptions. 
Actuarial equivalence will be determined on the basis of the interest rate and mortality tables adopted by the retirement system. Actuarial assumptions that will be used to determine the amount or level of any optional benefit forms will be the actuarial equivalent of the normal retirement benefit. Optional benefits provided under the plan shall be actuarial adjusted in relation to the straight life annuity. For purposes determining the IRC § 415 limitations, the interest rate assumption will not be less than the greater of five (5) percent or the rate specified in the plan for determining actuarial equivalence for the particular form of retirement benefit. The actuarial early retirement reduction and reduction of the dollar limit if the employee has less than ten (10) years of participation under IRC § 415 do not apply to income received as a pension or annuity as a result of an employee's personal injury, sickness or death and shall be administered in accordance with IRC § 415(b)(2), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-342. - Forfeitures. 
Upon a member's termination date, the value of any forfeitable accrued benefit shall be forfeited by the member as of the termination date. The value of such forfeitures shall be used to reduce the employer's future contributions under the plan in accordance with IRC § 401(a)(8). No forfeitures under the plan shall be applied to increase the benefits that any member or beneficiary would otherwise receive at any time prior to the time when the plan may be terminated. If a member whose employment has terminated does not retain a vested benefit under the plan, he/she shall no longer be a member or retain or earn credited service under the plan unless and until he/she again becomes an employee. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-343. - Military service. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with IRC § 414(u) and IRC Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-344. - Forfeitability of accrued benefits. 
An employee's right to his/her normal retirement benefit is nonforfeitable on the attainment of his/her normal retirement age as defined in IRC § 411(d)(3) and as defined and protected by Article 9 Section 24 of the State of Michigan Constitution. In the event of termination or partial termination of the plan, a member's interest is nonforfeitable to the extent funded in conformity with applicable sections of the Code and regulations thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-345. - Prohibition against reversion. 
The retirement system and trust have been created for the exclusive benefit of the members and beneficiaries as set forth herein. The funds thereof have been established for the benefit of the members and for the operation of the retirement system. No part of the principal and income of any of the funds of the system and trust shall revert to or be returned to the city prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities hereunder to all members, beneficiaries and anyone claiming by or through them. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-346. - Vesting. 
A member shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in his/her accrued benefit when he or she attains normal retirement age in accordance with IRC § 411(e) as in effect in 1974. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-347. - Actuarial reports. 
Annually, or more frequently, the retirement system shall obtain actuarial computations from an enrolled actuary as to the contributions necessary to fund the benefits provided by the plan on a reasonable basis in accordance with any applicable regulations, and such actuary shall certify such amounts to the employer. Contributions accumulated under the plan, along with the earnings thereon, will be distributed in accordance with the terms of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-580, § 1, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-348. - Qualified excess benefit arrangement. 
(a)  This section is enacted pursuant to Section 415(m) of the Internal Revenue Code and 2002 PA 100, the Michigan Public Employee Retirement Benefit Protection Act. 
(b)  A qualified excess benefit arrangement (QEBA) is established and shall be governed by a separate plan document and trust as established by city council. 
(c)  The amount of any retirement allowance that would exceed the limitations imposed by section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, as set forth in the retirement system, shall be paid from the QEBA in accordance with necessary and appropriate procedures established by the defined benefit board of trustees for the administration of the QEBA. 
(d)  The QEBA shall be a separate portion of the plan. The QEBA is subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The QEBA shall be maintained solely for the purpose of providing to retirants and beneficiaries that part of the retirant's or beneficiary's retirement allowance otherwise payable under the terms of the plan, but which exceed the limitations imposed by section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code; and 
(2)  Retirants and beneficiaries do not have an election, directly or indirectly, to defer compensation to the QEBA. 
(e)  If this ordinance amendment or any portion thereof is held to be invalid by any court competent jurisdiction, and said decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining provisions. 
(Ord. No. 80-615, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Secs. 25-349, 25-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL RETIREMENT HEALTH, LIFE AND DISABILITY BENEFITS PLAN AND TRUST  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 25-351. - Short title. 
This ordinance may be known and cited as the City of Warren Retirement Health, Life and Disability Benefits Plan and Trust ("plan and trust"). 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 2, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-352. - Purpose. 
The plan and trusts herein established shall constitute "voluntary employees' beneficiary associations" (VEBA) under Section 501(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The plan and trusts are created for the exclusive purpose of providing funding for health, and where applicable life and disability, benefits for those eligible to receive such retirement benefits under the City of Warren Employees Retirement Systems, their spouses and eligible dependents. The city intends the benefit expenses to be funded by the establishment and maintenance of a trust fund in conformance with all applicable federal statutes and IRS regulations, state and local law. 
Benefits shall be provided in accordance with the plan through policies issued by duly licensed commercial insurance companies; through a fund of self-insurance; or through any other lawful means of providing group health, life or disability insurance. 
The city reserves the right to enter into substitute contracts with commercial insurance carriers or with health maintenance organizations or preferred provider organizations in order to provide benefits under the plan. 
The city reserves the right to enter into insurance agreements, and to modify, alter or amend such agreements from time to time, with commercial insurance carriers, health maintenance organizations, preferred provider organizations or any other qualified entity currently existing or created for the purpose of providing such benefits. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 2, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-353. - Collective bargaining agreements. 
The benefit provisions of this plan incorporate the relevant provisions of the applicable collective bargaining agreements between the city and all employee associations. The provisions of a collective bargaining agreement relative to retirement health, life and disability benefits are controlling in the event of a conflict between the terms of the collective bargaining agreement and the plan. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to modify or limit in any way the rights of the parties to the collective bargaining agreement, any supplements or memoranda thereto, or any arbitrator's award to enforce the terms of the plan and trust, including the collection of any amount due to the trust and the right of the parties to sue for same. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-354. - Notice. 
Notice given to all interested parties shall, unless otherwise specified in this article, be in writing and personally delivered or sent by prepaid first class mail. The distribution or delivery of any statements or documents required under the plan and trust shall be sufficient if delivered in person or prepaid first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-355. - Reporting and disclosure. 
The city, the plan administrator and the board of trustees, or their respective designees, shall complete and file any reports as may be required by the Code, applicable federal, state or local law. A copy shall be provided to those eligible to receive benefits or participate in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-356. - Amendment. 
The provisions of the plan and trust may be amended by ordinance, adopted by the city council in accordance with applicable law provided the amendment does not alter the tax exempt status of the 501(c)(9) trust. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-357. - Interpretation; applicable law; construction. 
The plan is intended to qualify as a voluntary employees beneficiary association (VEBA) to provide group health, life and disability benefits under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, section 501 and sections 105, 106 and 162; the regulations promulgated under each section; and applicable federal and Michigan law. If any provisions of the plan are determined invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions shall remain in effect. 
Neither the establishment of the plan nor the trust nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund or account, nor the payment of any benefits, shall be construed as giving to any person covered under the plan and trust or other person any legal or equitable right against the city, its elected or appointed officials or employees, the trustees or any individual trustee, except as may otherwise be provided in this article. 
Neither the city nor the trustees shall be responsible for the validity of any insurance agreement issued in connection with the plan or trust or for the failure on the part of the insurer to make payments provided by such insurance agreement, or for the action of any person which may delay payment or render an insurance agreement null and void or unenforceable in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Secs. 25-358, 25-359. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 25-360. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of Article IV, the following words shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Base plan means the retirement health, life and disability benefits in effect at the time of eligibility as provided by the policy or the comprehensive program in place at that time. The city may elect to provide a substantially equivalent policy or program. HMO, PPO and other alternative plans are not included in the base plan. 
Benefit eligibility means the determination that an individual is entitled to receive benefits implemented by this plan pursuant to the eligibility criteria set forth in this article. 
Board refers to both the board of trustees of the general retirement health, life and disability benefits and the board of trustees of the police and fire retirement health benefits. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Reference to any section or subsection of the Code includes reference to any and all amendments. 
Collective bargaining agreement(s) means any written agreement, supplemental agreement or memorandum of understanding by and between the applicable collective bargaining associations and the city; or any final arbitration or judicial decision interpreting the written agreement. 
Collective bargaining associations means those associations which have negotiated to participate in this plan and trust. 
Contributions means the payment required to be made to the trust by the city to provide funding for retirement group health insurance, life insurance and disability benefits for those eligible to receive benefits from the plan. 
Dependent means dependent as defined in the applicable City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan; alternate insurance policy offered by the city; or future insurance policy or plan which may be provided. 
Disability plan means the City of Warren Disability Benefit Plan which provides disability benefits to individuals eligible under the defined contribution plan as provided in Division 4 of this article. 
Employees retirement system means the City of Warren General Employees Retirement System, as provided in Chapter 25, Article III of the City of Warren Code of Ordinances which includes the defined benefit plan, the defined Contribution plan, and the retirement health, life and disability benefits plan and trust. 
Insurance agreement means the health, life and disability insurance plan(s) and amendments, including any substitute insurance agreement with a commercial insurance carrier. 
Insurance carrier means a commercial health, life and disability insurance provider, health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization or other qualified entity designated by the city to provide benefits under the plan. 
Major life event changes means birth of a child, legal adoption, legal separation, divorce, legal guardianship, death, or marriage of a dependent child. 
Plan means the retirement health, and where applicable life and disability, benefits plan as provided by this ordinance, any subsequent amendments, the collective bargaining agreements, the medical benefit plan, insurance agreement(s), and other applicable insurance policy documents incorporated by reference into the plan. 
Plan administrator means the person, firm, corporation or insurance company appointed by the city to administer the plan. The plan administrator shall be responsible for the day to day operations of the plan and shall carry out the directives of the city. The city may appoint more than one (1) plan administrator. 
Plan year is a calendar year commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31 of each year. 
Qualified beneficiary means any person satisfying the eligibility requirements of the plan for beneficiaries including spouses and dependents. 
Retirement health care benefit plan means the City of Warren's self-insured health care benefit plan which provides retirement health care benefits to those eligible to participate in the plan pursuant to the applicable collective bargaining agreement which may include medical, dental, vision and/or life insurance benefits. 
Special entrant dependent means special entrant as defined in the applicable City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan, alternate insurance, or future insurance policy or plan which may provide coverage. 
Sponsored dependent means sponsored dependent as defined in the applicable City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan, alternate insurance policy offered by the city, or future insurance policy or plan which may provide coverage. 
Spouse means those individuals legally married on the date of benefit eligibility. 
Trust means the declaration of trust for both the general retirement health, life and disability benefits plan and the police and fire retirement health benefits plan established in Division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 3, 7-27-04)  
DIVISION 3. - RETIREMENT HEALTH CARE BENEFIT PLAN 
 
Sec. 25-361. - Retirement health care benefits. 
The city shall provide retirement health care benefits to those eligible pursuant to the applicable collective bargaining agreements, implemented through ordinance, insurance agreements and/or the City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan. 
Those individuals eligible for benefits shall be entitled to the retirement health care benefits in effect on the date of benefit eligibility. The benefits may be provided under the same policy or program in place on that date or under a substantially equivalent policy or program as provided in the collective bargaining agreements. All individuals in receipt of health care benefits at the time of enactment of this plan and trust shall continue to be eligible for the same benefits. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-362. - Life insurance benefits included. 
The retirement health care benefit plan shall include life insurance benefits for those eligible and the nominated qualified beneficiaries provided in the applicable collective bargaining agreement in effect on the date of benefit eligibility. 
Subject to all applicable provisions of the plan and/or insurance agreements, each eligible to participate in the plan must nominate a beneficiary(ies) with the city. The death of an individual eligible to participate in the plan, must be reported to the city. Upon notification, the nominated beneficiary(ies) will be required to complete form(s) supplied by the city and submit certain required information to effectuate processing and payment of the death benefits to the nominated beneficiary(ies). 
Individuals eligible for life insurance benefits at the time of enactment of this plan and trust shall continue to be eligible for the same benefits. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-363. - Incorporation of applicable provisions; description of benefits. 
The collective bargaining agreements, insurance agreement(s) and/or City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan are incorporated herein by reference. A complete description of benefits provided under the plan, the insurance agreements, the City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan and the collective bargaining agreements, shall be maintained by the plan administrator. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-364. - Eligibility; health care benefits. 
Subject to applicable collective bargaining agreement provisions, eligibility for retirement health care benefits during any plan year shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Member of the general employee or police and fire defined benefit plan- has met the age and credited service eligibility requirements for retirement under the applicable defined benefit plan of the city, terminated employment and commenced retirement benefits. 
(2)  Participant in the defined contribution plan - has met the age and credited service requirements for collection of retirement health care benefits as provided in the applicable collective bargaining agreement and has terminated employment with the City of Warren. 
(3)  Member of the defined benefit plan on a deferred retirement - has met the age and credited service eligibility requirements for retirement under the defined benefit plan of the city and has commenced receipt of retirement benefits. 
(4)  Retiree, retiree's spouse or dependent - on the effective date of this ordinance, a retiree, retiree's spouse or dependent who was eligible and receiving retirement health benefits from the city. 
(5)  Disability retirant - has been granted a disability retirement benefit under the defined benefit plan or this plan and has commenced receipt of disability retirement benefits. 
(6)  Spouse - is legally married on the date of benefit eligibility to the participant, member or retiree eligible to receive benefits from the plan who meets the age and credited service requirements for collection of retirement health care benefits as provided in the applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(7)  Survivor benefits - a spouse, dependent, sponsored dependent or special entrant dependent of an eligible participant may be eligible for survivor health care benefits after the death of the participant provided: 
(a)  Defined contribution plan. the participant in the defined contribution plan, on the date of death, was eligible and receiving retirement health care benefits and had the right to name a beneficiary; and there is a surviving spouse or surviving dependent, sponsored dependent or special entrant dependent the participant named as beneficiary; or 
(b)  Defined benefit plan. the member of the defined benefit plan, on the date of death, was eligible for retirement health care benefits and had elected an optional joint and survivor beneficiary form of retirement and had named the spouse or dependent as beneficiary of the option benefit in compliance with section 25-220 of this ordinance; or the spouse or dependent qualifies for benefits from the defined benefit plan pursuant to section 25-225 or 25-226. 
(c)  The surviving spouse health care benefit shall not terminate upon re-marriage; however coverage shall not extend to the surviving spouse's successive spouse and/or dependents. 
(8)  Settlement agreement - retirement health care benefits were granted under a settlement agreement between the city and the participant. 
(9)  Court order - retirement health care benefits were granted by court order provided that satisfactory documentation of the order is presented at the time enrollment for benefits is made, provided however, the city reserves the right to challenge the validity of any court order produced and if such challenge proves successful then the cost of any benefits provided shall be reimbursed to the trust. 
(10)  No person shall be eligible to receive benefits under the plan who is a part-time, part-time seasonal, co-op, temporary appointment, special assignment employee or who is compensated for services to the city on a fee or independent contractual basis. 
(11)  In the event there is an issue as to eligibility for participation in the plan, the board of trustees shall decide who is eligible within the meaning of the provisions of this plan and trust, the applicable ordinance provisions, the collective bargaining agreements and established written city policy. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 4, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-365. - Commencement of benefit. 
Subject to all applicable provisions of the plan, the insurance agreements, and/or the City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan, retirement health care benefits shall commence on the first day the eligibility requirements are satisfied and enrollment for coverage has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-366. - Enrollment. 
Retirement health care benefits shall not commence until enrollment for coverage has been completed in compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The city shall give those eligible to participate in the plan written notice of eligibility and the right to enroll for coverage under the plan at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of eligibility. Enrollment for coverage shall be initiated on a form provided by and filed with the city. All information requested by the city, the plan administrator and/or the insurance carrier shall be furnished prior to commencement of benefits. The city, the plan administrator and the insurance carrier may rely upon the information as provided on the enrollment form and the information furnished. 
(2)  Qualified beneficiaries such as a spouse and eligible dependents shall be enrolled for coverage under the plan at the time the individual who is eligible to participate in the plan enrolls for coverage under the plan or as provided for in subsection (3). 
(3)  Anyone participating in the plan must report "major life event changes" to the city promptly in order to add or delete beneficiaries from their benefit plan. "Major life event changes" may impact eligibility for benefits. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-367. - Alternative policies or programs. 
The city, in its discretion, may offer alternative policies or benefit structures. In the event that the city chooses to offer alternative policies or benefit structures, those eligible may transfer from one (1) policy or benefit structure to another policy or benefit structure during open enrollment periods. However, any additional cost of the alternative policy or benefit structure cost shall be born by those who elect to participate in the alternative policy or benefit structure. The city will have no obligation to give notice of the open enrollment period for alternative policies or benefit structures. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-368. - Coordination of benefits. 
Payment under this plan shall not exceed the amount of the expenses incurred. For this reason, benefits shall be coordinated with other insurance policies according to industry standards and applicable laws. The following provisions shall apply in coordinating benefits: 
(1)  Reimbursement. If an expense is paid under the plan by the plan administrator and such expense is subsequently paid from any other source, in whole or in part, the individual who received the benefit, shall remit to the plan an amount equal to the duplicated benefits. In addition, the plan administrator may reimburse any other plan, person or entity which has paid an expense on behalf of anyone participating in the plan, for any amount which was payable under the plan. In such event, the plan, plan administrator and/or the insurance carrier shall be relieved of all further responsibility with respect to that expense. 
(2)  Subrogation. In the event any payment is made by the trust under the plan, the plan and the trust shall be subrogated and shall succeed to the rights of anyone participating in the plan or any qualified beneficiary, against any other plan, person or entity for recovery of health care expenses for which such other plan, person or entity is legally liable. All amounts recovered by settlement, judgment or otherwise, shall be paid to the trust. Those participating in the plan shall furnish information requested, shall execute and deliver any assignments, documents or other instruments requested, and shall secure the rights of the plan. Those participating in the plan shall take no action to prejudice the rights and interests of the plan hereunder. 
(3)  Effect of exclusions. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to create any independent right to payment of any benefit under this plan. Any exclusion or limitation contained in the plan, insurance agreement and/or City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan shall supersede any provision of this section regarding coordination of benefits. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-369. - Medicare eligibility. 
Upon attaining Medicare eligibility, those participating in the plan and/or qualified spouses may enroll for Medicare coverage, unless specifically required pursuant to the applicable collective bargaining agreement. Upon receipt of Medicare coverage and upon making application for reimbursement, the plan shall reimburse the basic monthly premium cost of Medicare coverage and shall provide complimentary coverage in accordance with the applicable collective bargaining agreement and/or the benefit coverage in effect at the time of retirement. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 4, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-370. - Termination of benefits. 
Except as provided in section 25-371, participation in the plan shall terminate as provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement and/or the plan on the earliest date: 
(1)  Termination of the plan; or 
(2)  Non-payment of any required contributions; or 
(3)  Death of the individual receiving benefits under the plan; or 
(4)  The written election to cease coverage under the plan; or 
(5)  Upon becoming a full-time member of the armed services of any country; or 
(6)  In the case of a spouse or dependent, the date the spouse or dependent ceases to be a spouse or dependent as defined in the plan; or 
(7)  In the case of a spouse, dependent, sponsored dependent, or special entrant dependent, death of the eligible member who elected a straight life equivalent form of retirement benefit at the time of retirement; or if the eligible participant failed to nominate the required beneficiary necessary to ensure coverage of the spouse, dependent, sponsored dependent or special entrant dependent; or 
(8)  In the case of an eligible participant, upon that individual assuming employment elsewhere and the subsequent employer providing health care benefit coverage to the eligible participant which does not substantially differ from that offered by the plan; however, in the event the subsequent health benefit coverage is discontinued for any reason, including voluntary or involuntary separation of employment, the city's obligation to provide health coverage under the plan shall recommence immediately upon the presentation of proof of discontinuation; or 
(9)  As otherwise provided for by collective bargaining. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-371. - COBRA continuation coverage. 
Notwithstanding the above provisions of section 25-370, continuing health care benefit insurance coverage shall be provided under the plan to those eligible, in accordance with Internal Revenue Code provisions, Section 4980B, and Title XXII of the Public Health Services Act,"COBRA continuation coverage," as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-372. - Conversion privilege. 
An individual who is no longer eligible to receive health care benefits under the plan, including a spouse, dependent or COBRA qualified beneficiary, may, if permitted by and in accordance with the terms of the plan, the insurance agreement, or the City of Warren Medical Benefit Plan, convert his or her coverage under the plan to an individual medical expense policy with the plan administrator and/or the insurance carrier, without the necessity of a medical examination and with no interruption in coverage. Application for individual conversion coverage must be made to the city and/or the plan administrator in accordance with the plan. A COBRA qualified beneficiary must be given notification of this conversion privilege during the one hundred eighty-day period ending on the expiration of the qualified beneficiary's COBRA continuation period. The cost of individual conversion coverage shall be paid solely by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Secs. 25-373—25-379. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DISABILITY BENEFIT PLAN 
 
Sec. 25-380. - Disability benefits. 
(1)  Participants in the defined contribution plan and trust shall receive disability benefits from the plan which are equivalent to the disability benefits provided in Article III, Division 2, sections 25-221 through 25-224 of this ordinance, as amended. The benefits provided shall conform to the applicable collective bargaining agreement 
(2)  Members of the defined benefit plan shall receive disability benefits from the defined benefit plan as set forth in Article III, Division 2, sections 25-221 through 25-224 of these ordinances, as amended. 
(3)  Division 4, disability benefit plan, does not apply to members of the police and fire retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 5, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-381. - Disability benefits eligibility. 
In order to be eligible for disability benefits during any plan year, a current employee must qualify as totally and permanently disabled by reason of a personal injury or disease pursuant to sections 25-221 through 25-224 of this ordinance; and 
(1)  Is a participant of the defined contribution plan and trust; or 
(2)  Is a member of the defined benefit plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-382. - Computation of benefits for participant in defined contribution plan and trust. 
The disability benefits provided pursuant to the applicable collective bargaining agreement to an eligible participant in the defined contribution plan and trust, shall be computed as provided in section 25-216 of Division 2 of Article III of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances, as amended. The city's liability for the disability benefit shall be offset by: 
(1)  Any amount which may be payable pursuant to the Workers' Compensation Act, if applicable; and 
(2)  By the lifetime annuity value of the employee's 401(a) defined contribution account, determined as of the effective date of the participant's disability-related separation from service. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Secs. 25-383—25-389. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION OF PLAN BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 25-390. - City administrative duties. 
(a)  The city shall be responsible for the performance of its duties as employer and plan sponsor under applicable Internal Revenue Code sections. The city may employ a plan administrator and/or insurance carrier who may be responsible for the administration and the payment of claims under the plan. The city may delegate all or any part of its plan administration responsibilities to the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier. Any delegation shall be done in writing. 
(b)  The city shall be responsible for complying with the code's reporting and disclosure requirements and for fulfilling such other plan administrative functions as are not specifically assigned to the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier. 
(c)  The city may contract one (1) or more persons to render advice with regard to any responsibility under the plan. Any fiduciary, agent, representative or other person contracted to perform services to the plan, shall be entitled to reasonable compensation and reimbursement for expenses actually incurred. Any city employee providing services to the plan shall not be entitled to any additional compensation from the plan and trust. 
(d)  The city shall furnish the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier any information required for enrollment under the plan; for the processing of terminations or other changes in coverage; and shall furnish to the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier such other information required for the administration of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-391. - Insurance carrier administrative duties. 
Each insurance carrier shall have the responsibility for interpreting and administering their respective insurance agreement; for processing and paying benefit claims thereunder; and shall provide the city with such information as the city may deem necessary to permit the timely filing of all reports required by law. The insurance carrier shall also provide a description of the benefits provided under their respective insurance agreement directly to all those participating in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-392. - Plan administrator duties. 
The plan administrator shall have the responsibility for administering the plan and for processing and paying benefit claims thereunder, and shall provide the board of trustees with such information necessary to permit the timely filing of all reports required by applicable laws or regulations governing the trust. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-393. - Benefit eligibility dispute determination by board of trustees. 
Any dispute as to benefit eligibility shall be referred to the board of trustees to determine applying the benefit eligibility requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-394. - Claims procedures for health benefits. 
A claim for benefits under the plan must be submitted in writing to the plan administrator and/or insurance carrier in accordance with procedures established and distributed in writing. The plan administrator and/or insurance carrier shall provide adequate notice to anyone whose claim for benefits under this plan has been denied. The denial shall be provided in writing and shall specify the reasons for such denial. Any dispute involving the payment of benefits shall be resolved by the plan administrator and/or respective insurance carrier administering the benefits under the plan. The plan administrator and/or insurance carrier shall afford a reasonable opportunity for a full and fair review of any decision denying a claim. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Secs. 25-395—25-399. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DECLARATION OF TRUST 
 
Sec. 25-400. - Irrevocable VEBA; establishment of trusts. 
The Internal Revenue Code, section 501(c)(9) exempts from taxation voluntary employees' beneficiary associations (VEBA) which provide health, life and accident benefits to its members. Based on this IRS authorization, the city hereby authorizes the VEBA and establishes two (2) VEBA Trusts to provide health, and where applicable life and disability, benefits to eligible members, participants and retirees of both the general employees retirement system and the police and fire Retirement system. The VEBA trusts shall be titled the City of Warren General Retirement Health, Life and Disability Benefits Trust, and the City of Warren Police and Fire Retirement Health Benefits Trust. The trusts shall be irrevocable and shall conform to all applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 6, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-401. - Funding of the trust. 
(1)  For the purpose of creating and maintaining a pre-funded plan for the payment of health, life and disability benefits under the plan, the city shall pay to the trusts an amount consistent with actuarial valuations and calculations. In addition, funding provisions contained in the collective bargaining agreements shall be effectuated. 
(2)  Qualified beneficiaries shall pay to the trust contributions as required for additional benefit coverage elected by the qualified beneficiary. 
(3)  The board of trustees shall adopt rules and procedures for all payments made to the trust, and shall provide the forms required to accompany such payments, unless specified otherwise in the trust. All rules and procedures shall conform to all tax provisions of the City Charter and state law, 
(4)  The board of trustees shall adopt a schedule for all payments to be made to the trust. All payments made shall be immediately processed. The regular and timely payment of contributions is essential to the operation of the trust and the providing of benefits under various insurance programs. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 6, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-402. - Trust assets. 
Each trust shall consist of all contributions paid by the city; contributions paid by those participating and any qualified beneficiaries due to the election of additional benefit coverage beyond that provided by the city; all investments made or held under trust; all investment income, both received and accrued; and any other property received or held by the trust. Funds paid as a result of premium sharing required pursuant to applicable collective bargaining agreements and/or city policy, shall be paid as directed by the plan administrator. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 6, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-403. - Use of trust assets. 
(a)  All income, profits, contributions, forfeitures, recoveries and any and all monies, securities and properties of any kind at any time received or held by the board of trustees, shall become part of the trust when received, and shall be held for the use and purposes of the trust. 
(b)  The trust assets shall be used for the exclusive purpose of providing retirement health, life and disability benefits for those eligible to participate in the plan and may include administrative expenses for professional services and expenses related to operation of the trust. The trust assets shall not be used for or diverted to purposes other than to provide the health, life and disability benefits contemplated under the plan. 
(c)  No one participating in the plan shall be entitled to receive any part of the contributions made by the city or payments required to be made by the trust in lieu of benefits provided under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-404. - Trust liabilities. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for payment to the trust of any amount other than those required of it by the trust and/or any applicable collective bargaining agreement. Neither the city, nor any trustee, nor anyone participating in the trust shall be liable for any debt, liability or obligation of the trust, except as provided for in this chapter. Any contribution improperly paid into the trust shall be returned by the board of trustees upon the request of the city or other payee upon discovery by the board of trustees that such monies have been improperly paid into the trust. 
(b)  No part of the trust or any benefit payable by the board of trustees shall be subject to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge or encumbrance by any person. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-405. - Termination of the trust. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations of this chapter, new employment benefit decisions may be made by the city or through collective bargaining which modify the provisions of the trust. The trust shall continue during such period of time as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of any ordinance or collective bargaining agreement requiring the trust and the fact that such collective bargaining agreements or employment benefit decisions are not extended shall not by itself terminate the trust, which shall continue for a period of time sufficient to wind up the affairs of the trust. 
(b)  In the event there is no longer anyone eligible to participate in the trust or receive benefits from the trust, the trust may be terminated at that time by the board of trustees, provided that the termination is not inconsistent with any ordinance or collective bargaining agreement. It shall not be necessary for the city or the collective bargaining associations to execute such an agreement for termination of the trust. 
(c)  Upon termination of the trust, the board of trustees shall forthwith notify the plan administrator and any insurance carrier providing insurance under the plan. 
(d)  In the event of the termination of the trust, the funds remaining after providing for all the outstanding obligations shall be used in a manner pursuant to and consistent with all provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Secs. 25-406—25-409. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - BOARDS OF TRUSTEES FOR THE CITY OF WARREN GENERAL RETIREMENT HEALTH, LIFE AND DISABILITY BENEFITS PLAN AND TRUSTS 
 
Sec. 25-410. - Administration of plan and trusts by board of trustees. 
The general administration, management and responsibility for the proper operation of both the City of Warren General Retirement Health, Life and Disability Benefits Trust and the Police and Fire Retirement Health Benefits Trust, shall be vested in the respective board of trustees, consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. A trustee or other fiduciary under the trust shall discharge his or her duties with respect to the trust solely for the purpose of providing retirement health, life and disability benefits to those eligible to receive such benefits. The trustees shall discharge their duties with the care, skill and caution which a prudent person, acting in a like capacity and familiar with those matters, would use in the conduct of an activity of like character and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 7, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-411. - Composition and operation of board of trustees. 
(a)  The general employees defined benefit board of trustees as composed pursuant to section 25-247 to 25-254 of Division 2A of Article III of Chapter 25, is hereby authorized to serve as the board of trustees for the VEBA trust entitled the general retirement health, life and disability benefits plan and trust. 
(b)  The police and fire retirement board of trustees authorized by sec. 16.1 of the City Charter and as composed pursuant to Public Act 345 of 1937, as amended, is hereby authorized to serve as the board of trustees for the VEBA trust entitled the City of Warren Police and Fire Retirement Health Benefits Plan and Trust. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-614, § 7, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 25-412. - Authority of the board of trustees. 
(a)  Consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations, the board of trustees shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations for the day-to-day management of the trust; the investment of monies held by the trust; and to determine all questions regarding the interpretation of the trust. 
(b)  Whenever the signature of a trustee is required on any document, signature of the chairperson/acting chairperson and secretary shall be required. 
(c)  In the event of any suit brought against the board of trustees arising out of an act within the scope and powers of the board of trustees, or in the event of any lawsuit brought by the board of trustees as authorized by this chapter, the cost of defense or prosecution of such lawsuit shall be charged to the trust, and shall be paid directly from the trust, provided such costs are not incurred by reason of bad faith, gross negligence, or breach of a fiduciary obligation to the trust or to the beneficiaries thereof. 
(d)  The board of trustees may employ such clerical personnel or administrative personnel to perform administrative functions that are required in the proper performance of the trust. In addition, the board of trustees may, if they desire, contract with an administrator to perform such clerical and administrative duties as they may, in their sole discretion, determine is reasonably and prudently necessary to carry out the trust's activities and purposes. Under no circumstances shall said administrator have control or authority with respect to the management of the trust or its assets. The said administrator shall not be clothed with any type of authority or power which will constitute the administrator as a fiduciary. The administrator will not have the power or authority to act as an investment counselor or manager and will not be authorized to furnish investment advice. 
(e)  The board of trustees may utilize city staff for such functions as legal counsel, personnel, administration, accounting, banking and purchasing and will comply with all established city control procedures and policies related to these services. The board will annually reimburse the city for actual costs of these services as determined by a method jointly agreed upon by the board and the city. 
(f)  The city may, upon the request of the board, assign employees to assist in administration of the trust. When providing services to the board of trustees, said employees shall be subject to the supervision of the board. The board will annually reimburse the city for the actual costs of these employees as determined by a method jointly agreed upon by the board and the city. 
(g)  The board of trustees may employ investment managers to manage the assets of the trust. Each investment manager shall be registered under the Investment Advisor's Act of 1940, as amended, and must meet all applicable state and federal requirements to act as an investment manager. In addition, the board of trustees may appoint and enter into agreements with managers, banks or insurance companies to serve as fiduciary and may convey to such fiduciary the assets of the trust to manage and/or hold the assets pursuant to the directive of the agreement and in accordance with the provisions of Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended. 
(h)  The board of trustees may employ legal counsel with whom they may seek advice, consult with, require attendance at meetings and to otherwise represent the trustees in matters relating to the trust. 
(i)  The board of trustees may authorize the purchase of insurance for the trust and for the trustees to cover liability or losses occurring for any reason, including but not limited to, errors or omissions of a fiduciary, including trustees; however, in case of a breach of fiduciary obligation, the insurance policy shall provide recourse by the insured against the fiduciary, including the trustee or trustees involved. 
(j)  The board of trustees shall appoint an actuary who shall advise the board on the actuarial operation of the plan and trust. The trustees shall, from time to time, adopt such mortality and other tables of experience and a rate or rates of regular interest as are necessary in the operation of the trust on an actuarial basis. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-413. - Board meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be held monthly at a time and place to be designated by the board. An annual schedule of regular meetings shall be adopted at the first meeting in January and shall be thereafter posted. All special meetings may be called by two (2) board members and all meetings shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq. Three (3) trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on each question before the board and at least three (3) concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 25-414. - Qualification of trust as tax exempt under Section 501(c)(9). 
The plan and trust shall be tax exempt and shall qualify under the Internal Revenue Code, Section 501(c)(9), and any amendments of the Code applicable to plans of this type. The trustees shall take no action nor make any determination inconsistent with any qualification or ruling of the Internal Revenue Service, an arbitrator or the courts with respect to the trust. The trustees shall have the continuing duty to propose to the city amendments to this article to the extent it becomes necessary to qualify said plan and trust under the Internal Revenue Code and to continue the tax exempt status of the trust. In the case of amendments to the Internal Revenue Code or changes of regulations by the Internal Revenue Service or the Labor Department, the trustees are empowered to take all action authorized by this article, federal and state law and regulations, to continue the qualification of the trust. In carrying out the purposes of the trust, the trustees shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The board of trustees, in order to effectuate the purposes of the trust, shall be bound by the terms of the plan, the trust, all applicable collective bargaining agreements and shall comply with all applicable laws. 
(2)  The board of trustees shall establish a uniform system for the timely transmission of required reports and contributions from the city. 
(3)  The trustees, in accordance with the requirements of law, may direct an impartial firm of independent certified public accountants to act as agent of the trustees to examine the payroll records and reports as may be necessary. Such agent shall prepare a written report for submission to the board with a copy to the city. 
(4)  The trustees shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, proper books of accounts and records of and for the administration of the trust, including the minutes of all meetings, make them available for inspection at the permanent office of the board of trustees. 
(5)  The financial records of the trust shall be subject to the annual audit of the city. The trustees shall fully comply with all applicable statutory and municipal budgetary and accounting procedures and provide access to and/or documentation of all assets and liabilities of the trust and a resume of the operations of the trust for the preceding year together with such other data as may be required by law and/or as part of the city's annual financial report to the state treasurer. 
(6)  The trustees shall be authorized, pursuant to Public Act 149 of 1999, as amended, to invest the assets of the trust in accordance with the provisions of Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended. 
(7)  The trustees shall hold all the powers that are necessary to carry out the purposes of the trust and are generally available to trustees under the laws of the State of Michigan, except as limited by the trust and by federal law and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 80-577, § 2, 12-11-01)  
ARTICLE V. - RETIREMENT HEALTH SAVINGS PLAN (RHS) 
 
Sec. 25-415. - Retirement health savings plan (RHS). 
(a)  Establishment . The city shall provide retirement health care benefits savings plan to those eligible pursuant to the applicable collective bargaining agreements, implemented through ordinance, insurance agreements and/or the City of Warren Retirement Health Savings Plan. 
(b)  Administration; appointment or removal of plan administrator. The defined contribution board of trustees is vested with the power and authority to facilitate administration of the retirement health savings plan. The defined contribution board of trustees shall appoint the plan administrator to perform the duties and obligations as set forth in the retirement health savings plan. The defined contribution board of trustees is authorized to execute an administrative/recordkeeping service agreement. However, any agreement that imposes a cost to the city in an amount as set forth in chapter 2, section 2-337c(6) shall require council approval. The plan administrator shall serve at the discretion of the defined contribution board of trustees. Within seven (7) days of making an appointment or removal of the plan administrator, the defined contribution board of trustees shall notify the city council and the mayor of such action. 
(c)  Amendment. The retirement health savings plan document(s) shall be amended by city council in order to retain the plan's status as a qualified plan in accordance with the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended or for any other purpose specified in the plan document. The plan administrator shall be required to provide notice to the defined contribution board of trustees of any amendment to the plan necessary to retain the plan's status as a qualified plan and trust. Prior to any amendment of the plan by city council, notice of the proposed amendment shall be provided to the defined contribution board of trustees who may provide its recommendation on the amendment to the city council. 
(d)  Termination of plan. The city council may terminate the retirement health savings plan as provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement and/or the plan document. Prior to termination of the plan, notice of the proposed termination shall be provided to the defined contribution board of trustees who may provide its recommendation for termination to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-754, § 2, 3-28-17)  
Secs. 25-416—25-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - THE DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 25-421. - Deferred compensation plan. 
(a)  Establishment . The city provides the option for participation in a deferred compensation plan for eligible employees. The primary purpose of the plan is to provide retirement income and other deferred benefits to eligible officers and employees in accordance with the provisions of Section 457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(b)  Adoption. The city council adopts and incorporates by reference, the deferred compensation plan(s) and trust for each approved provider as if all provisions were set forth herein. 
(c)  Administration; appointment or removal of plan administrator. The defined contribution board of trustees is vested with the power and authority to facilitate administration of the deferred compensation plan(s). The defined contribution board of trustees shall appoint the plan administrator(s) to perform the duties and obligations as set forth in the deferred compensation plan and trust. The defined contribution board of trustees is authorized to execute an administrative/recordkeeping service agreement. However, any agreement that imposes a cost to the city in an amount as set forth in chapter 2, section 2-337c(6) shall require council approval. The plan administrator shall serve at the discretion of the defined contribution board of trustees. Within seven (7) days of making an appointment or removal of the plan administrator, the defined contribution board of trustees shall notify the city council and the mayor of such action. 
(d)  Amendment. The deferred compensation plan and trust shall be amended by city council in order to retain the plan's status as a qualified plan in accordance with the provisions of Section 457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended or for any other purpose specified in the plan document. The plan administrator shall be required to provide notice to the defined contribution board of trustees of any amendment to the plan necessary to retain the plan's status as a qualified plan and trust. Prior to any amendment of the plan by city council, notice of the proposed amendment shall be provided to the defined contribution board of trustees who may provide its recommendation on the amendment to the city council. 
(e)  Participation eligibility. The defined contribution board of trustees may provide a recommendation to the mayor and city council regarding amendments to the eligibility requirements. Any amendments to the eligibility requirements shall be done by city council resolution and as provided under the terms of the plan document. 
(f)  Loans to participants. Participants may apply for a loan subject to the terms in the deferred compensation plan documents. 
(g)  Termination of plan. The city council may terminate the deferred compensation plan as provided by the applicable collective bargaining agreement and/or the plan document. Prior to termination of the plan, notice of the proposed termination shall be provided to the defined contribution board of trustees who may provide its recommendation for termination to the city council. In the event of termination of the deferred compensation plan, no part of the trust shall be used or diverted to any purpose other than the exclusive benefits of the participants or their beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. 80-754, § 3, 3-28-17)  
Secs. 25-422—25-430. - Reserved. 

Chapter 26 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public safety, § 7.16 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; city crime commission, § 2-141 et seq.; emergency preparedness, Ch. 11; offenses, Ch. 22; personnel, Ch. 25; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 37. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 26-16. - Appointment; call to duty; control. 
(a)  The mayor, upon the recommendation of the police commissioner, is directed to appoint special officers to be known as "auxiliary police officers" in such numbers as the mayor deems necessary subject to such rules and regulations as the police commissioner may promulgate. 
(b)  Such officers may be called to active duty at any time by the police commissioner or, in the police commissioner's absence, by a command officer of the police department, and such officers shall be under the direction, supervision and control of the police commissioner. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1301; Ord. No. 80-340, § 27, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 26-17. - Rules for qualification, appointment and removal. 
The police commissioner shall promulgate rules relating to qualifications, appointment and removal of auxiliary police officers and shall fix the minimum and maximum age of the officers. The maximum age may be waived for former or retired police officers or for persons with military experience. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1303)  
Sec. 26-18. - Compensation. 
Auxiliary police officers shall serve without compensation except where the city council shall have made provision and an appropriation therefor for the particular duty being performed or for actual expenses incurred, or for a lump sum payment to the entire auxiliary unit. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1303)  
Sec. 26-19. - Workers' compensation. 
An auxiliary police officer, while acting under the direction of the police commissioner during a regular assigned tour of duty, is an employee of the city and is entitled to receive workers' compensation benefits, and his or her average weekly earning shall be deemed to be such amount as will qualify him or her and/or his or her dependents for the maximum benefits under the Michigan Workers' Compensation Law at the date of injury. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1304)  
Sec. 26-20. - Badge, dress, insignia. 
Auxiliary police officers shall wear such badge, dress and insignia and be equipped in such manner for the proper discharge of their duties as the police commissioner shall direct. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1302)  
Sec. 26-21. - Exercise of authority; restriction. 
It shall be unlawful for an auxiliary police officer to exercise his or her authority or to wear the uniform or insignia or display his or her badge or identification card in an attempt to exercise his or her authority except during the performance of actual authorized police duty. While on active duty, auxiliary police officers shall have the same powers as regular members of the police department. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1305)  
Sec. 26-22. - Neglect of duty; suspension or dismissal. 
Any auxiliary police officer who wilfully neglects or refuses to respond for assignment or duty when called, under such rules and regulations as promulgated by the police commissioner, may be subject to suspension or dismissal by the police commissioner. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1306)  
Sec. 26-23. - Termination of service; exclusion. 
The services of any auxiliary police officer may be terminated by the police commissioner at any time, and any auxiliary police officer may resign at any time by notifying the police commissioner in writing of his or her resignation; provided, however, that neither the civil service or retirement laws of the city relating to regular, fulltime city employees, nor the civil service or retirement laws of the state applicable to police officers, shall apply to any auxiliary police officers of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1308)  
Sec. 26-24. - Impersonation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as an auxiliary police officer to impersonate such officer, or to wear, carry or display the badge or identification card, dress or insignia for auxiliary police officers. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1307) 
State Law reference— False personation of officers, MCL 750.215.  
Secs. 26-25—26-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Disposition of lost, unclaimed or abandoned personal property by the state, MCL 434.151 et seq.; disposition and sale of stolen or abandoned property of villages and townships, MCL 434.181 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-41. - Definition. 
The word "property," as used in this article, shall not include animals, or abandoned vehicles auctioned under section 37-111. 
(Code 1967, § 2-801) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-42. - Custody. 
All property or money alleged or supposed to have been feloniously or wrongfully obtained or which shall be lost or abandoned, and which shall be thereafter taken into the custody of any member of the police force, or which shall come into such custody, shall be, by such member given into the custody of the property clerk and kept by him or her. 
(Code 1967, § 2-801)  
Sec. 26-43. - Record to be kept. 
All property and money taken into custody under section 26-42 shall be particularly registered by the property clerk in a book kept for that purpose, which shall contain also a record of the names of the persons from whom such property or money was taken, the names of all claimants thereto, the place where found, the time of the seizure, the date of the receipt, the general circumstances connected therewith, and any final disposal of such property and money. 
(Code 1967, § 2-802)  
Sec. 26-44. - Return of property by property clerk; two or more claimants; liability of property clerk; property required as evidence. 
(a)  The law enforcement agency shall send a notice by first class mail to any known legal owner of lost or abandoned property to the last known address of record. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date the property was found. 
(2)  The type of property found. 
(3)  The address where the property is located. 
(4)  The cost of storage per day, if any. 
(5)  A statement that the property must be claimed within six (6) months of the date of the letter or the property shall be considered abandoned and disposed of under the provisions of this act. 
(6)  The name of the law enforcement agency, the address, and the telephone number where the legal owner can obtain the property. 
Upon satisfactory evidence of the ownership of property or money described in section 26-42, the property clerk shall deliver the same to the owner, his or her next of kin, or legal representative, and to him or her or them only. If, in any case, it is proven impracticable for such owner, next of kin, or legal representative to appear, the property clerk may deliver such property or money to any person having a duly executed or legal representative, upon the filing of such power of attorney in the office of the clerk and the signing of a receipt for such property or money. 
Property described in subsection (a) not claimed within six (6) months after the date of the notice may be disposed of pursuant to subsection (e). 
(b)  If two (2) or more persons claim ownership of any such property or money, the property clerk may give notice by registered mail to all such claimants of whom the property clerk shall have knowledge of the time and place of a hearing to determine the person to whom the property or money shall be delivered. At the time and place so designated the property clerk shall hear and receive evidence of ownership of the property or money concerned, and shall determine the identity of the owner. After the hearing, the property clerk shall deliver the property or money to the person whom the property clerk determines is the owner, his or her next of kin, or legal representative, and to him or her or them only. If, in any case, it is proven impracticable for the owner, next of kin, or legal representative to appear, the property clerk may deliver the property or money to any person having a duly executed power of attorney from such owner, his or her next of kin or legal representative, upon the filing of the power of attorney in the office of the clerk and the signing of a receipt for the property or money. 
(c)  The property clerk shall not be liable in damages for any official action performed hereunder in good faith. 
(d)  Except as provided in sections 26-50—26-52, no property or money in the possession of the property clerk alleged to have been feloniously obtained or to be the proceeds of crime shall be delivered under this section if it is required to be held under the provisions of section 26-46; nor shall it be delivered within one (1) year after the date of receipt of the property or money by the property clerk unless the property or money is not needed as evidence in the prosecution of a crime. 
(e)  Property or money deemed lost or abandoned (as defined in section 26-42) which is unclaimed for six (6) months after recovery, shall be offered to the finder via first class mail. The finder of such unclaimed property will have seven (7) calendar days to respond to such offer and claim such property. If the finder of the property cannot be located or does not want the property, [the city shall] do one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Retain the property for use by the law enforcement agency. 
(2)  Sell the property at a public sale pursuant to section 26-48 and deposit the money from the sale in the general fund of the governmental unit of the law enforcement agency. 
(3)  Release the property to a charitable organization as defined in section 2 of the charitable organizations and solicitations act. Act No. 169 of the Public Acts of 1975, being section 400.272 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(Code 1967, § 2-803; Ord. No. 80-344, § 1, 10-13-87; Ord. No. 80-353, §§ 1, 2, 5-24-88)  
Sec. 26-45. - Return of property to accused upon acquittal. 
Whenever property or money shall be taken from persons arrested, and shall be alleged to have been feloniously obtained, or to be the proceeds of crime, and whenever so brought with such claimant and the person arrested before any court for trial, and the court shall be satisfied from evidence that the person arrested is innocent of the offense alleged, and that the property rightfully belongs to him or her, the court may, in writing, order such property or money to be returned, and the property clerk, if he or she have it, to deliver the property or money to the accused person himself or herself, and not to any attorney, agent, or clerk of such accused person. 
(Code 1967, § 2-804)  
Sec. 26-46. - Claims of third persons. 
(a)  If any claim to the ownership of such property or money shall be made on oath before the court, by or in behalf of any other persons than the person arrested, and the accused person shall be held for trial or examination, the property or money shall remain in the custody of the property clerk until the discharge or conviction of the person accused. 
(b)  Any claim to the ownership of lost or abandoned property (as defined in section 26-42) that shall be made on oath before the court by or on behalf of any other person that the lawful owner, should be controlled by the provisions of section 26-44. 
(Code 1967, § 2-805; Ord. No. 80-334, § 2, 10-13-87)  
Sec. 26-47. - Property coming into possession of police to be transmitted to property clerk; disposition of property of deceased persons. 
All property or money taken on suspicion of having been feloniously obtained, or of being the proceeds of crime, and for which there is no other claimant than the person from whom such property was taken, and all lost property coming into possession of any member of the police force, and all property and money taken from pawnbrokers as the proceeds of crime or from persons supposed to be insane, intoxicated or otherwise incapable of taking care of themselves, shall be transmitted as soon as practicable to the property clerk to be fully registered and advertised for the benefit of all parties interested, and for the information of the public as to the amount and disposition of the property so taken into custody by the police. Whenever any money or property of deceased persons coming into the custody of the property clerk of the police department shall remain in his or her hands for the period of one (1) year without being claimed by the legal representatives of such deceased person, such money or property, when not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) in value, shall be disposed of as lost or abandoned property as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-806)  
Sec. 26-48. - Sale at auction; balance to city treasurer. 
(a)  If no owner or person lawfully entitled to such property shall appear and establish his or her title to the same within three (3) months from the date of finding, the police commissioner, or his or her designated agent, shall offer the same for sale at a public auction upon first giving fifteen (15) days notice of the sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the notice to state the place and time of the sale and to contain a description of the property to be sold. The public auction shall be held at such time and place as the police commissioner in his or her opinion shall deem necessary. 
(b)  The proceeds of the sale, having been retained by the property clerk for a period of three (3) months without a lawful claimant, shall then be paid to the city treasurer; and all money that shall remain in his or her hands for the period of six (6) months shall be so advertised, and if no lawful claimant appears, shall be likewise paid to the city treasurer. All such funds received by the city treasurer shall be credited to the general fund. The police commissioner shall designate the time and place for holding such auction. 
(c)  Lost or abandoned property that remains unclaimed following the procedure set forth in section 26-44(e) shall be offered for public auction pursuant to the provisions of section 26-48(a) and (b). 
(Code 1967, § 2-807; Ord. No. 80-344, § 3, 10-13-87)  
Sec. 26-49. - Sale of perishable property. 
All perishable property taken into custody under section 26-42 and unclaimed shall be sold at once. 
(Code 1967, § 2-808; Ord. No. 80-344, § 4, 10-13-87)  
Sec. 26-50. - Delivery of property to owner pending trial. 
Whenever any articles of property (except perishable property) other than money, returned to the property clerk as the proceeds of crime, are shown by sufficient evidence to be necessary for the current use of the owner and not for sale, the city council has power, in its discretion, to authorize the property clerk to place the same in the custody of the owner, upon sufficient bonds being given by the owner in the sum of twice the value of the property, conditioned for the production of the same at any time within one (1) year when required for use in court as evidence in any proceedings thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 2-809)  
Sec. 26-51. - Perishable property may be delivered to owner; security. 
Perishable property, returned to the property clerk as the proceeds of crime, may be delivered to the owner on ample security being taken by the court for his or her appearance to prosecute the case. 
(Code 1967, § 2-810)  
Sec. 26-52. - Quantities of goods held for sale; delivery to owner. 
When large quantities of goods held for sale by the owner come into the possession of the property clerk as the proceeds of crime, the same may be delivered to the owner, his or her heirs or representatives, as provided in section 26-44, upon ample security to prosecute the case. In such cases goods to the estimated value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less shall be retained by the property clerk until the discharge or conviction of the accused. 
(Code 1967, § 2-811)  
Sec. 26-53. - Use of property as evidence. 
If any property or money placed in the custody of the property clerk shall be desired as evidence in any criminal court, the property shall be delivered to any officer who shall present an order to that effect from such court; but the property shall not be retained in the court but shall be returned to the property clerk to be disposed of according to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-812)  
Sec. 26-54. - Property not called for within one year to be treated as abandoned. 
Any property or money returned to the property clerk as the proceeds of crime, and which shall not be called for as evidence by any proceeding in court, within one (1) year from the date of return, may, unless specially claimed by the owner within that time, be thereafter treated as other unclaimed, abandoned or lost property or money, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 2-813)  
Chapter 27 - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2010, amended Ch. 27 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 27, §§ 27-1—27-29, pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete derivation of the former provisions, see the Code Comparative Table of this Code. 
Cross reference— Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 24; secondhand goods, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Precious metal and gem dealers act, MCL 445.481 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
Agent or employee means a person who, for compensation or valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer. 
Certificate of registration means a type of business license required by MCL 445.483 in order for a person to engage in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public. 
Customer means the person from whom the dealer or the agent or employee of the dealer receives or purchases a precious item. 
Dealer means any person who in whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this city. 
Gold means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
Internet drop-off store means a person that meets all the conditions described in section 27-3 and has a fixed place of business within this state where the person exclusively transacts all purchases or sales by means of the internet and the purchases and sales are not physically transacted on the premises of that fixed place of business. 
Jewelry means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious gem. 
Local police agency means the Warren Police Department or the county sheriff of the county, in which the dealer or internet drop-off store conducts business. 
Platinum means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
Precious gem means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline, turquoise or pearl. 
Precious item means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver, or platinum. Precious item does not include the following: 
(1)  Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or in behalf of, a government or private mint; 
(2)  Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and commodity exchanges; 
(3)  Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered under this chapter, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from a manufacturer; 
(4)  Industrial machinery or equipment; 
(5)  An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item was purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales receipt; 
(6)  An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer; 
(7)  An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than five dollars ($5.00); 
(8)  Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum which are recoverable as a by-product; 
(9)  Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer. 
Silver means elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
ARTICLE II. - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 27-2. - Registration required. 
The Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, found at MCL 445.481 et seq., requires a precious metal and gem dealer that engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this city to obtain a valid certificate of registration from the local governmental unit. This chapter is adopted to implement the registration requirements of the Act. Therefore, a precious metal and gems dealer that engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this city shall not conduct business unless the dealer has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-3. - Excluded from registration requirements. 
(a)  Internet drop-off store. An internet drop-off store complying with the following conditions is not required to obtain a certificate of registration under this article: 
(1)  Has a fixed place of business within this city except that he or she exclusively transacts all purchases or sales by means of the internet and the purchases and sales are not physically transacted on the premises of that fixed place of business. 
(2)  Made the personal property or other valuable thing available on a website for viewing by photograph, if available, accessible by the general public at no charge. The website shall be searchable by zip code or state, or both. The website viewing shall include, as applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(3)  Maintains records of the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of the personal property or other valuable thing for at least two (2) years, which records shall contain a description, including a photograph, if available, and, if applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(4)  Provides the local police agency with any name under which it conducts business on the website and access to the business premises at any time during normal business hours for purposes of inspection. 
(5)  Within twenty-four (24) hours after a request from the local police agency, provides an electronic copy of the seller's or consignor's name, address, telephone number, driver license number and issuing state, the buyer's name and address if applicable, and a description of the personal property or other valuable thing as described in subsection (3). The provision of information shall be in a format acceptable to the local police agency, shall be in a legible format and in the English language. 
(6)  Provide that payment for the personal property or other valuable thing is executed by means of check or other electronic payment system, so long as the payment is not made in cash. No payment shall be provided to the seller until the item is sold. 
7)  Immediately remove the personal property or other valuable thing from the website if the local police agency determines that the personal property or other valuable thing is stolen. 
(b)  Individuals. A person engaged in the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of precious items for himself or herself is not required to obtain a certificate of registration under this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-4. - Registration fee. 
(a)  Processing fee. A dealer shall apply to the city clerk for a certificate of registration and pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover the reasonable cost of processing and issuing the certificate of registration. 
(b)  Reimbursement of background investigation fee. The city clerk shall collect from the dealer an amount equal to any fee charged to the city to conduct the required background investigation. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-5. - Application for certificate of registration. 
Application for a precious metal and gems dealer certificate of registration shall be made to the city clerk on the form provided. No application shall be accepted unless the following information is provided: 
(1)  The name, home address and phone number, date of birth and thumbprint of the applicant; if the applicant is a business entity, the information shall be provided by the representative/agent. 
(2)  Written proof of identity, such as driver's license, birth certificate, state identification, passport or affidavit. 
(3)  The name and business address and phone number under which the applicant does business. 
(4)  The name and address of all other businesses presently operated by the applicant under a precious metal and gems business within the State of Michigan. 
(5)  The name, address, and thumbprint of all agents or employees of the dealer. Within twenty-four (24) hours after hiring a new employee, the dealer shall forward to the local police agency the name, address, and thumbprint of the new employee. 
(6)  A statement as to whether the applicant, agent or employee has been convicted of, or pled guilty or no contest to any violation of the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, or Section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, found at MCL 750.535, or any corresponding local law adopted pursuant to the Act. 
(7)  The application shall be signed by the applicant, or if a business entity, by the representative/agent, and dated. 
(8)  The applicant has paid the nonrefundable registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-6. - Issuance of precious metals and gems certificate of registration. 
(a)  Review. Prior to issuance of a certificate of registration, the city clerk shall distribute the application for review to the following departments. Each department shall review the application for compliance with this chapter and shall recommend approval or disapproval based on the review. The review shall be conducted and the application returned to the clerk's office within twenty (20) calendar days together with the department's recommendation. 
(1)  Police department. Shall conduct a background investigation, including criminal history check to determine if the applicant, agent or employee has been convicted of, or pled guilty or no contest to any violation of the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, or Section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, found at MCL 750.535, or any corresponding local law adopted pursuant to the Act. 
(2)  Division of buildings and safety engineering. Shall review the application to determine whether the business location complies with the zoning district or other zoning criteria and if a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(b)  Issuance. Once the city clerk has received approval from the above departments and further determined the application complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, the city clerk shall issue the certificate of registration. 
(c)  Denial. A dealer or an agent or an employee of a dealer who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter, or in violation of the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, or Section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, found at MCL 750.535, shall be denied a certificate of registration for a period of one (1) year after conviction. A dealer or an agent or an employee of a dealer who is convicted of a felony in violation of MCL 445.481 et seq. or MCL 750.535, shall be denied a certificate of registration for a period of five (5) years after the conviction. 
(d)  Compliance with other regulations. In the event the transaction is also regulated by the secondhand goods business ordinance, the business is required to comply with all applicable regulations including additional licensing, fingerprinting and separate transaction reports that may be required. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-7. - Transfer. 
A certificate of registration under this article is not assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-8. - Expiration. 
All certificates of registration issued under this article shall expire on September 30 each year. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-9. - Registration revocation. 
Upon the conviction of any dealer, agent or employee for the violation of any provision of this chapter, any provision of section 18-12 of the Code of Ordinances, any provision of the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, or Section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, found at MCL 750.535, the certificate of registration issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be revoked as provided in section 18-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Secs. 27-10—27-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 27-15. - Posting of certificate of registration. 
Upon receipt of the certificate of registration, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of business. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-16. - Change of name and address. 
Not less than ten (10) days before the dealer changes the name and address under which the business is conducted, the dealer shall notify the police department and the city clerk of the change. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-17. - Hours of operation. 
No dealer shall conduct business as provided in this chapter between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All certificates of registration issued shall include the following statement: "No business shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m." 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-18. - Record of transaction. 
(a)  Record required. A dealer shall keep a written record of transactions as required by MCL 445.484. The record shall be entered at the time of purchase or receipt of any precious item. The record shall be written in the English language and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The dealer certificate of registration number. 
(2)  The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number one (1) and the calendar year. 
(3)  A general description of the precious item or precious items received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description. 
(4)  The date of the transaction. 
(5)  The name of the person conducting the transaction. 
(6)  The name; date of birth; driver's license number or state of Michigan personal identification card number; and the street and house number of the customer. 
(7)  A legible imprint of the right thumb of the customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb or a finger of the customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or fingerprint shall be made available to a police agency during the course of a police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record of transaction. 
(8)  The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item or precious items. 
(9)  The form of payment made to the customer: check, money order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft. 
(10)  The customer's signature. 
(b)  Destruction of record. After a period of one (1) year from the date of the record of transaction, if a police investigation concerning a precious item or items described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and any police agency or sheriff's department holding a copy of the record of transaction shall destroy, and not keep a permanent record of the record of transaction. 
(c)  Changes in business. A dealer who goes out of business or changes his or her business address to another local jurisdiction either within or out of this state shall transmit the records of all transactions made by the dealer within one (1) year before his or her closing or moving, to the local police department. 
(d)  Retain copy. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each record of a transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one (1) year after the transaction to which the record pertains. 
(e)  Forwarded copies. Within forty-eight (48) hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police department and as otherwise required by MCL 445.484. The record of transaction forms received by the police department shall not be open to inspection by the general public. The police department holding the record of transaction forms is responsible under MCL 445.484(3) for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction forms and insuring that the record of transaction forms are used only for the purpose for which they were received. 
(f)  Inspection. Pursuant to MCL 445.484(4), the record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item received shall be open to an inspection by the police department, the county prosecuting attorney, the police department or sheriff's department of the local governmental unit in which the customer resides, and the Michigan state police, at all times during the ordinary business hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is considered to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. If inspection is refused or not obtained, the police official may seek a warrant or other recourse as provided by law. 
(g)  Form. The form of the record of transaction shall comply with the requirements of MCL 445.484(6). 
(h)  Electronic format required. The transmission of the record of transaction information shall be provided in an electronic format as required by the police department. Any costs incurred to utilize the electronic format required shall be borne by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-19. - Retaining precious item; no alteration. 
A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for nine (9) calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other than that required to make an accurate appraisal of its value. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Sec. 27-20. - Dealer prohibitions. 
A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person: 
(1)  If there is reason to believe the item is stolen; 
(2)  Known by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the preceding five (5) years, whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another; 
(3)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license or a valid State of Michigan personal identification card; 
(4)  From any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Secs. 27-21—27-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALER ACT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 27-26. - State law regulations; penalties. 
The Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, found at MCL 445.481 et seq., regulates the business operations of a precious metal and gem dealer including records of transactions and retention periods requirements. The dealer is required to abide by all applicable provisions. Further, the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, sets forth penalties for violations of the Act which are designated a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than one (1) year and felony violations. These violations shall be enforced by the Warren Police Department and the Macomb County Sheriff's Department and prosecuted through the Macomb County Prosecutor. 
(Ord. No. 80-683, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Chapter 28 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-626, § 5, adopted March 14, 2006, amended the title of Ch. 28 from "Railroads" to "Property Maintenance." Section 3 of said ordinance repealed former § 28-1 which pertained to planking and paving required at crossings. User's attention is directed to § 34-6 for similar provisions. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-681, § 1, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 28-1, 28-2, pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete derivation of the former provisions, see the Code Comparative Table of this Code. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Adoption and incorporation of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Pursuant to the Home Rules Cities Act, Public Act 279 of 1909, MCL 117.3(k) as amended, the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended, is adopted by reference and incorporated into this chapter as if fully set forth in this section with certain insertions, deletions and amendments as listed in section 28-2 of this article. The International Property Maintenance Code is adopted to regulate the condition and maintenance of all premises, including residential and non-residential buildings and structures by providing the standards essential to ensure that structures and premises are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use. The International Property Maintenance Code, is on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 80-681, § 1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 80-693, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 80-771 , § 1, 1-8-19)  
Sec. 28-2. - Additions, insertions, and amendments. 
The International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference and incorporated into section 28-1 is amended to read as follows: 
(a)  Section 101.1 Insert: The City of Warren (the City). 
(b)  Section 101.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Scope. The provisions of this code: (1) apply to all premises in the City; (2) state the minimum requirements and standards for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, safety from fire and other hazards, and sanitary maintenance; (3) list the responsibilities of the owners , the owner's authorized agents, operators , and occupants of a premises in the City; and (4) sets forth the methods of administration, enforcement, and penalties of the code. 
(c)  Section 101.5 is added to read: 
Responsible parties. Except if specifically exempted, each owner (which includes operators and agents) is responsible for maintaining the premises as required by this code. Each occupant is responsible for maintaining the part of the premises he/she/it occupies as required by Part 3 of this code. 
(d)  Section 102.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Maintenance. Each owner (which includes operators and agents) and each occupant shall maintain all equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards required by this code or any applicable regulation in good working order. Owners and occupants shall not remove, shut off, discontinue any service facility, equipment, or utility that is required under this code, unless it is a temporary interruption to allow for repairs or alterations. This code is not a basis for an owner or occupant to remove or abrogate any fire protection or safety systems in an existing structure. 
(e)  Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: 
General. The department of property maintenance inspection is created and the executive official in charge shall be known as the code enforcement officer. This is an independent department of city government created pursuant to Sec. 7.26 of the City Charter. 
(f)  Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Fees and Costs. City Council shall establish fees and costs associated with administering and enforcing this code. Fees and costs shall be reasonably related to the expense of administering and enforcing this code. 
(g)  Section 104.1 is amended to read as follows: 
General. The code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this code. References to code official shall mean code enforcement officer or inspector as authorized to enforce the code as set forth in Section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(h)  Section 104.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Right of Entry. The code enforcement officer or inspector may enter a premises to conduct an inspection as provided below: 
1.  For residential rental premises , if compliant with the directives of MCL 125.526, as amended. 
2.  For residential owner-occupied premises , consent of an owner or obtaining an administrative warrant. 
3.  Premises being used for a nonresidential purpose, consent of an owner , occupant , or operator or obtaining an administrative warrant. 
4.  For an emergency. An emergency includes, but is not limited to, fire, flood, noxious fumes, toxic spill, or other serious threat to human health or life. 
5.  Otherwise permitted by law. 
(i)  Section 104.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Notice of inspection. When the code enforcement officer or inspector has reason to believe that violations of the International Property Maintenance Code exist, a Notice of Inspection shall be posted on the premises to notify the owner that inspections shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of section 104.2 and 104.3 of the Code. A Notice of Inspection is not required when there is an emergency as described in Section 109 of this Code. 
(j)  Section 106 is amended to read as follows: 
SECTION 106 VIOLATION AND
CITATION 
Section 106.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Violation. Each owner (which includes operators and agents) and each occupant is responsible for maintaining the premises in compliance with this code. An owner or occupant who fails to comply with this code is subject to the warning and citation procedures and penalties outlined in this code. 
Section 106.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Citation. To issue a citation under this code, the code enforcement officer or inspector shall comply with the requirements listed below. The code enforcement officer or inspector may issue a violation to each owner and each occupant even if the violation arises from the same condition. 
106.2.1 Warning notice. Before issuing a citation, the code enforcement officer or inspector shall comply with the warning notice procedure described in Section 107 of this Code. 
106.2.2 Form. The citation shall be in writing and include: 
1.  a sufficient description of the premises to identify it; 
2.  sufficient information to identify the violation(s); 
3.  the date that the violation occurred; 
4.  that a hearing date will be scheduled; and 
5.  that the owner or occupant has a right to appeal an adverse decision at the hearing to the Macomb County Circuit Court. 
106.2.3 Method of Service. The code enforcement officer or inspector shall serve a citation through one of the following three methods: 
1.  personal service; 
2.  sending the warning notice by first-class or certified mail to the subject party's last known address; or 
3.  if the warning notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, posting the warning notice in a conspicuous place at the premises . 
Section 106.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Prosecution of violation. Except for misdemeanor offenses, citations are set for hearing in the Administrative Hearings Bureau (AHB). The AHB shall conduct a hearing and sentence a person found responsible for a violation as provided in the Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2.5 and its Rules of Procedure. With the exception of misdemeanor offenses, any citation issued pursuant to this code is a strict liability offense. An adverse decision by the AHB may be appealed to the Macomb County Circuit Court. 
Section 106.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Violation penalties. Except if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in Chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d) or as specifically stated otherwise in this code, the violation of a provision of this code is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a person found responsible for a violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense. 
Section 106.6 is added to read as follows: 
Schedule of fines. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fines for blight citations issued pursuant to this code. 
(k)  Section 107 is amended to read as follows: 
SECTION 107 WARNING NOTICE 
107.1 Warning Notice. Except when a violation is a misdemeanor or there is an imminent danger , when the code enforcement officer or inspector determines that either an owner or occupant is violating this code, or has a reasonable belief that he/she/it is violating this code, the code enforcement officer or inspector shall provide the subject party with a warning notice prior to issuing a citation under Section 106 of this code. 
107.2. Form. The warning notice shall be in writing and include: 
1.  a sufficient description of the premise to identify it; 
2.  sufficient information to identify the violation(s); 
3.  provide a reasonable length of time to correct the violation(s); 
4.  state that a citation will be issued if the violation is not corrected in the time provided; and 
5.  advise the owner or occupant of the right to appeal. 
A warning notice may be in the form of a letter, an inspection report, or other writing so long as it contains the information listed above. 
107.3. Method of Service. The code enforcement officer or inspector shall serve the warning notice through one of the following three methods: 
1.  personal service; 
2.  sending the warning notice by first-class or certified mail to the subject party's last known address; or 
3.  if the warning notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, posting the warning notice in a conspicuous place at the premises . 
107.4. Unauthorized tampering. Any sign, tag, or seal properly posted by a code enforcement officer or inspector pursuant to this code shall not be tampered with or removed without written permission of the code enforcement officer or inspector. A person violating this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration for not more than ninety (90) days, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(l)  Section 107.5 shall be stricken in its entirety. 
(m)  Section 107.6 shall be stricken in its entirety. 
(n)  Section 108 shall be stricken in its entirety, being Sections 108.1 through 108.7. 
(o)  Section 109 is amended to read as follows: 
SECTION 109 EMERGENCIES 
109.1 Unsafe premises. If the code enforcement officer or inspector reasonably believes that a premises or structure is in danger of collapsing, has collapsed, poses a substantial risk to human health, or is otherwise a danger to health, safety, or welfare of the community, he or she shall post, at each entrance of the structure or premises , a notice that states that the structure or premises is unsafe and entrance is prohibited. The code enforcement officer or inspector shall notify the owner, occupant, or operator of the posting within seven days at the last known address of the subject party or parties. The owner, occupant, or operator may only enter the premise or structure with written permission of the code enforcement officer or inspector. 
109.2 Emergency measures. If the code enforcement officer or inspector reasonably believes that a structure or premises poses an imminent danger , he or she may take any necessary steps to make the premises temporarily safe by either: (1) ordering the owner or operator to perform the necessary work; or (2) employing a reputable person or business to perform the necessary work. If the City incurs costs pursuant to this Section, the City may seek reimbursement from any or all of the owners, occupants, or operators for all reasonable costs associated with the emergency measures. The City may also place a lien on the property in the amount of the costs the City expended. 
109.3 Closures. If, based on an unsafe premise , it is reasonably necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare, a code enforcement officer or inspector may temporarily close or order closed premises (including adjacent premises), streets, sidewalks, and any other surrounding areas. 
109.4 Penalty. A person who enters a premises in violation of Section 109.1 of this code, or fails to comply with a legal emergency measure order issued pursuant to 109.2 of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration for not more than ninety (90) days, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
109.5 Hearing. An owner or operator ordered to take emergency measures described in Section 109.2 of this Code shall comply with such order immediately. After complying, an aggrieved party may appeal the emergency measure action or emergency measure order issued pursuant to Section 109.2, by following the appeal process described in Section 111. 
(p)  Section 110 shall be stricken in its entirety, being Sections 110.1 through 110.4. 
(q)  Section 111.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Application for appeal. An aggrieved party may appeal (1) a warning notice issued pursuant to Section 107, (2) a determination of an unsafe premises pursuant to Section 109.1, (3) an emergency measure order or action pursuant to Section 109.2, or (4) a stop work order issued pursuant to Section 112.2 to the board of appeals through the procedure outlined in this Section. In order to perfect an appeal, an appellant shall do all of the following: (1) complete a written application on a form provided by the City; (2) submit the application within 20 days of the warning notice service or emergency measure was ordered or performed; and provide information on the application stating one of the three bases for appeal: the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted pursuant to this Code have been incorrectly interpreted; the provisions of this Code do not fully apply; or the requirement of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
(r)  Section 111.2. Membership of the Board. The board of appeals shall consist of not less than three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The code enforcement officer shall be an ex-officio member but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by City Council. The board members serve staggering and overlapping terms. 
(s)  Section 111.2.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Secretary. The Mayor shall designate a qualified person to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the City Clerk's office. 
(t)  Section 111.2.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Compensation of members. City Council shall set member compensation. 
(u)  Section 111.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Stays of enforcement. A pending appeal of a warning notice under this Section stays any enforcement proceedings related to that warning notice, including citations for failing to obtain a certificate of compliance or a rental license. Unless the board of appeals orders otherwise, stop work orders and emergency measures remain in place through the entire appellate procedure. 
(v)  Section 111.9 is added to read as follows: 
Appellate fee. City Council shall set an appellate fee that is reasonably related to the costs of administering the Board of Appeals. 
(w)  Section 112.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Failure to comply. Unless directed to do so by the code enforcement officer or inspector, any person who continues to work after a stop work order is placed on the premises or is served with notice of a stop work order is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration for not more than ninety (90) days, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(x)  Section 302.4. Insert: Six (6) inches. 
(y)  Section 304.14. Insert: April 15 to October 15. 
(z)  Section 602.3. Insert: September 15 to May 15. 
(aa)  Section 602.4. Insert: September 15 to May 15. 
(Ord. No. 80-681, § 1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 80-693, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 80-731, § 7, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 80-771 , § 2, 1-8-19)  
Secs. 28-3—28-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF RENTAL DWELLINGS 
 
Sec. 28-10. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure that the residential rental structures and multiple-family units located within the city comply with minimum maintenance standards for the public health, safety and welfare. This article applies to the rental of one- and two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family dwelling units/apartments located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-11. - Definitions. 
[The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:] 
Code official: The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, a Warren Police Officer, or any duly authorized representative. 
Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, however, this definition excludes owner-occupied dwelling units. 
Lease: Any written or oral agreement that sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of rental dwellings or rental units. 
Multiple-family dwelling: A building or portion thereof containing more than two (2) dwelling units intended for occupancy including apartments and owner-occupied dwelling units. 
New rental dwelling: Any structure or building which has never been occupied that contains one (1) or more dwelling units promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit and, which has never been occupied, excluding any addition or modification of an existing structure. This definition includes one- and two- and multiple-family dwellings, apartments, and excludes certain condominium units and owner-occupied dwelling units. 
Occupancy: Includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a rental dwelling or rental unit. 
Owner: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the premises. 
Premises: Any lot, plot or parcel of land inclusive of the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit or multiple-family dwelling. 
Rental dwelling: Any structure or building containing one (1) or more dwelling units promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence or sleeping unit. This definition includes one- and two-family dwellings, condominiums, and apartment buildings, and excludes owner-occupied condominium units. As to condominium rentals, there shall be notice from the respective president of the condominium association with evidence of authority from the condominium association to inspect rentals in the condominium association and the president of the condominium association shall notify the rental division with the name of the owner and address of the condominium unit(s) to be inspected. 
Rental dwelling unit: Any one (1) area, room, structure, flat or apartment of a rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one (1) tenant, group of tenants or family under one (1) lease for use as a home, residence or sleeping unit, excluding owner-occupied condominium units. As to condominium rentals, there shall be notice from the respective president of the condominium association with evidence of authority from the condominium association to inspect rentals in the condominium association and the president of the condominium association shall notify the rental division with the name of the owner and address of the condominium unit(s) to be inspected. 
Responsible local agent: The responsible local agent shall be a representative of a corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association, organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the property. All official notices may be issued to the responsible local agent, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have been issued upon the owner of record. The responsible local agent shall be responsible for operating the registered rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit and shall also be responsible for providing access to such premises for any inspection necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 80-764, § 1, 8-28-18)  
Sec. 28-12. - Administration and records. 
(a)  Administration. There shall be a rental division in the department of property maintenance inspection which is responsible for the enforcement and administration of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Records. The rental division shall maintain a separate file for reach rental unit licensed by the City of Warren containing no less than a copy of the application for a rental license, any license issued, inspection reports, notices of violation, the results of any action taken regarding the license, and other appropriate records. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-13. - Licenses. 
(a)  License required. No person shall rent, lease, offer for rent or lease, or occupy any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit without a rental license from the rental division. Rental licenses are not transferable between landlords or rental units. The provisions of Chapter 18 of the Warren Code of Ordinances shall not apply to the licensing of rental property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding exceptions outlined in section 28-21 below, occupancy of any dwelling by a person other than the owner of record shall be presumed to require a rental license. This presumption may be rebutted by evidence that the occupant has ownership equity of twenty-five (25) percent or more of the fee or life estate as evidenced by a recorded deed, a recorded land contract, or an unrecorded land contract with supporting evidence that it was not entered into in order to circumvent the requirements of this article. A dwelling that is rented or leased with an option to purchase is considered a rental agreement until the lessee fully exercises the option to purchase. 
(c)  A rental license shall be issued by the rental division if the applicant meets the following requirements: 
(1)  An application form is submitted pursuant to the provisions of section 28-18. 
(2)  A biennial inspection is performed on the premises sought to be licensed as directed by section 28-20 of this article. All violations disclosed by this inspection shall be corrected or waived by formal motion of the city council. 
(3)  All application and inspection fees are paid. 
(4)  No rental license shall be issued until all of the following fees and debts to the city have been paid in full: 
a.  All previously billed property taxes; 
b.  All current or past due special assessments; 
c.  Water or sewer bills outstanding; 
d.  All charges against the property for mowing, cleanup, weed or debris removal, or any similar charges by the city; 
e.  Any fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort arising from provisions of the property maintenance code, including any blight violations. 
(d)  A license is valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked for cause by the city. Licensees must apply for license renewal sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date of the license. Sale of the subject property results in immediate termination of any license. Failure to obtain or timely renew a license or failure to pay an inspection fee is a violation of this article. 
(e)  Application fees, inspection fees and applicable late charges shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-14. - Effect of rental registration. 
Owners of registered rental units with a valid certificate of compliance at the time of adoption of this article shall obtain a rental license before the expiration date of the existing certificate of compliance. Rental unit registration is construed to be an application for a rental license, and admission of fact by the applicant that the applicant is conducting a rental dwelling operation as defined by this article. It shall be the duty of all landlords to apply for the rental license as required by this article and obtain all necessary inspections, repairs, and/or approvals required and/or necessary to obtain the license. A registration fee, once tendered, may not be refunded or transferred. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-15. - Conditional licenses. 
(a)  A conditional rental license may be issued before the rental unit is brought into compliance with all requirements of this article when the code official determines that the required corrective work does not affect the health or safety of any tenant. The conditional rental license period shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days. A sixty-day extension may be granted by code officials if environmental or weather conditions prevent the corrective work from being completed in a timely manner. A conditional rental license may be issued by the Rental Division under the following conditions: 
(1)  Application is made by the owner for a conditional license; 
(2)  No violations are in existence which would preclude habitation or threaten the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or the community, or create nuisance conditions; 
(3)  Conditions are set forth in writing on the conditional license by any code official or authorized agent; 
(4)  A cash bond, in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) must be posted to guarantee compliance with the conditions of the conditional license; 
(5)  There are no delinquent water/sewer bills; 
(6)  The applicant has not defaulted on previously issued conditional licenses; 
(7)  Payment of a nonrefundable conditional license fee as established by resolution of the city council; 
(8)  A conditional license shall be automatically revoked when there is noncompliance with any condition stated therein, fraud or misrepresentation by the applicant, violation(s) of the Warren Code of Ordinances, or for other just cause. In the event a conditional license is revoked or expires for non-compliance with the conditions stated therein shall result in forfeiture of the bond. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-16. - Display of license. 
No rental unit may be occupied unless a copy of the current rental unit license for the rental unit is displayed in an eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) inch frame securely affixed to the interior wall adjacent to the primary entrance door to the rental unit. A multiple-family dwelling or apartment complex shall display the license in the same manner at the primary entrance of each building. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-17. - Designation of responsible local agent required. 
The owner of any rental dwelling and rental dwelling unit shall designate a person as the responsible local agent who shall be responsible for operating the rental dwelling or rental unit and who shall provide access to the rental dwelling or unit for inspection by the code official for compliance with the applicable ordinance requirements. The responsible local agent shall be an individual and reside within a fifty-mile radius of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 80-773 , § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 28-18. - Application forms. 
A rental license applicant shall fill out an application on a form created by the rental inspection division. The application shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  The name and address (no post office boxes) of the applicant. 
(2)  The names and addresses of all owners of the rental dwelling. If any owner of the rental dwelling is an entity, all members', managers', officers', directors', partners', proprietors', or beneficiaries' names, address, and copy of a government identification card. 
(3)  Each tenant/occupant's name and signature. 
(4)  The responsible local agent's name, local address (no post office boxes), telephone number, and a copy of a government identification card. 
(5)  The number of rental dwelling units in each rental dwelling and the address of the rental dwelling. 
(6)  The authorization appointing a responsible local agent signed by both the owner and the responsible local agent. 
(7)  The application for inspection. 
(8)  Proof that no fees or debts are owed to the city. 
(9)  Any other relevant information required for the effective administration of this article that the rental inspection division reasonably requests on its form. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 80-773 , § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 28-19. - Inspection fees. 
An inspection fee shall be paid at the time of application for a new license, or renewal of an existing license, payable to the City of Warren-Rental Inspection Fund. All fees collected shall be used specifically to fund the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Inspection fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-20. - Inspection of rental units. 
(a)  Access of code official. The code official shall be granted access by the owner or occupant of the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit to enter the dwelling or unit during business hours for the purpose of conducting a compliance inspection. If any owner or occupant refuses to provide access to the premises for a compliance inspection, the code official may seek a warrant from the 37th District Court to obtain entry to the premises. All rental dwellings and rental units shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in section 28-1 of this chapter. 
(b)  Inspection required. The proposed rental dwelling shall have an inspection to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in section 28-1 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Inspection of multiple family dwellings (including apartment buildings). A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the units contained in a multiple family dwelling license application or renewal application shall be inspected. The units to be inspected shall be randomly selected. The number of units inspected shall be increased should significant code violations be found or should the inspector have reasonable cause to believe other violations exist in the uninspected units. 
(d)  Additional inspections. In addition to regular or renewal inspections, inspections may be scheduled on one (1) or more of the following bases: 
(1)  By written complaint to the rental division. Written complaints of violations will be inspected within a reasonable time only if they allege sufficient facts that would give reasonable cause to believe a violation of this ordinance exists; 
(2)  Whenever a code official has reasonable cause to believe that there is a violation of this ordinance or other conditions which make the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous; 
(3)  For the purpose of reinspection to ensure the correction of any violations in existence at a previous inspection. 
(e)  Private inspections. In the performance of the requirements of section 28-20(b), the rental division, under the direction of the mayor or the mayor's designee, may contract for inspection services. Records of inspections and tests shall be submitted to the rental division and shall be retained in accordance with record retention requirements. 
(f)  Blight violation . A code official conducting an inspection for purposes of compliance with this article shall not issue a blight violation during, or as a result of, an inspection of the rental premises unless either of the following occurs: (a) The landlord is given written notice to correct the violation and a reasonable opportunity to correct the circumstances before a reinspection of the premises or a date specified in the notice; or (b) The violation is a direct result of the landlord's action or inaction and creates an emergency that presents an immediate risk of harm to people or damage to property including, but not limited to, a flooded basement or premises without heat. 
(g)  HUD and MSHDA properties. Rental dwellings that have been previously inspected by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and/or the Michigan State Housing Development Authority (MSHDA) are subject to the inspection requirement in this article to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 80-653, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-750, § 3, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 28-21. - Exceptions. 
A rental license is not required under the following circumstances: 
(1)  An owner-occupied single family dwelling. 
(2)  An owner-occupied condominium unit that has a duly organized and authorized association of co-owners pursuant to PA59 of 1978 which is responsible for the maintenance of common elements as defined by the Act. The city council by resolution may revoke this exception for any condominium where the association of co-owners fails to comply with the minimum standards set forth in the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in section 28-1 of this chapter, or otherwise fails to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the tenants or the community. 
(3)  Occupancy by a personal representative, trustee, or guardian of the estate and their family where the dwelling was owner-occupied prior to the owner's death. 
(4)  The sale of any one- or two-family dwelling intended for occupancy by the owner of record which is to be occupied by the seller under a rental agreement for a period of less than ninety (90) days following closing. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 80-764, § 2, 8-28-18)  
Sec. 28-22. - Dangerous conditions. 
Upon inspection, if the code official or designated representative determines that there are conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, the city, upon notification by the code official, may order the conditions to be remedied immediately, and if appropriate, may temporarily limit or prohibit occupancy, may institute condemnation proceedings pursuant to Article VI, Division 1 of Chapter 9 or may institute nuisance abatement proceedings pursuant to Article VI, Division 2 of Chapter 9. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-23. - Compliance with Code of Ordinances. 
All rental dwellings and rental dwelling units shall comply with all provisions of this division, the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted in section 28-1, and all other applicable ordinance requirements. After inspection, all rental dwellings and rental dwelling units in compliance with applicable ordinances shall receive a license consistent with the provisions of section 28-13. Those rental dwellings or units that are not in compliance with applicable ordinances shall be brought into compliance within sixty (60) days of the date of notice of the violations. Upon written request and submission of proof of extenuating circumstances, the code official may grant an extension to make the repairs necessary to bring the property into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-24. - District court actions for rents and/or possession. 
The district court shall require the owner of a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit to submit a copy of the rental license upon filing an action under the landlord tenant laws. An unlicensed owner of rental property may apply for a conditional rental license to proceed with district court actions for rents and/or possession. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-25. - Additional violations. 
The following are additional violations subject to enforcement under Article II: 
(1)  No person, firm, or corporation shall rent, lease, offer for rent, offer for lease, or occupy an unlicensed rental unit; 
(2)  No person shall occupy for sleeping purposes, and no owner or responsible local agent shall allow a person to occupy for sleeping purposes, the non-habitable spaces of a rental unit; 
(3)  No person shall knowingly make any false statement or provide any false information on a rental license application to any employee of the City of Warren or other authorized person in relation to any investigation of a violation of this article; 
(4)  No person shall harass, stalk, threaten, hinder, assault, or otherwise interfere with a code official or city inspector during the performance of his or her duties; 
(5)  Every rental unit and the yard connected therewith shall remain clean and kept free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, or garbage; 
(6)  Each day upon which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 80-653, § 2, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 28-26. - Transfer of ownership; licenses not transferable. 
(a)  Upon a transfer of ownership of a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit, the new owner shall apply for a license within sixty (60) days prior to transfer of ownership. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit who has received a blight violation to transfer, convey, lease or sell, including sale by land contract, his or her ownership and/or interest in any way to another, unless such owner shall have first furnished to the grantee, lessee, vendee or transferee a true copy of any notice of violation and shall have furnished to the city or rental division a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, vendee, lessee or transferee acknowledging their receipt of such notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-27. - Suspension or revocation of licenses. 
(a)  A license issued by the rental division under this article may be suspended by a code official for just cause. The licensee shall have a right to a hearing before the city council on any such action of the code official, provided a written request is filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of suspension. The city council may affirm a suspension or revoke or reinstate any such license after a hearing. The action of the city council shall be final. Upon suspension or revocation of any license, any inspection or application fees shall not be refunded. 
(b)  The city council may schedule a hearing for the possible suspension or revocation of a license issued under this article upon receipt of the following: 
(1)  Written notice from a code official that contains facts, information, and belief that just cause exists to suspend, revoke, or otherwise review the status of the license. 
(2)  Written notice to the rental division from any other individual that contains facts, information, and belief that just cause exists to suspend, revoke, or otherwise review the status of the license. Such individual must state facts showing that he/she is adversely affected by acts, omissions, or conditions located on the premises of residential income property owned by licensee. 
(c)  The determination and decision by the city council shall be final and may be appealed to the circuit court within twenty-one (21) days from the date the city council makes the determination. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-28. - "Just cause" defined. 
(a)  The term "just cause" as used in this article, shall include any act or omission, or the permitting of any condition to exist in connection with any license granted under this article, or upon any premises used in connection therewith, which act, omission, or condition is: 
(1)  Contrary to the public health, morals, safety, or welfare. 
(2)  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted. 
(3)  Forbidden by the provisions of this article or any other duly established city ordinance, regulation or provision. 
(4)  A violation of any criminal law. 
(5)  A nuisance as defined by Division 2 of Article VI of Chapter 9 on the licensed property. 
(b)  If a licensee has knowledge that a tenant, a member of the tenant's household, or other person under the tenant's control has unlawfully manufactured, delivered, possessed with intent to deliver, or possessed a controlled substance on the leased premises, then the licensee shall have a duty to report such activity to the police department and commence proceedings pursuant to the Landlord Tenant Law, MCL 600.5714 to recover possession of said premises. Failure to commence such proceedings within seven (7) days shall constitute just cause to suspend or revoke a license. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-29. - Nuisance per se. 
A rental dwelling unit in violation of this article is considered to be a nuisance per se, and, as such, subject to abatement in a manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-30. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The city shall not liable to any person by reason of the inspections required by this article or the issuance of a license. A license is not a warranty or guarantee that there are no defects in the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit. The inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city does not guarantee or approve and shall not be held responsible for defects not noted in the inspection report or for any latent, structural or mechanical defects thereto. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-31. - Severability. 
The sections and provisions of this article are severable and any portion declared invalid or against public policy will not affect the validity of the remaining sections or provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-634, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 28-32. - Penalty. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below or if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d), the violation of a provision of this chapter is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(b)  A violation of section 28-13 or section 28-25 of this chapter is a misdemeanor offense punishable by incarceration for not more than ninety (90) days, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(c)  Misdemeanor tickets issued pursuant to this article shall be served either by personal service or certified mail return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 80-653, § 3, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-671, § 1, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 80-731, § 8, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 80-773 , § 3, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 28-33—28-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGISTERING ABANDONED AND FORECLOSED HOMES 
 
Sec. 28-50. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of the City of Warren, through the adoption of this article, to establish an abandoned residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-51. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
Abandoned means a property that is vacant and is under a current complaint for foreclosure or notice of foreclosure and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax sale, and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
Accessible property means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc. 
Accessible structure means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
Agreement means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer, or exchange. 
Assignment of rents means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a mortgage from one lender/entity to another. 
Beneficiary means a lender under a note secured by a mortgage. 
Buyer means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this section. 
Code official means the director of property maintenance. 
Dangerous building means any building/structure that is in violation of any condition referenced in chapter 21 of this Code. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder or a mortgage upon consent of the beneficiary of the mortgage. 
Default means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary, or conditional. 
Distressed means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale and/or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/nor mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults. 
Local means within forty (40) road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
Mortgage means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. 
Neighborhood standard means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of properties within a three-hundred-foot radius of an individual property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, and any other abandoned property within the three-hundred-foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
Out-of-area means in excess of forty (40) road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
Owner means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property excluding governmental agencies. 
Owner of record means the person having recorded title to the property. 
Property means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
Residential building means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed, or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings or structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as residential whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use. 
Secure or secured means such measures as may be directed by the City of Warren code official or his or her designee that render the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, and the repair or boarding of doors, broken windows and/or other openings. In the case of broken windows, securing means the reglazing or boarding of the window. Boarding shall be completed or required. In addition, secure or secured means closing and locking widows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a person to access the interior of a property and/or structure(s). 
Trustee means the person, firm, or corporation holding a mortgage on a property. 
Trustor means a borrower under a mortgage, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
Vacant means a building/structure that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-52. - Registration. 
Any beneficiary/trustee, who holds a mortgage on a property located within the city, shall perform an inspection, to the extent permitted by law or under the mortgage, of the property that is the security for the mortgage, upon default by the trustor, within five (5) days after either filing a complaint for foreclosure (if foreclosure is by judicial action) or publishing a notice of foreclosure (if foreclosure is by advertisement). If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this article, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten (10) days of the inspection, register the property with the City of Warren Code Official Head or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected, to the extent permitted by law and the mortgage, by the beneficiary/trustee, or his designee, monthly until (1) the trustor or other party remedies the default or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee shall, within ten (10) days of that inspection, register the property with the City of Warren Code Official Head or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
In either case the registration shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual), the direct street/office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be received no later than January 31 of the year due. 
This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. Such properties shall be registered with the city in accordance with the terms of this section upon transfer even if occupied at the time of transfer. 
Properties subject to this article shall remain under the annual registration requirement, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant. 
A person, firm, or corporation that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration to the City of Warren Code Official within ten (10) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-53. - Maintenance requirements. 
Vacant and abandoned properties subject to this section shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds, dry bush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circular, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration was required. Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Landscape does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
Maintenance includes but is not limited to regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning, and moving of required landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
Pools and spas shall be either kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry or drained and covered. In either case properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of Michigan. 
Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions, and restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-54. - Security requirements. 
Properties subject to this section shall be secured so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-55. - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this article or other chapters of the City of Warren Code of Ordinances, the City of Warren code official head or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to securing any/all door, window, or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-56. - Fees. 
The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by resolution of the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-57. - Failure to secure and maintain. 
If a property has not been maintained or secured, the city and/or its contracted agent, may maintain and/or secure the property and assess costs to the owner, beneficiary or trustee. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-58. - Re-occupancy. 
A registered property may not be occupied until all outstanding costs, assessments and/or liens owed to the city have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-59. - Violation/abatement. 
Violations of this article shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Violations of this article may be enforced as allowed in this chapter. Alternatively, at the sole discretion of the city, the city may issue to the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record a notice to abate. The notice to abate shall include: 
(1)  The nature and location of the violation; 
(2)  The time within which the violation must be abated; 
(3)  Notice that the city may act to abate the violation if it is not abated by the owner within a reasonable time stated in the notice, but which may not exceed fifteen (15) days; 
(4)  Notice that the cost of such action by the city, plus an administrative fee, shall be a personal debt of the owner, which may be assessed as a lien against the property until paid; and 
(5)  Notice that any refusal to allow the city to abate an uncorrected violation shall be a separate violation under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-60. - Authorization for city abatement. 
Upon failure of a beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record to abate a violation as ordered in a notice to abate, the city may abate the nuisance. This abatement may be performed by the city, by a contract vendor, or by other means determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-61. - Administrative fees. 
The fees necessary for the administration of this article shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such administrative fees shall include the following: 
(1)  Notice to abate; 
(2)  Search warrant; 
(3)  Contact request or warning of abatement action; 
(4)  Warning letter; 
(5)  Civil infraction preparation; 
(6)  Additional inspections; 
(7)  Vendoring; 
(8)  Second and subsequent vendoring; 
(9)  Vehicle removal; 
(10)  Second and subsequent vehicle removal; and 
(11)  Denied entry. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-62. - Charge for costs. 
When the city has abated a cited nuisance, the cost of abatement, plus any applicable administrative charges as established by city council resolution, shall be billed to the property owner or beneficiary/trustee. Such billing shall be a personal debt of the owner to the city, which may be assessed as a lien against the property, including interest thereon, until paid. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-63. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this section may appeal to the city council of the City of Warren, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice, or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means, or the strict application of any requirement of this Code would cause an undue hardship. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-64. - Owner, unoccupied premises. 
If a property is not in foreclosure but is otherwise unoccupied, the owner shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Maintain the property in accordance with section 28-53 herein and article I of this chapter. 
(2)  Register the property in accordance with section 28-52. 
(3)  Responsible for the fee identified pursuant to section 28-56 herein. 
(4)  Keep the property secure in accordance with sections 28-54 and 28-55 herein. 
(5)  Not permit re-occupancy until all outstanding costs, assessments and/or liens owed to the city are paid in full. 
(6)  If the owner leases or lets the property, the owner shall comply with article II of this chapter in addition to the requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Sec. 28-65. - Penalty. 
Except if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d), the violation of a provision of this chapter is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 80-731, § 9, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 28-66. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The city hereby declares that it would have passed Ordinance No. 80-679, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 80-679, § 1, 7-14-09)  
Secs. 28-67—28-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VACANT COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 28-81. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Warren, through reasonable, effective, and consistent rules requiring commercial and industrial property owners and other responsible parties to maintain and secure vacant commercial and industrial properties. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 28-82. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
(1)  Code official: the director of property maintenance and building inspection or his or her designee. 
(2)  Landscaping: includes all of the following: grass; ground cover; bushes; shrubs; hedges; decorative rock or bark; artificial turf or sod; or any similar plantings or materials. 
(3)  International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC): the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted and amended in the Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 28, property maintenance, article I and II, International Property Maintenance Code. 
(4)  Mortgage: an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third-party trustee as security for a real estate loan. 
(5)  Nighttime hours: means the time between sunset and sunrise. 
(6)  Responsible party or parties: includes all of the following: 
a.  Owner: meaning any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in the subject property. 
b.  Mortgagee: meaning any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity holding a mortgage on the subject property. 
c.  Mortgagor: meaning a borrower, pursuant to a mortgage, who deeds the subject property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
d.  Buyer: meaning any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity who gives something of value in consideration for a subject property. 
e.  Government agencies are excluded as responsible parties. 
(7)  Secure or secured : making the subject property inaccessible to unauthorized persons by doing all of the following: repairing fences and walls; closing, chaining, and padlocking all gates; locking and repairing or boarding all doors, windows, and other openings; ensuring that there are no openings that would allow a person to access the structures or buildings on the subject property; and any other measures the code official determines are necessary. Securing broken windows means reglazing or boarding the window. 
(8)  Subject property: real property with vacant buildings or structures used, previously used, or permitted to be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including the buildings or structures themselves. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as commercial or industrial, whether it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use. 
(9)  Vacant: not legally occupied for a period of 30 days or more. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 28-83. - Vacant property maintenance and security requirements. 
(a)  The responsible party or parties shall do all of the following to the subject property: 
(1)  Continue electrical service; 
(2)  Turn on exterior lights during nighttime hours; 
(3)  Within a reasonable period of time, remove or paint over graffiti, tagging, or markings. Painting over means painting with exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the subject property (see section 22-64(b) of this Code); 
(4)  Maintain the exterior of the subject property as described in IPMC, Section 302, Exterior Property Areas, and IPMC, Section 304, Exterior Structure; 
(5)  Within a reasonable period of time, remove all weeds; dead vegetation; vegetation trimmings; trash; debris; building materials; and accumulation of newspapers, flyers, and notices, other than those notices required by local, state, and federal law; 
(6)  Maintain existing landscaping, including, but not limited to, mowing the grass; watering the plants, shrubs, hedges; and trimming and pruning the hedges or bushes; and 
(7)  Secure the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 28-84. - Additional maintenance authority. 
(a)  In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this article or other chapters of this Code, the code official may require the responsible party or parties to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures, including, but not limited to: installing additional security lighting; increasing on-site inspection frequency; hiring an on-site security guard; and implementing any other measures that may be reasonably required for the upkeep of the subject property. 
(b)  The code official shall inform the responsible party or parties of the additional maintenance requirements through a notice to abate, described in section 28-86. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 28-85. - Strict liability offense. 
A violation of section 28-83 or 28-84 is a strict liability offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 28-86. - Violations. 
(a)  If the responsible party or parties violate this article, the code official may take all of the following actions: 
(1)  Issue a notice to abate to the responsible party or parties. 
(2)  Issue a civil infraction, pursuant to section 1-8(b) of this Code, to the responsible party or parties. 
(b)  The notice to abate shall include: 
(1)  The nature and location of the violation; and 
(2)  The time within which the violation must be corrected. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 28-87. - Re-occupancy. 
(a)  A vacant commercial or industrial property is not re-occupied until: 
(1)  All outstanding costs, assessments, and liens owed to the city have been paid in full; and 
(2)  A certificate of compliance has been obtained, pursuant to this Code, appendix A, zoning, section 22.10. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 28-88. - Saving clause. 
This article is supplemental to the requirements of the IPMC, the Housing Law of Michigan, MCL 125.401 et seq., and any other local, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 80-741, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 80-743, 6-14-16)  
Secs. 28-89—28-105. - Reserved.  
Chapter 30 - SECONDHAND GOODS AND PAWNBROKERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-673, adopted Nov. 25, 2008, repealed ch. 30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 30 consisted of §§ 30-1—30-14; 30-20—30-30; and 30-39—30-60, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80-340, adopted June 9, 1987; Ord. No. 80-400, adopted Dec. 26, 1991; Ord. No. 80-416, adopted Aug. 11, 1992; Ord. No. 80-441, adopted Oct. 12, 1993; and Ord. No. 80-471, adopted Dec, 13, 1994. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
Cross reference— Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 24; precious metals and gem dealers, Ch. 27; sales, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.; licensing of pawnbrokers, MCL 445.471 et seq., 446.201 et seq.; licensing of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq., 445.471 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Automotive recycler means a person who engages in business primarily for the purpose of selling retail salvage vehicle parts and secondarily for the purpose of selling retail salvage motor vehicles or manufacturing or selling a product of gradable scrap metal or a person employed as a salvage vehicle agent as that term is defined in section 56c of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.56c. The commercial operations of an automotive recycler is regulated as a secondhand goods business under this chapter. 
Garage sale means the sale of used tangible household personal items belonging to the household and conducted as permitted by section 4.42 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Internet drop-off store means a person that contracts with other persons, to offer its personal property or other valuable thing for sale, purchase, consignment, or trade through means of an internet website and meets the conditions described in subsection 30-3(d). A secondhand goods business license is not required for an internet drop-off store. 
Junk peddler means a peddler who does not have a place of business in a building and who goes about purchasing or receiving by exchange or otherwise, secondhand goods. 
Junk yard means any place or establishment that is operated for the purpose of storing, selling, dismantling, wrecking or disposing of disregarded material, refuse, junk or motor vehicles. The commercial operations of a junk yard is regulated as a secondhand goods business under this chapter. 
Pawnbroker means a person who loans money on deposit, or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. 
Person includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, limited liability entities, and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or organized under the laws of the State of Michigan, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
Scrap processor means a person, utilizing machinery and equipment and operating from a fixed location, whose business is the processing and manufacturing of iron, steel, nonferrous metals, paper, plastic, or glass, into prepared grades of products suitable for consumption by recycling mills, foundries, and other scrap processors. The commercial operations of a scrap processor is regulated as a secondhand goods business under this chapter. 
Secondhand goods business means any person whose principal business is that of purchasing, selling, exchanging, storing, or receiving secondhand articles of any kind, scrap metals, cast iron, old iron, old steel, tool steel, aluminum, copper, brass, lead pipe or tools, or lighting and plumbing fixtures. An automotive recycler, junk yard, scrap processor, or secondhand goods or junk dealer, as defined in this section, shall be required to obtain a secondhand goods business license. 
Secondhand goods or junk dealer means any person whose principal business is that of purchasing, selling, exchanging, storing, or receiving secondhand articles such as, but not limited to, scrap metals, cast iron, old iron, old steel, tool steel, aluminum, copper, brass, lead pipe or tools, or lighting and plumbing fixtures, and is regulated as a secondhand goods business under this chapter. 
Secondhand motor vehicle dealer means any person who engages in the business of purchasing, selling, trading, or exchanging any kind of secondhand motor vehicle; or who keeps a place, store, sales lot or establishment for any such purpose, including used car lots. 
Used or secondhand vehicle means any used or secondhand motor vehicle to which a certificate of title and license plates have been issued by the Secretary of State and which motor vehicle has been issued a valid registration for use on the highways. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND GOODS BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-2. - License required. 
No person shall carry on the business of automotive recycler, scrap processor, secondhand goods or junk dealer, junk peddler or junk yard, as defined in article I, without first procuring a license issued by the city clerk as required in this article and pursuant to the general licensing provisions of chapter 18. The license shall expire pursuant to the provisions of section 18-13 of the Code of Ordinances and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-3. - Excluded from licensing requirements. 
(a)  New articles. The requirements of this article shall not apply to new articles, wares or merchandise purchased at wholesale from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sale to customers. 
(b)  Secondhand motor vehicle dealer. The requirements of this Article shall not apply to secondhand motor vehicle dealer and used car lots, as regulated under article III. 
(c)  Garage sales. The requirements of this article shall not apply to residential garage sales as regulated in section 4.42 of the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Internet drop-off store. The requirements of this article shall not apply to an internet drop-off store, as defined in section 30-1, that complies with the following: 
(1)  Has a fixed place of business within the city where he or she exclusively transacts all purchases or sales by means of the Internet; and the purchases and sales are not physically transacted on the premises of that fixed place of business. 
(2)  Has the personal property or other valuable thing available on a website for viewing by photograph, if available, by the general public at no charge; and such website shall comply with all statutory requirements of MCL 45.401. 
(3)  Maintains records of the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of the personal property or other valuable thing for at least two (2) years, which records shall contain a description, including a photograph, if available, and, if applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(4)  Provides the local law enforcement agency with any name under which it conducts business on the website and access to the business premises at any time during normal business hours for purposes of inspection. 
(5)  Within twenty-four (24) hours after a request from a local law enforcement agency, provide an electronic copy of the seller's or consignor's name, address, telephone number, driver license number and issuing state, the buyer's name and address if applicable, and a description of the personal property or other valuable thing as described in subdivision (3). The provision of information shall be in a format acceptable to the local law enforcement agency, shall be in a legible format and in the English language. 
(6)  Provide that payment for the personal property or other valuable thing is executed in compliance with the provisions of MCL 45.401. 
(7)  Immediately remove the personal property or other valuable thing from the website if the local law enforcement agency provides notice that the personal property or other valuable thing is determined to be stolen. 
(e)  Nonprofit agencies. The licensing requirements of this article shall not apply to nonprofit agencies receiving and selling secondhand goods. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-4. - Application. 
Application for a secondhand goods business license shall be made to the city clerk on the form provided. no application will be accepted unless the following information is provided: 
(a)  Full name, address and phone number of the applicant and owner and any other names used by the applicant and owner in the preceding five (5) years. 
(b)  Name and address of the business to be licensed, including flea market location, if applicable. 
(c)  Name and address of all other secondhand businesses presently operated by the applicant and owner. 
(d)  If the applicant or owner is an individual, the date of birth; if the applicant or owner is a business entity, the date of birth of the representative/agent. 
(e)  The applicant's federal taxpayer identification number; if applicable, the state employer identification number; and a copy of the applicant's Michigan sales tax license. 
(f)  Written proof of identity, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate, state identification or passport. 
(g)  A statement as to whether the applicant and owner has ever been convicted of, has pled guilty or no contest to violating any law in the conduct of a secondhand goods business or to receiving and concealing stolen property and, if so, the date and facts surrounding the conviction(s). 
(h)  The application shall be signed by the applicant, or if a business entity by the representative/agent, and dated. 
(i)  The applicant has paid the nonrefundable fee pursuant section 18-18. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-5. - Petition against secondhand goods business. 
A license shall not be issued to any person desiring to conduct a secondhand goods business where sixty-five (65) percent or more of the residential property owners within a radius of one (1) city block of the contemplated secondhand goods business file a petition with the city clerk opposing the location. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-6. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review. Prior to issuance of a license, the city clerk shall distribute the application for review and approval to the following departments. Each department shall review the application for compliance with this chapter and shall recommend approval or disapproval based on the review. The review shall be conducted and the application returned to the clerk's office within twenty (20) calendar days together with the department's recommendation. 
(1)  Police department. Shall conduct a background investigation, including criminal history check to determine if the applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty or no contest to any violation of law in the conduct of a secondhand goods business or the crime of receiving and concealing stolen property and to determine the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
If the application is for a secondhand goods business-vehicle only license, the police department shall include a review of the applicant's driving record to determine whether the applicant has a valid driver's license and the vehicle is properly registered. 
(2)  Division of buildings and safety engineering. Shall review the application to determine whether the business location complies with the zoning district and any applicable locational criteria required by section 15.01(e) or 17.02(f) of the zoning ordinance; and if required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued. Applications for junk peddler licenses do not require review by the division of buildings and safety engineering. 
(3)  Mayor's office. The mayor's office shall review the application and recommendations of the police department and division of buildings and safety engineering. The mayor's signature confirms that the administrative departments have reviewed the application and recommended approval. 
(b)  Issuance. Once the city clerk has received approval from the above departments and further determined the application complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, the city clerk shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-7—30-10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-11. - Compliance with provisions. 
Every person operating under a secondhand goods business license, whether as owner, clerk, agent, servant or employee shall comply with all provisions and requirements contained in the Code of Ordinances and all applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-12. - Business location; not transferable. 
(a)  Location. The secondhand goods business license shall designate the particular place in the city where the person shall carry on the secondhand goods business, including a flea market location. New owners/businesses must obtain a certificate of occupancy from the division of building and safety engineering. 
(b)  Not transferable. The business shall be conducted only in the place designated in the license and the license is not transferable to another person or location. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-13. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
The licensee shall comply with the applicable zoning regulations. The requirements of the zoning ordinance are enumerated as follows: 
(a)  Residential districts (R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4 or R-5). As regulated by the zoning ordinance, a secondhand goods business is not permitted in any residential zoning district. Further, all open storage of secondhand goods and/or junk is prohibited in all residential districts. 
(b)  General business districts (C-2). Section 14.01(r) of the zoning ordinance permits the operation of a secondhand goods dealer in C-2 zoning districts, upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy and if the following locational criteria are complied with: 
(1)  The site shall be located more than five hundred (500) feet from the following zoning districts: R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4 or R-5; and 
(2)  The site must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from a site having a pawnshop or other secondhand goods business; or further than one thousand (1,000) feet to the property line of any public or private educational institution licensed by the State of Michigan to provide instruction for any grade level, kindergarten through twelve (12), inclusive. 
However, all open storage of secondhand goods and/or junk is prohibited in all general business zoning districts (C-2). 
(c)  Industrial districts (M-1, M-2). Section 17.02(f) of the zoning ordinance permits the commercial operation of an automotive recycler, scrap processor or junk dealer business in the M-1 and M-2 industrial zoning districts, upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy and if the locational criteria set forth in section 14.01(r) are complied with. A continuous decorative masonry wall shall be installed and maintained, six (6) feet in height, around the premises. At no time shall any of the contents stored on the property extend above the top of the wall. 
Open storage of junk is prohibited in M-1 and M-2 industrial districts. Operation of a junk yard and the open storage of junk is permitted in M-4 industrial zoning districts pursuant to the zoning ordinance regulations and the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-14. - Hours of operation. 
All licenses issued shall include the following statement: "No business shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m." 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-15. - Display of sign; license. 
Every secondhand goods business shall post in or upon in a conspicuous place on the business premises, a sign which legibly states the business name, occupation and business license. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-16. - Record of transaction. 
All secondhand goods businesses shall keep a written record of transactions as required by MCL 445.404 and 445.405. The record shall be entered at the time of purchase or receipt of any article except old rags, waste paper and household furniture. Each entry in the record of transaction shall be numbered consecutively commencing with number 1. The record shall be written in the English language and shall include the following information: 
(1)  A sequential pre-printed transaction number; 
(2)  A description of the article purchased or received; 
(3)  The name, residential address and fingerprint of the person from whom the article was purchased or received; 
(4)  The driver's license number or official state personal identification card number, or government identification number; 
(5)  A description of the person from whom the article was purchased or received; 
(6)  The date and time the article was purchased or received; 
(7)  The location from where the article was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-17. - Compliance with other regulations. 
In the event the transaction is also regulated by the precious metal and gems provisions or the pawnbroker regulations, the business is required to comply with all applicable regulations including additional licensing, fingerprinting and separate transaction reports that may be required. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-18. - Inspection. 
The record of transactions, the business premises, and all articles of property received or maintained on the premises shall be open to inspection at all times during open business hours by a city attorney, a member of the police department, a prosecutor, or member of the state police. As a condition of doing business, a licensee is deemed to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. The record of transactions shall not be open to inspection by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-19. - Copy of record of transactions for police. 
(a)  Copy required. On Monday of each week before 12:00 noon, every licensee shall transmit by electronic means a legible and correct copy of the record of transactions maintained from the previous week to the police department. The record of transactions transmitted to the police department shall contain a statement verifying that the copy is a true and accurate copy of the record of transactions and shall be dated and signed by the licensee or agent. 
(b)  Format required. The transmission of the information required shall be provided in an electronic format as required by the police department. Any costs incurred to utilize the electronic format required shall be borne by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-20. - Retention of goods purchased. 
(a)  Retention required. The articles purchased or exchanged shall be retained by the licensee for at least fifteen (15) days before disposing of them, in an accessible place in the building where the articles are purchased and received. A tag shall be attached to the articles in a visible and convenient place, with the number written thereupon, to correspond with the entry number in the record of transactions. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to old rags, waste paper, and household goods except radios, televisions, record players, and electrical appliances shall be retained pursuant to subsection (a). Further, the licensee is not required to retain articles purchased from persons having a fixed place of business after those articles shall have been reported to the police department in compliance with section 30-19. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-21. - Items on consignment. 
All requirements prescribed in this article are applicable to any and all items received on consignment except that the licensee is not bound by the requirement to report these transactions to the police department unless an official request is issued. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-22. - Licensee prohibitions. 
A licensee, agent or an employee shall not purchase or receive by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise, any secondhand good: 
(a)  The licensee has reason to believe is stolen; 
(b)  The licensee has reason to believe was unlawfully removed from any job site, utility pole, utility property, telecommunication company property or government property; 
(c)  From any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(d)  From any person who is at the time intoxicated or from a habitual drunkard; 
(e)  From any person known by the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property. 
(f)  From a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license, a valid state personal identification card, or official government identification which includes photographic identification; 
(g)  From any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Secs. 30-23—30-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - JUNK PEDDLER LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-26. - Junk peddler license; plate or decal required. 
(a)  Limited license. If a person is a peddler or collector of secondhand goods who does not have a regular place of business, the license shall be issued to such person as a junk peddler. The license applies only to the peddler and vehicle licensed and does not authorize the operation of any business from a permanent location. Further, all open storage of secondhand goods and/or junk is prohibited in all residential districts. 
(b)  Plate or decal. Upon issuance of a junk peddler license, the city clerk shall issue a plate or decal to be promptly displayed on the rear exterior of the vehicle licensed. If the junk peddler will be using a trailer, a second plate or decal shall be required and shall be promptly displayed on the rear of the trailer. The license shall expire pursuant to the provisions of section 18-13 of the Code of Ordinances and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-27. - Junk peddler license and plate or decal not transferable. 
The junk peddler license shall designate the make and model of the vehicle licensed. The license and plate or decal are not transferable to any other person or vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-28. - Additional application requirements. 
The applicant for a junk peddler license shall provide all application information required by section 30-4 and shall also include a copy of the applicant's driver's license, the valid registration for the vehicle and proof of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-29. - Retention of goods. 
If the licensee does not have a place of business in a building and has obtained a vehicle only license, the licensee is not required to retain the articles purchased or received for fifteen (15) days before selling them, provided that on Monday of each week the licensee files with the police department a report showing the place of business of the person to whom such sale was made; a copy of the record required to be kept in a separate book of the articles purchased or received during the preceding week, and shall include a description of the articles sold, the name and address of the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-30. - Compliance with all regulations. 
The licensee shall comply with all applicable regulations contained in article II, except as modified in section 30-29. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Secs. 30-31—30-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SECONDHAND MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS AND USED CAR LOTS  
DIVISION 1. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-34. - License required. 
No person shall carry on a secondhand motor vehicle dealer business, as defined in article I, without first procuring a license issued by the city clerk as required in this division and pursuant to the general licensing provisions of chapter 18. The license shall expire pursuant to the provisions of section 18-13 of the Code of Ordinances and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-35. - Application. 
Application for a secondhand motor vehicle dealer license shall be made to the city clerk on the form provided. No application will be accepted unless the following information is provided: 
(a)  Full name, address and phone number of the applicant and owner and any other names used by the applicant and owner in the preceding five (5) years; and the names and addresses of all persons associated with applicant in this business. 
(b)  Name and address of the business to be licensed. 
(c)  Name and address of all other secondhand businesses presently operated by the applicant and owner. 
(d)  If the applicant or owner is an individual, the date of birth; if the applicant is a business entity, the date of birth of the representative/agent. 
(e)  A copy of the applicant's Michigan Department of State Vehicle Dealer License. 
(f)  The applicant's federal taxpayer identification number; if applicable, the state employer identification number; and a copy of the applicant's Michigan sales tax license. 
(g)  Written proof of identity, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate, state identification or passport. 
(h)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, has pled guilty or no contest to violating any law in the conduct of a secondhand goods business or to receiving and concealing stolen property and, if so, the date and facts surrounding the conviction(s). 
(i)  The application shall be signed by the applicant, or if a business entity by the representative/agent, and dated. 
(j)  The applicant has paid the nonrefundable fee pursuant section 18-18. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-36. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review. Prior to issuance of a license, the city clerk shall distribute the application for review and approval to the following departments. Each department shall review the application for compliance with this ordinance and shall recommend approval or disapproval based on the review. The review shall be conducted and the application returned to the clerk's office within twenty (20) calendar days together with the department's recommendation. 
(1)  Police department. Shall conduct a background investigation, including criminal history check to determine if the applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty or no contest to any violation of law in the conduct of a secondhand goods business or to the crime of receiving and concealing stolen property and to determine the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Division of buildings and safety engineering. Shall review the application to determine whether the business location complies with the zoning district and any applicable locational criteria required by the zoning ordinance; and if required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(3)  Mayor's office. The mayor's office shall review the application and recommendations of the police department and division of buildings and safety engineering. The mayor's signature confirms that the administrative departments have reviewed the application and recommended approval. 
(b)  Issuance. Once the city clerk has received approval from the above departments and further determined the application complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, the city clerk shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Secs. 30-37—30-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-40. - Compliance with provisions. 
Every person operating under a secondhand motor vehicle dealer license, whether as owner, clerk, agent, servant or employee shall comply with all provisions and requirements contained in the Code of Ordinances and all applicable state laws, including the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.248 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-41. - Business location; not transferable. 
(a)  Location. The license shall designate the particular place in the city where the person shall carry on the secondhand motor vehicle dealer business and the licensee shall procure a license for each and every such place of business in this city. New owners/businesses must obtain a certificate of occupancy from the division of building and safety engineering. 
(b)  Not transferable. The business shall be conducted only in the place designated in the license and the license is not transferable to another person or location. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-42. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
The secondhand motor vehicle dealer shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-43. - Hours of operation. 
No business shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-44. - Display of sign; license. 
Every secondhand motor vehicle dealer business shall post in or upon in a conspicuous place on the business premises, a sign which legibly states the business name, occupation and business license. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-45. - Record of transaction. 
Each dealer in secondhand motor vehicles shall keep and preserve a book in which shall be legibly written in ink at the time of each transaction relating to the purchase, sale, exchange or barter of any secondhand or used motor vehicle in compliance with the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.251. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-46. - Wrecking, storage, open display; prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to cause any vehicles or parts thereof to be wrecked, dismantled or junked on the licensed premises unless the property is properly zoned and a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-47. - Inspection. 
The record of transactions, the business premises, and all articles of property received or maintained on the premises shall be open to inspection at all times during open business hours by a city attorney, a member of the police department, a prosecutor, or member of the state police. As a condition of doing business, a licensee is deemed to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-48. - Licensee prohibitions. 
A licensee, agent or an employee shall not purchase or receive by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise, any secondhand motor vehicle: 
(a)  The licensee has reason to believe is stolen; 
(b)  From any person between the hours of 9 p.m. and 7 a.m.; 
(c)  From any person who is at the time intoxicated or from a habitual drunkard; 
(d)  From any person known by the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property; 
(e)  From a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license, a birth certificate, a valid state identification card, or passport; 
(f)  From any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Secs. 30-49, 30-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS  
DIVISION 1. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-51. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate pawnshops in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to preserve the character of the community. It has been demonstrated that pawnshops increase the rates of robbery, burglary and larceny. It has also been demonstrated that the number of pawnshops in a county is a strong and significant predicator of larcenies and burglaries. It is the city's intent to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious effects on both business and residential locations within the city causing crime and blight. The City of Warren implemented regulations and procedures relating to pawnshops in order to deter the trading of stolen property and related crimes in order to protect the citizenry and the residential and business locations in the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-753, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 30-52. - License required. 
No person shall carry on the business of pawnbroker, as defined in article I, without first procuring a license issued by the city clerk as required in this article and pursuant to the general licensing provisions of chapter 18. The license shall expire pursuant to the provisions of section 18-13 of the Code of Ordinances and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-53. - Internet drop-off store excluded from licensing requirements. 
The requirements of this article shall not apply to an internet drop-off store, as defined in section 30-1, provided the internet drop-off store complies with all provisions contained in section 30-3. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-54. - Application. 
Application for a pawnbroker license shall be made to the City Clerk on the form provided. No application will be accepted unless the following information is provided: 
(a)  Full name, address and phone number of the applicant and owner and any other names used by the applicant and owner in the preceding five (5) years. 
(b)  Name and address of the business to be licensed, including flea market location, if applicable. 
(c)  Name and address of all other pawnbroker businesses presently operated by the applicant and owner. 
(d)  If the applicant or owner is an individual, the date of birth; if the applicant or owner is a business entity, the date of birth of the representative/agent. 
(e)  The applicant's federal taxpayer identification number; the state employer identification number, if applicable; and a copy of the applicant's Michigan sales tax license. 
(f)  Written proof of identity, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate, state identification or passport. 
(g)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, has pled guilty or no contest to violating any law in the conduct of a pawnbroker business or to receiving and concealing stolen property and, if so, the date and facts surrounding the conviction(s). 
(h)  The application shall be signed by the applicant, or if a business entity by the representative/agent, and dated. 
(i)  The applicant has paid the nonrefundable fee pursuant to section 18-18. 
(j)  The applicant shall provide a minimum of two bonds, each in the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), with at least two (2) sureties for a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) in bonds, for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations of the business and for the payment of all costs and damages incurred by any person as a result of any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-55. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review. Prior to issuance of a license, the city clerk shall distribute the application for review and approval to the following departments. Each department shall review the application for compliance with this chapter and shall recommend approval or disapproval based on the review. The review shall be conducted and the application returned to the clerk's office within twenty (20) calendar days together with the department's recommendation. 
(1)  Police department. Shall conduct a background investigation, including criminal history check to determine if the applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty or no contest to any violation of law in the conduct of a pawnbroker business or to the crime of receiving and concealing stolen property and to determine the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Division of buildings and safety engineering. Shall review the application to determine whether the business location complies with the zoning district and any applicable locational criteria required by subsection 15.01(e) of the zoning ordinance; and if required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(3)  Mayor's office. The mayor's office shall review the application and recommendations of the police department and division of buildings and safety engineering. The mayor's signature confirms that the administrative departments have reviewed the application and recommended approval. 
(b)  Issuance. Once the city clerk has received approval from the above departments and further determined the application complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, the city clerk shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Secs. 30-56, 30-57. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-58. - Compliance with provisions. 
Every person operating under a pawnbroker business license, whether as owner, clerk, agent, servant or employee shall comply with all provisions and requirements contained in the Code of Ordinances and all applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-59. - Compliance with other regulations. 
In the event the transaction is also regulated by the precious metal and gems provisions, the business is required to comply with all applicable regulations including additional licensing, fingerprinting and separate transaction reports that may be required. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-60. - Business location; not transferable. 
(a)  Location. The pawnbroker business license shall designate the particular place in the city where the person shall carry on the business, including a flea market location. New owners/businesses must obtain a certificate of occupancy from the division of building and safety engineering. 
(b)  Not transferable. The business shall be conducted only in the place designated in the license and the license is not transferable to another person or location. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-61. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
The licensee shall comply with the applicable zoning regulations. The requirements of the zoning ordinance are enumerated as follows: 
(a)  Residential districts (R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4 or R-5 and any mixed residential zone such as a planned unit development or the downtown district). As regulated by the zoning ordinance, a pawnbroker business is not permitted in any residential zoning district. Further, all open storage of goods is prohibited in all residential districts. 
(b)  General business districts (C-2). Section 14.01(r) of the zoning ordinance permits the operation of a pawnbroker in C-2 zoning districts if the following locational criteria are complied with: 
(1)  The site shall be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest lot line of any of the following zoning districts within the City of Warren: R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4 or R-5 and any mixed residential zone such as a planned unit development or the downtown district; and 
(2)  The site must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest lot line of any of the following land uses within the City of Warren: 
i.  Any public or private preschool, elementary school, middle school, junior high school, or high school; 
ii.  Any public or private child day care facility licensed by the State of Michigan; 
iii.  Any public library; 
iv.  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship, provided that buildings containing food banks, homeless shelters, emergency shelters, and similar uses shall not be considered a "church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship" notwithstanding the fact that worship services may also occur on the property; 
v.  Any public park or public recreational area under the control, operation, or management of the department of parks and recreation of the city or any other federal, state, or local municipality, which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including recreation centers, parks, playgrounds, nature trails, swimming pools, athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, or wilderness areas. 
vi.  The pawnbroker business must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest structure used for a pawnshop or other secondhand goods business. 
(c)  Special land use . Approval of a special land use permit is required from the city council, after application to and recommendation of the planning commission, and under such conditions as the council finds the use meets the standards for approval set forth in section 22.14 of the zoning ordinance. A special land use permit is also required for the expansion of an existing pawnbroker business. 
All open storage of goods is prohibited in all general business zoning districts (C-2). 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 80-753, § 2, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 30-62. - Hours of operation. 
No business shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time on Sunday. All licenses issued shall include the following statement: "No business shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time on Sunday". 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-63. - Display of sign; license. 
Every pawnbroker business shall post in a conspicuous place in or upon the business premises, a sign which legibly states the business name, occupation and business license. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-64. - Written record of property received. 
At the time of receipt of any article of personal property or other valuable thing, the pawnbroker shall keep a written record of property received by way of pawn or pledge as required by MCL 46.205. Each entry in the record of property received shall be numbered consecutively commencing with number 1. The record shall be written in the English language and shall include the following information: 
(1)  A sequential pre-printed transaction number; 
(2)  A description of the article received; 
(3)  Any amount of money loaned on the article; 
(4)  The name, residential address and thumb or finger print of the person from whom the article was received; 
(5)  The driver's license number or official state personal identification card number, or government identification number of the person from whom the article was received; 
(6)  A description of the person from whom the article was received; 
(7)  The date and time the article was purchased or received. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-65. - Transaction form. 
(a)  Record required. Upon the receipt of any article of personal property or other valuable thing by way of pawn, the pawnbroker shall make a permanent record of the transaction on a form provided by the pawnbroker that substantially complies with the form described in subsection (c). Each record of transaction shall be completed in duplicate by the pawnbroker, legibly written in the English language, and shall contain all applicable information required to complete the record of transaction form under subsection (c). 
(b)  Copy to police. The pawnbroker shall retain a record of each transaction and, within forty-eight (48) hours after the property is received, shall electronically transmit one (1) copy of the record of transaction to the police department as required by section 30-67. 
(c)  Form. The pawnbroker shall use the following record of transaction form in an eight and one-half by 11-inch size: 
 
 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-66. - Inspection. 
The record of transactions, the business premises, and all articles of property received or maintained on the premises shall be open to inspection at all times during open business hours by a city attorney, a member of the police department, a prosecutor, or member of the state police. As a condition of doing business, a licensee is deemed to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. The record of transactions shall not be open to inspection by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-67. - Copy of record of transactions for police. 
(a)  [Submittal requirements.] Each day, the licensee shall transmit by electronic means a legible and correct copy of the record of transactions maintained from the previous week to the police department. The record of transactions transmitted to the police department shall contain a statement verifying that the copy is a true and accurate copy of the record of transactions and shall be dated and signed by the licensee or agent. 
(b)  Format required. The transmission of the information required shall be provided in an electronic format as required by the police department. Any costs incurred to utilize the electronic format required shall be borne by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-68. - Purchaser's memorandum of pawn; contents. 
At the time of a loan, a pawnbroker shall deliver to the person pawning or pledging any article a memorandum or note signed by him or her, containing all the information required to be included in the written record of property received. A charge shall not be made or received by the pawnbroker for the entry, memorandum, or note. The memorandum or note shall be consecutively numbered and upon its back shall be printed in English in 12-point type the following: 
"If interest or charges in excess of three (3) percent per month, plus storage charges provided in this document, are asked or received, this loan is void and of no effect; and the borrower cannot be made to pay back the money loaned, any interest on the loan, or any charges or any part of the charges, and the pawnbroker loses all right to the possession of the goods, article, or thing pawned, and shall surrender the item to the borrower or pawner upon due demand for the item." 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-69. - Interest on loans; rate; storage and usage fees. 
(a)  Interest. A pawnbroker may charge a rate of interest not to exceed three (3) percent per month upon any loan and is not required to accept any interest less than fifty cents ($.50) on a single loan. A pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's agent or employee shall not charge or receive interest on the loan in excess of this amount. Interest on any loan is not payable in advance and shall be computed on unpaid monthly balances without compounding. 
(b)  Storage fee. A pawnbroker may also charge one dollar ($1.00) per month or fraction of a month for the storage of unencumbered personal property under any single pledge or pawn. 
(c)  Usage fee. A pawnbroker may charge one dollar ($1.00) per month or fraction of a month for a usage fee for unencumbered personal property pawned or pledged and used by the pawner during the term of the pawn or pledge. A usage fee charged under this subsection is not considered interest. 
(d)  Fees limited. A pawnbroker is not entitled to any examination fee and shall not make any charge in excess of the amounts provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-70. - Title to item; sale of pawned property. 
(a)  Title. Title to the item pledged or pawned vests in the pawnbroker upon the expiration of three (3) months or of any period beyond three (3) months agreed upon by the parties if the borrower has not paid the debt, interest, and charges on the item pledged or pawned. 
(b)  Sale. A pawnbroker shall not sell any article pawned or pledged until the item has remained in his or her possession for at least three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-71. - Payment before sale. 
If at any time before the sale of the item pledged or pawned, the borrower pays or tenders to the pawnbroker the debt, the interest and all charges due on the item, that payment or tender reinvests the pawner with the title and right of possession to the property pledged. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-72. - Usage agreement. 
A pawnbroker may agree in writing, after pledged or pawned unencumbered personal property has been deposited with the pawnbroker, to allow the pawner to maintain possession and use of the pledged or pawned unencumbered personal property during the term of the pawn or pledge transaction. The agreement may also include the payment of a usage fee under section 30-69. A pawnbroker may take possession of the pledged or pawned property pursuant to section 9609 of the Uniform Commercial Code, MCL 440.9609. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-73. - Licensee prohibitions. 
A pawnbroker, agent or an employee shall not: 
(a)  Deface, scratch, obliterate, melt, separate, or break into parts any article or thing received by pawn or pledge, or in any manner cause, or cause others to do anything that renders it difficult to determine, destroys or tends to destroy the identity of the article or thing; 
(b)  Accept by way of pledge, pawn, purchase, or exchange any article or thing that customarily bears a manufacturer's serial number or other identifying insignia unless the number or insignia is plainly visible on the article or thing; 
(c)  Accept by way of pledge, pawn, purchase, or exchange any article or thing that the licensee has reason to believe is stolen; 
(d)  Accept by way of pledge, pawn, purchase, or exchange any article or thing from any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or at any time on Sunday; 
(e)  Accept by way of pledge, pawn, purchase, or exchange any article or thing from any person who is at the time intoxicated or from a habitual drunkard; 
(f)  Accept by way of pledge, pawn, purchase, or exchange any article or thing from a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license, a valid state personal identification card, or official government identification which includes photographic identification; 
(g)  Accept by way of pledge, pawn, purchase, or exchange any article or thing that from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Secs. 30-74—30-76. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PENALTY 
 
Sec. 30-77. - Pawnbroker penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the pawnbroker article, whether as owner, or as clerk, agent, servant or employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail not less than ten (10) days nor more than three (3) months, or by both plus costs and other sanctions as determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-78. - General penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter, other than article IV regulating pawnbrokers, by any person, whether as owner, or as clerk, agent, servant or employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days in jail, or both plus costs and other sanctions for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 30-79. - Revocation of license. 
Upon the conviction of any licensee, or of any clerk, agent, servant, or employee of the licensee for violation of any provision of this chapter, the license issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be revoked as provided in section 18-12 of the Code of Ordinances and upon entry of a conviction such person shall not be permitted to carry on a secondhand goods or pawnbroker business within this city for a period of one (1) year after that conviction. 
(Ord. No. 80-673, § 1, 11-25-08)  
Chapter 31 - SIGN ERECTORS AND SIGN PERMIT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-494, § 1, adopted March 12, 1996, repealed former Ch. 31, §§ 31-1—31-23, relative to signs, and § 3 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 31 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Ch. 31 derived from Code 1967, §§ 6-701—6-722, 7-131; Ord. No. 80-358, adopted June 14, 1988; Ord. No. 80-391, adopted June 11, 1991; Ord. No. 80-392, adopted June 25, 1991; Ord. No. 80-393, adopted June 25, 1991; Ord. No. 80-443, adopted Oct. 26, 1993; Ord. No. 80-485, adopted Aug. 22, 1995. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate signs and billboards, § 3.1(b)(2)(f). 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; subdivision regulations, Ch. 35; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - LICENSING OF SIGN ERECTORS 
 
Sec. 31-1. - License required. 
All contractors, firms or corporations erecting, constructing, repairing or maintaining any sign or display structure within the city shall obtain a license to perform such work from the division of buildings and safety engineering prior to the commencement of any work within the geographic limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 31-2. - License fee. 
The fee for a license required by section 31-1, shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 80-608, § 1, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 31-3. - Application. 
The application for a sign erectors license shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  Whether the applicant is a corporation, partnership or sole ownership; 
(c)  Provide the names, home addresses and titles of all owners or corporate officers; 
(d)  Be signed by the applicant and notarized by a duly authorized Notary Public. 
Providing false information in the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 31-4. - Insurance. 
(a)  The applicant must procure and maintain for the duration of the license period, comprehensive general liability insurance in the following minimum limits of liability: 
Bodily injury: 	$250,000.00 for each person 
	$500,000.00 for each occurrence 
Property damage: 	$1,000,000.00 for each accident 
 
(b)  The policy of insurance shall also name the city as an insured. The policy of insurance shall be issued by an insurance company and in form satisfactory to the city attorney. The policy shall also provide for at least ten (10) days' written notice to the city in the event of cancellation or any material change. A copy of the policy shall be delivered to the city prior to the issuance of the license. If the policy of insurance is cancelled or materially changed, the contractor's license shall be immediately suspended until a policy of insurance acceptable to the city has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 31-5. - Denial, revocation and suspension. 
Any license issued pursuant to this article, in addition to the other reasons enumerated herein, may be denied, revoked or suspended pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 18, section 18-12. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Sec. 31-6. - Penalty. 
Except if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d), the violation of a provision of this chapter is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 22, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-731, § 10, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17)  
Secs. 31-7—31-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIGN PERMIT FEES 
 
Sec. 31-11. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or outdoor display structure, plans and specifications shall be filed with the division of buildings and safety engineering indicating the dimensions, materials and required details of construction including location on the property, design loads and stresses, method of anchorage and electrical connection. 
(b)  All signs shall be subject to a zoning plan review and fee which shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 80-608, § 2, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 31-12. - Sign permit fees. 
Any sign permit required by the Warren Code of Ordinances shall not be issued until the fee prescribed shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 80-608, § 3, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 31-13. - Sign inspections. 
A fee for biennial sign inspections shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 80-608, § 4, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 31-14. - Sign removal fees. 
A fee for removal of a sign, whether temporary or permanent, shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-494, § 3, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 80-608, § 5, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 31-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-608, § 6, adopted April 27, 2004, repealed § 31-15, which pertained to erectors license. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Chapter 32 - SOIL REMOVAL, DUMPING AND REGRADING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; filling excavations for moved buildings. § 9-344; subdivision regulations, Ch. 35; regulation of soil, refuse or fuel carrying vehicles, § 37-631 et seq.; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— Soil conservation districts law, MCL 282.1 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control act, MCI 282.101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Soil defined. 
The word "soil," as used in this chapter, shall be top soil, sand, gravel, earth, or any other material proposed to be removed from land or used in filling land. 
(Code 1967, § 6-601) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 32-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and preserve the natural resources and to prevent the creation of nuisances and hazards to the public welfare, health, safety, well-being and general welfare. 
(Code 1967, § 6-602)  
Sec. 32-3. - Conduct of operations. 
If permission to remove, dump or regrade soil shall be granted, the owner or person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded to conform with the contour lines and grades as approved by the division of engineering. 
(Code 1967, § 6-610)  
Sec. 32-4. - Top soil retention. 
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil, when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer of arable soil for a depth of six (6) inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a depth of six (6) inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises, and shall be respread over the premises not constructed upon when the rest of the soil has been removed, pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the division of engineering. 
(Code 1967, § 6-611)  
Sec. 32-5. - Soil removal below building grade. 
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil, when permission has been duly granted, shall not remove any soil below the normal grade as established from the nearest existing or proposed street, when the building grade has been established and approved by the division of engineering. This regulation shall not prohibit the normal removal of soil for the construction of an approved building or structure when such plans have been approved by the division of building and safety engineering, a building permit issued, and a contract let for the building development. 
(Code 1967, § 6-612)  
Secs. 32-6—32-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 32-26. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any soil from any parcel of land lying within the city without having first obtained a permit for the removal thereof as provided in this article. It shall also be unlawful for any person to dump any soil in excess of fifty (50) cubic yards upon any parcel of land lying within the city without having first obtained a permit for the dumping thereof as provided in this article. It shall also be unlawful for any person to regrade the existing soil in excess of fifty (50) cubic yards on any parcel of land lying within the city without having first obtained a permit for the regrading thereof as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-603, 6-614)  
Sec. 32-27. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the director of public service and shall be in writing and contain the following information: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the persons making the application; 
(2)  Names and addresses of the owners of the land for which a permit is applied for; 
(3)  Full legal description of the land from which soil is desired to be removed, dumped or regraded; 
(4)  Estimated length of time removal, dumping or regrading activity will consume, and purpose for which the permit is desired. 
(b)  There shall be filed with the application a map of the premises under consideration, showing the contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from such intended removal, dumping or regrading of soil in relation to the topography of the premises. 
(c)  Upon filing the application and map there shall be paid to the city treasurer a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which fee shall not be returnable to the applicant. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-125(45), 6-604—6-606; Ord. No. 80-320, § 1(43), 5-13-86)  
Sec. 32-28. - Examination and approvals. 
(a)  The director of public service shall transmit the application and map under this article to the division of engineering. It shall be the duty of the division of engineering to examine the application and map, and make such investigation as may be necessary to enable it to properly approved or disapprove the application or map. In the event of disapproval, the application and map shall be returned by the division of engineering to the applicant along with its reasons, in writing, for such disapproval. If the application and map is approved, the division of engineering shall transmit the same to the director of public service together with its recommendations. 
(b)  The director of public service shall consider particularly whether the proposed removal, dumping or regrading activities would create or be likely to create a public or private nuisance, whether it would result in an unreasonable depletion of the natural resources of the city, whether such activity would create a hazard to the public health, welfare and safety, and whether the activity would create a place of danger, whether or not the proposed site is in conflict with any uses as prescribed by the zoning ordinance of the city, whether or not the issuance of the permit would tend to depreciate property values of the surrounding property, and such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of the city. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-607, 6-608)  
Sec. 32-29. - Issuance; term. 
If, after due consideration, the director of public service shall be of the opinion that the proposed soil removal, dumping or regrading will not create conditions inimical to the public health, welfare and safety, and will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values, nor create any drainage, sewerage problem, or other conditions of danger, permission to remove, dump or regrade the soil shall be granted. Any permission granted to remove, dump or regrade soil under this article shall be valid only for a period of one (1) year following the date such permission is granted by the director of public service, unless the date shall be extended by the director of public service upon application therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 6-609)  
Sec. 32-30. - Bond required. 
(a)  Before any permit for soil removal, soil dumping or soil regrading shall be issued, the owner or applicant shall file with the director of public service a corporate, surety or cash bond or letter of credit in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Less than one (1) acre: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) cash bond or letter of credit. 
(2)  One (1) acre to five (5) acres: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) cash bond or letter of credit for each acre. 
(3)  More than five (5) acres: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) cash bond or letter of credit and a corporate surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each acre in excess of five (5) acres. 
(b)  The bonds or letters of credit shall be in a form which shall be acceptable to the director of public service. 
(c)  The bond required in this section is meant to operate as a guarantee on the part of the permittee to the city that work at the site will be conducted in such a manner as: 
(1)  To prevent any depositing by truck wheels of dirt on the surface of any adjacent streets to a degree that may create slippery road surface conditions or dust clouds; 
(2)  To assure level grading of dirt as it is hauled to the site; 
(3)  To assure maintenance of grade levels as approved by the division of engineering; and 
(4)  To assure certification prepared by a civil engineer or land surveyor showing that conditions of grade levels at the conclusion of the proposed grading plan which was previously approved by the city engineer. 
Failure to comply with any of these conditions will result in a notice being filed with the contractor by certified letter from the division of engineering, outlining the exact nature of the complaint and allowing seven (7) calendar days for correction. Failure to correct the conditions resulting in the complaint within seven (7) calendar days allowed will constitute forfeiture of the bond and consenting by the contractor to allow the city to enter upon the site or adjacent roadways with its forces or contractor to correct the condition and recover all costs from the bond fund as deposited. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-613, 6-615)  
Sec. 32-31. - Display. 
The permit under this article shall be prominently displayed at all times at the site of the soil removal, dumping or regrading operation. 
(Code 1967, § 6-614)  
Sec. 32-32. - Penalty. 
Unless provided otherwise, the violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-656, § 1, 5-8-07)  
Chapter 33 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority for public improvements, § 3.1(b)(4); special assessments, Ch. 10; mandate for special assessment procedure, § 10.2. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; determination and procedure for repair and construction of sidewalks, § 34-54; paving of driveway approaches, § 34-56. 
State Law reference— Powers re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS (IN GENERAL) 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Cost when referring to the cost of any improvement, shall include the cost of surveys, plans, rights-of-way, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing and construction, legal and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
Improvement means any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one (1) or more lots or parcels of land to be especially benefited thereby, in proportion to the benefit to be derived therefrom. Improvements initiated for sidewalks, trees and service leads shall be governed by Article III, except that any sidewalk and driveway approach improvement completed in conjunction with road paving shall be governed by Article I. 
Service lead means any instrumentality that connects an affected property, including a structure, fixture, or improvement on the property, to the sewage disposal system and that is neither owned nor maintained by the city. 
Sewage disposal system means all interceptor sewers, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, combined sanitary and storm sewers, sewage treatment plants, and all other plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes, and includes a stormwater drain system under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-301; Ord. No. 80-557, § 1, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 1, 2-26-02) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 33-2. - Council authority. 
The city council shall have the power to make public improvements within the city and, as to public improvements which are of such a nature as to especially benefit any property within a district, the city council shall have the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or any part of the expense of any such public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment, in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
(Code 1967, § 2-302) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 10.1(a).  
Sec. 33-3. - Authorized improvements. 
In addition to the other improvements which the city may make and finance, in whole or in part, by special assessments, the city may (1) install a boulevard lighting system on any street; (2) install and connect sewers and waterworks on and to property within the city; (3) install asphalt or concrete pavement in unimproved rights-of-way; and (4) replace existing gravel roads, or deteriorated asphalt or concrete roads, in public rights-of-way, with asphalt or concrete roadway. The city may finance these improvements, in whole or in part, by special assessments upon the land abutting thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 2-303; Ord. No. 80-619, § 1, 4-12-05) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 10.1(b).  
Sec. 33-4. - Filed objections; vote required. 
If, prior to the adoption of a resolution finally authorizing the making of a public improvement to be financed by special assessments, written objections to the proposed improvements have been filed by the owners of property in the district, which according to estimates will be required to bear more than fifty (50) percent of the amount of such special assessments, or by more than fifty (50) percent of the owners of land to be assessed for such improvement, no resolution finally determining to proceed with the improvement shall be adopted except by the affirmative vote of six (6) members of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-304) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 10.1(c).  
Sec. 33-5. - Petitions; advisory not jurisdictional. 
The city council, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive such a petition voluntarily presented; but in either event such petition shall be advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional. 
(Code 1967, § 2-305)  
Sec. 33-6. - City engineer's report. 
Before determining to make any improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the city council shall require the city engineer to ascertain the assessed valuation of all property affected by the proposed improvement, the number of parcels which show tax delinquencies, the number of parcels owned by public authorities, the number of parcels which are vacant, and to prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications therefor and an estimate of the cost thereof, and to file the same with the city clerk, together with his or her recommendation as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district. 
(Code 1967, § 2-306)  
Sec. 33-7. - Public hearing. 
(a)  After the report is filed under section 33-6, a public hearing shall be held before the city council, which hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice of the time and place thereof has been published in a newspaper with general circulation in the city and published in the county, and mailed by the city clerk. Notice of this hearing shall be sent by first-class mail to each property owner or party having an interest in property in the proposed district whose name appears upon the current assessment roll of the city, addressed to that owner or party at the address shown on the tax records. 
(b)  Cost estimates as prepared by the city engineer as provided in section 33-6 shall be open to inspection at the public hearing, along with proof of mailing as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  At the time and place specified in the notice for the public hearing, the city council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the council. Any person deeming him or herself aggrieved by the proposed improvement, may object to the proposed improvement by appearing at the hearing in person or by filing a written objection with the city clerk or the city council prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-307—2-309; Ord. No. 80-434, § 1, 7-13-93) 
State Law reference— Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.  
Sec. 33-8. - Council determination. 
After the public hearing under section 33-7, the city council may, by resolution, determine to make improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution the city council shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement; determine the estimated cost thereof, determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city; determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid; determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed the maximum lawful interest; designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied; and direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination. 
(Code 1967, § 2-310)  
Sec. 33-9. - Preparation of roll. 
The city assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the city council, and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at large, if any. 
(Code 1967, § 2-311)  
Sec. 33-10. - Endorsement of roll. 
When the city assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, he or she shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, his or her certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by him or her pursuant to a resolution of the city council (giving date of adoption of same) and that in making the assessments therein he or she has, as near as may be, according to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in the resolution, and to the Charter and the provisions of this chapter. Thereupon he or she shall present the same to the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-312)  
Sec. 33-11. - Meeting to review and confirm roll. 
Upon receipt of the special assessment roll the city council shall order it filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination; and shall fix the time and place when it will meet to review and confirm such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice thereof has been sent by the city clerk. Notice of this hearing shall be sent by first-class mail to any property owner or party having an interest in property in the proposed district whose name appears upon the current assessment roll, addressed to that owner or party at the address shown on the tax records. The notice shall specify the time and place of the meeting. The city council may, in its discretion, publish notice of the meeting not less than ten (10) days prior to date of the meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 2-313; Ord. No. 80-434, § 2, 7-13-93) 
State Law reference— Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.  
Sec. 33-12. - Protesting the proposed assessment. 
Any owner or party having an interest in the property to be assessed, or his or her agent, may protest the proposed special assessment by appearing at the hearing described in section 33-11 in person or by filing his or her objections in writing with the city clerk or city council prior to the close of that hearing. The city council shall maintain a record of all parties who protest the special assessment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-314; Ord. No. 80-434, § 3, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 33-13. - Confirmation of roll. 
The city council shall meet and review the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed, or at an adjourned date therefor, and shall consider any objections thereto. The city council may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land, or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the council's minutes. After the hearing and review the council may confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the assessor for revision or may annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith. Any such corrections and changes made by the assessor shall be reviewed by the city council in the same manner as the original assessment. The city council shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll. The roll shall, upon confirmation, be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-315, 2-316; Ord. No. 80-434, § 4, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 33-14. - Attachment of roll. 
All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. The lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the Charter for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the city council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for the amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments not to exceed thirty (30) in number as the city council may determine at the time of confirmation, and if in annual installments, the city council shall determine the first installment to be due on the following July first and subsequent installments on July first of succeeding years. 
(Code 1967, § 2-317) 
Charter reference— Lien for special assessments, § 10.5(a).  
Sec. 33-15. - Transmission of roll for collection. 
The assessment roll shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for collection immediately after its confirmation. The city treasurer shall give notice by one (1) publication in a newspaper that the special assessment roll (identifying it) has been filed in his or her office and specifying when and where payments may be made thereon. He or she shall mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners, as indicated by the records of the city assessor, of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail or receive if mailed any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-318) 
Charter reference— Collection of special assessments, § 10.5(b).  
Sec. 33-16. - Transmission of roll to assessor; installments. 
The city treasurer shall transmit such roll to the city assessor with all payments upon assessments noted thereon. The city assessor shall then divide any remaining balance of each assessment into such number of equal installments as shall have been fixed by the city council; provided, that if such division operates to make any installment less than ten dollars ($10.00), then the city assessor shall reduce the number of installments so that each installment shall be above and as near to ten dollars ($10.00) as possible. 
(Code 1967, § 2-319)  
Sec. 33-17. - Spreading installments on city tax roll. 
The first installment shall be spread upon the next city tax roll in a column headed "Special Assessments," together with interest upon all unpaid installments from such date as may be determined by the city council to the first day of July of the year in which the tax roll is made. Thereafter one (1) installment shall be spread upon each annual tax roll, together with one (1) year's interest upon all unpaid installments; provided, that when any annual installment shall have been prepaid as hereinafter provided, then there shall be spread upon the tax roll for such year only the interest upon all unpaid installments. 
(Code 1967, § 2-320)  
Sec. 33-18. - Collection of installments by city treasurer; return to county treasurer. 
After each installment has been placed on the tax rolls, the same shall be collected by the city treasurer with the same rights and remedies, and the same penalties, interest and collection fees, as provided in the Charter for the collection of taxes, and shall be due and payable on the first day of July of the fiscal year in which levied. All such assessment installments which are paid on or before the thirty-first day of August of such year shall be collected by the city treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for the collection thereof. Provided, that at the election of the taxpayer he or she may pay one-half of the assessment installment on or before the thirty-first day of August of such year to the city treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for collection thereof, and provided that the balance of the assessment installment, if one-half was paid on or before the thirty-first day of August, shall be due and payable on the first day of December of such year, provided further that the taxpayer may pay the balance of the assessment installment by the thirty-first day of January of the following year to the city treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for collection thereof, and provided further that if the taxpayer fails to pay the first one-half by the specified date, the half payment option is void, payment thereafter must be made on the full amount subject to a collection fee on the assessment installment of one (1) percent during the month of September and an additional one-half of one percent per month during each and every month or fraction of a month which shall elapse thereafter before the payment of such assessment installment is made, until the last day of February next following the date that such assessment installments become due and payable; and provided further, that if the taxpayer fails to pay the second half payment by the thirty-first day of January, payment thereafter will be subject to the above fees on the amount due. Upon all city assessments returned to the county treasurer upon any delinquent tax roll, a charge of three and one-half (3½) percent shall be added and the same shall be collected by the county treasurer in like manner as and together with the taxes, charges and assessments so returned. 
(Code 1967, § 2-321)  
Sec. 33-19. - Advance payments. 
Any person desiring to pay any installment in advance shall first secure the proper statement from the city assessor to permit the city treasurer to compute the amount to be paid. The city treasurer shall report to the city assessor all advance payments on installments so that the city assessor shall have such information before spreading installments on the next city tax roll. 
(Code 1967, § 2-322)  
Sec. 33-20. - Completed improvements; certification of costs. 
Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof, the city engineer shall certify to the city council the total cost of the improvement, together with the amount of the original roll for the improvement. 
(Code 1967, § 2-323)  
Sec. 33-21. - Insufficient assessments; additional assessment authorized. 
Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the city council shall make additional assessments against the city and the several lots and parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original assessments, to supply the deficiency; but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the city council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Code 1967, § 2-324) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 10.3(a).  
Sec. 33-22. - Disposition of excessive assessments. 
The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five (5) percent or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five (5) percent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the parties who paid the excess assessment. The refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such assessment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-325)  
Sec. 33-23. - Invalidity of roll due to irregularity, informality; remedy. 
Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the city council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the city council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment; and whenever the assessment, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the same has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. 
(Code 1967, § 2-326) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 10.3(b).  
Secs. 33-24—33-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 33-46. - Abatement of nuisances. 
When any lot, lots, building or structure within the city, because of an accumulation of refuse, or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious weeds, or age or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the city council, a public hazard or nuisance, which is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or those residing or habitually going near such lot, lots, building or structure, the city council may, by resolution, after investigation, determine that a hazard or nuisance exists. The city clerk shall send the notice by certified mail return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the owners of the land. If a signed return receipt is not received by the city clerk's office, the city clerk shall publish the notice in a local newspaper at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. 
(Code 1967, § 2-327; Ord. No. 80-318, § 1, 4-22-86)  
Sec. 33-47. - Notice required. 
The notice to abate or remove a hazard or nuisance under this article shall specify the nature of the hazard or nuisance and describe the property on which the same is located and require the owner to abate or remove the hazard or nuisance promptly, and shall designate a time within which the same shall be abated or removed which shall be commensurate with the nature of the hazard or nuisance. The notice shall further establish the date for a public hearing before the city council at which time the owner may raise any objections to the proposed abatement. The city clerk shall also give due notice of the hearing to persons to whom real property within three hundred (300) feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of single and two-family dwellings within three hundred (300) feet, notice to be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of approval by the city council of the initial resolution specified in section 33-46, and the notice shall provide a minimum notice of fourteen (14) calendar days to the owner. 
(Code 1967, § 2-328)  
Sec. 33-48. - Failure to comply; removal by city. 
If at the expiration of the time limit specified in the notice to remove or to abate a hazard or nuisance, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known, the city council may, by resolution, order such hazard removed or nuisance abated under the direction of the director of public service by the proper department or agency of the city, or may do the work by contract or by hire. 
(Code 1967, § 2-329)  
Sec. 33-49. - Duty of director of public; report. 
The director of public service shall take all steps necessary to carry out the directions of the city council in removing a hazard or abating a nuisance, shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate record of all expense in connection therewith, and upon completion of the work to be performed, shall submit a report of the work done and all expense in connection therewith, to the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-330)  
Sec. 33-50. - Recovery of costs. 
The city council shall, by resolution, after examination of the director of public service's report, determine what amount or part of each such expense shall be charged and the person, if known, against whom and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment. By such resolution the city council shall determine the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed the maximum lawful interest, designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied, direct the city assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination and designate the name by which said assessment roll shall be known and referred. The city clerk shall notify the owner of the costs to be assessed as determined by the city council. The city clerk shall send the notice by ordinary mail and by certified mail return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the owners of the land. 
(Code 1967, § 2-331; Ord. No. 80-318, § 1, 4-22-86)  
Sec. 33-51. - Preparation of roll. 
The city assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the city council and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such sums as may have been directed by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-332)  
Sec. 33-52. - Endorsement of roll. 
When the city assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, he or she shall attach thereto and endorse thereon his or her certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by him or her pursuant to a resolution of the city council (giving date of adoption of same) and that in making the assessments therein he or she has, as near as may be, according to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in the resolution and the Charter and the provisions of this chapter. Thereupon, he or she shall file the special assessment roll with the city clerk who shall forthwith give notice as has been required by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-333)  
Sec. 33-53. - Notice of hearing. 
Upon receipt of the special assessment roll under section 33-52, the city clerk shall give notice as has been directed by the city council, which notice shall state the basis of the assessment, the amount thereof, describe the property affected thereby and give a reasonable time, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, in which a hearing may be had thereon or payment made. 
(Code 1967, § 2-334)  
Sec. 33-54. - Hearing objections. 
If payment is not made within the time specified in the resolution and notice, the city council shall meet at the time and place provided and hear any objections to the roll as prepared. 
(Code 1967, § 2-335)  
Sec. 33-55. - Changes in roll. 
The city council may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the council minutes. 
(Code 1967, § 2-336)  
Sec. 33-56. - Confirmation of roll. 
After the hearing the city council shall confirm the special assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made and the city clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon, and upon confirmation such roll shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1967, § 2-337)  
Secs. 33-57, 33-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS—SIDEWALKS, TREES AND SERVICE LEADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, adopted July 11, 2000, completely repealed the provisions of former Art. III of this chapter which encompassed §§ 33-76—33-82 and pertained to general provisions regarding special assessments. Ord. No. 80-557 replaced former Art. III with Art. III, §§ 33-60—33-84 as currently set out herein. Former §§ 33-76—33-82 derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 2-338—2-344. Subsequently, Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, adopted Feb. 26, 2002, amended the title of Art. III to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 33-59. - Service leads. 
Whenever the water division superintendent or designate determines, pursuant to water division specifications, that a service lead is required to be constructed for the public health, safety, welfare, or is in a state of disrepair, unsafe or blocked for use, the water division superintendent or designate may advise the owner of the property affected to repair the service lead. The water division superintendent or designate may construct, reconstruct or repair such service lead if the owner consents to the voluntary service lead program. If the city constructs, reconstructs, or repairs such service lead, it may charge the expense to the premises and the owner as a special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-60. - Sidewalks. 
Whenever the city engineer or designate determines, pursuant to the engineering division specifications, that a sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach is required to be constructed for the public health, safety, welfare, or is in a state of disrepair, unsafe or blocked for use, the city engineer or designate may order the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk to repair the sidewalk. The city engineer may construct, reconstruct, or repair such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach. If the city constructs, reconstructs, or repairs such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach it may charge the expense to the premises and the owner as a special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-61. - Trees. 
Whenever the director of parks and recreation or designate determines, pursuant to the parks and recreation department specifications, that a tree in the public right-of-way is an obstruction, in a state of disrepair or hazardous to the public health and safety, the director of parks and recreation or designate may order the owner of the property abutting the tree to repair, remove and/or plant a tree. The director of parks and recreation or designate may repair, remove and/or plant the tree. If the city repairs, removes and/or plants a tree, it may charge the expense to the premises and the owner as a special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-62. - Sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review. (STS) 
(a)  Creation. The sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review is hereby created, composed of three members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by city council, each of whom shall be a resident of the city and who are owners of property assessed for taxation in the city. 
(b)  Term of office. The terms of office shall be three (3) years, except that of the members first appointed, one (1) each shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), and three (3) years. Members other than the first members shall be appointed before July 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled by the mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Function. The board shall hear complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by special assessments relating to the sidewalk, tree, and sewer service lead program. If it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully specially assessed or omitted from the roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems appropriate. The board shall forward its confirmation to city council. 
(d)  Meetings of the board; quorum; concurrence of majority; chairperson. The board shall convene as needed to efficiently process the recommended public improvement by special assessments. A majority of the members of the board constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the board. The board shall not take action or make a determination without the concurrence of a majority of the board. The board shall elect a chairperson from among its members and shall elect other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. 
(e)  Procedures, records. The board shall adopt its own rules and procedures and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(f)  Open meetings. The business which the board may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the board held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being sections 15.261 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(g)  Expenditures. No members of the board shall incur any expenses or create any obligation or liability on the city. If any expenditure of city funds is necessary in connection with the functioning of the commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-63. - Report from the engineering department and/or the parks and recreation department, and/or water department. 
Prior to a public hearing before the sidewalk, tree, and sewer board of review, the engineering department and/or the parks and recreation department and/or the water department shall ascertain the assessed valuation of the property affected by the proposed improvement, the number of parcels which show tax delinquencies, the number of parcels owned by public authorities, the number of parcels which are vacant, and to prepare or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications for the public improvement, and an estimate of the cost of the special assessment. This information is to be filed with the city clerk and the city assessor, together with its determination as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by the special assessment and what part if any should be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed the maximum lawful interest, and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district. The engineering department and/or the parks and recreation department and/or the water department shall then forward the report to the city assessor in order to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the report. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-64. - Preparation of roll. 
Prior to the public hearing, the city assessor or designate shall prepare a special assessment roll including the lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by engineering and/or parks and recreation department and/or the water department and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such relative portions of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at large, if any. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-65. - Endorsement of roll. 
When the city assessor or designate completes the assessment roll, he or she shall attach and endorse his or her certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by him or her pursuant the engineering and/or parks and recreation department and/or water department report, and that in making the assessments, he or she has, as near as may be, according to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in the charter and the provisions of this chapter. Upon completion, he or she shall forward the same to the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-66. - Notice; special assessment public hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the engineering and/or parks and recreation and/or water department report and the special assessment roll, the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review shall order the information filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination; and shall fix the time and place when it will meet to hear complaints of those persons considering themselves aggrieved by the special assessment and review and confirm such roll, which meeting shall not be less than ten (10) days after notice of special assessment has been sent by the city clerk. 
(b)  Notice of hearing shall be given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed whose name appears upon the tax assessment records maintained in the city assessor's office. The notice of hearing shall be mailed by first class mail, addressed to that owner or party at the address shown on the tax records at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. The tax assessment records maintained by the city assessor's office means the last assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes that has been reviewed by the board of review (assessing), as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the names or the addresses of the owners or parties listed on that roll. 
(c)  The notice of hearing shall include a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing in the special assessment proceedings is required in order to appeal the amount of the special assessment to the state tax tribunal and shall describe the manner in which an appearance and protest shall be made. 
(d)  An owner or party in interest, or his or her agent may appear in person at the hearing to protest the special assessment, or shall be permitted to file his or her appearance or protest by letter and his or her personal appearance shall not be required. 
(e)  The city shall maintain in the city clerk's office a record of the parties who appear to protest at the hearing. If a hearing is terminated or adjourned for the day before a party is provided the opportunity to be heard, a party whose appearance was recorded is considered to have protested the special assessment in person. 
(f)  Where any person claims an interest in real property whose name and correct address do not appear upon the last tax assessment records, he or she shall be obligated to file immediately his or her name and address with the assessor. This requirement shall be deemed effective only for the purpose of establishing a record of the names and addresses of those persons entitled to notice of hearing in special assessment proceedings. It shall be the duty of the city assessor to immediately enter on the tax assessment records any changes in the names and addresses to owners or parties in interest filed with him and at all times to keep such tax assessment records current and complete and available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-67. - Changes in roll. 
The sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the board of review minutes. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-68. - Sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review determination. 
After the public hearing pursuant to section 33-66, the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review, may by resolution, determine to make the public improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property specially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution, the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review shall approve plans and specifications for the improvement; determine the estimated cost, determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city; determine the number of installments in which may be paid; determine the rate of interest to be charged on the installments, not to exceed the maximum lawful interest; designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied. The sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review shall forward its confirmation to city council for its approval. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-69. - Confirmation of roll. 
After the public hearing, the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review may confirm the special assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made and the city clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon, and upon confirmation such roll, it shall be the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review's final and conclusive determination. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-70. - Failure to give notice; invalidation of assessment; reassessment. 
Any failure to give notice as required in section 33-66 shall not invalidate an entire assessment roll but only the assessments on property affected by the lack of notice. A special assessment shall not be declared invalid as to any property if the owner or party in interest thereof has actually received notice, has waived notice, or has paid any part of the assessment. If any assessment is declared void by court order or judgment, a reassessment against the property may be made. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-71. - Validation of previously held hearings. 
Each special assessment hearing held is validated insofar as any notice of hearing is concerned, if notice was given by mail to the owners or parties in interest whose names appeared at the time of mailing on the last local tax assessment records. Any such special hearing is also validated as to any owner or party in interest who has actually received notice of hearing, has waived such notice, or has paid any part of the special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-72. - Approval by city council. 
Upon receipt of the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review's confirmation, city council shall meet and review the engineering and/or park and recreation and/or the water department's report, the special assessment roll, and the confirmation of the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review. The city council may by resolution, determine to make the public improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property specially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution, the city council shall approve plans and specifications for the improvement; approve the estimated cost, approve what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city; approve the number of installments in which may be paid; approve the rate of interest to be charged on the installments; not to exceed the maximum lawful interest; approve the designation of the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied. 
The city council may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land, or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the city council's minutes. After review of the records, city council may approve the confirmation of the special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the city assessor or appropriate department for revision or may annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith. Any such corrections made by the city assessor shall be reviewed by the city council in the same manner as the original assessment. The city council shall endorse the date of its approval of the confirmation upon each assessment roll. The roll shall, upon approval of the confirmation, be final and conclusive. If prior to the adoption of a city council resolution finally authorizing the making of a public improvement to be financed by special assessments, written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district, which according to estimates will be required to bear more than fifty (50) percent of the amount of such special assessments, or by more than fifty (50) percent of the owners of land to be assessed for such improvement, no resolution finally determined to proceed with such improvement shall be adopted, except by the affirmative vote of six (6) members of city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-73. - Attachment of roll. 
All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of approval of the confirmation of the roll by city council, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. The lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the Charter for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the city council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for the amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. All special assessments shall become due upon approval of the confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments not to exceed thirty (30) in number as the city council may determine at the time of the approval of the confirmation, and if in annual installments, the city council shall determine the first installment to be due. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-74. - Transmission of roll for collection. 
The assessment roll shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for collection immediately after its approval by city council. The city treasurer shall give notice by one (1) publication in a newspaper that the special assessment roll (identifying it) has been filed in his or her office and specifying when and where payments may be made thereon. He or she shall mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners, as indicated by the records of the city assessor, of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail or receive if mailed any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-75. - Transmission of roll to city assessor; installments. 
The city treasurer shall transmit such roll to the city assessor with all payments upon assessments noted thereon. The city assessor shall then divide any remaining balance of each assessment into such number of equal installments as shall have been fixed by the city council; provided, that if such division operates to make any installment less than ten dollars ($10.00), then the city assessor shall reduce the number of installments so that each installment shall be above and as near to ten dollars ($10.00) as possible. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-76. - Spreading installments on city tax roll. 
The first installment shall be spread upon the city tax roll in a column headed "special assessments," together with interest upon all unpaid installments from such date as may be determined by the city council. Thereafter, one (1) installment shall be spread upon each annual tax roll, together with one (1) year's interest upon all unpaid installments; provided, that when any annual installment shall have been prepaid as hereinafter provided, then there shall be spread upon the tax roll for such year only the interest upon all unpaid installments. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-77. - Collection of installments by city treasurer; return to county treasurer. 
After each installment has been placed on the tax rolls, the same shall be collected by the city treasurer with the same rights and remedies, and the same penalties, interest and collection fees, as provided in the Charter for the collection of taxes, and shall be due and payable. All such assessment installments which are paid on or before the thirty-first day of August of such year shall be collected by the city treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for the collection thereof. Provided, that at the election of the taxpayer he or she may pay one-half (½) of the assessment installment on or before the thirty-first day of August of such year to the city treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for collection thereof, and provided that the balance of the assessment installment, if one-half (½) was paid on or before the thirty-first day of August, shall be due and payable on the first day of December of such year, provided further that the taxpayer may pay the balance of the assessment installment by the thirty-first day of January of the following year to the city treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for collection thereof, and provided further that if the taxpayer fails to pay the first one-half (½) by the specified date, the half payment option is void, payment thereafter must be made on the full amount subject to a collection fee on the assessment installment of one (1) percent during the month of September and an additional one-half of one (0.5) percent per month during each and every month or fraction of a month which shall elapse thereafter before the payment of such assessment installment is made, until the last day of February next following the date that such assessment installments become due and payable; and provided further, that if the taxpayer fails to pay the second half payment by the thirty-first day of January, payment thereafter will be subject to the above fees on the amount due. Upon all city assessments returned to the county treasurer upon any delinquent tax roll, a charge of three and one-half (3½) percent shall be added and the same shall be collected by the county treasurer in like manner as and together with the taxes, charges, and assessments so returned. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-78. - Advance payments. 
Any person desiring to pay any installment in advance shall first secure the proper statement from the city assessor to permit the city treasurer to compute the amount to be paid. The city treasurer shall report to the city assessor all advance payments on installments so that the city assessor shall have such information before spreading installments on the next city tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-79. - Completed improvements; certification of costs. 
Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof, the city engineer and/or director of parks and recreation and/or water division superintendent shall certify to the city council the total cost of the improvement, together with the amount of the original roll for the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-80. - Insufficient assessments; additional assessment authorized. 
Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the city council shall make additional assessments against the city and the several lots and parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original assessments, to supply the deficiency; but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the city council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-81. - Disposition of excessive assessments. 
The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the parties who paid the excess assessment. The refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such assessment. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-82. - Invalidity of roll due to irregularity, informality; remedy. 
Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the city council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the city council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment; and whenever the assessment, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the same has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-83. - Appeal. 
If a special assessment is made against a property, the notice of special assessment sent to the property owner or person responsible for the ad valorem property taxes under the general property tax act, MCL 211.1 to MCL 211.157, shall include, in addition to any other requirements by statute or charter, a statement that the owner or any person having an interest in the real property may file a written appeal of the special assessment with the state tax tribunal within thirty (30) days of the confirmation hearing held by the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review if that special assessment was protested at the sidewalk, tree and sewer board of review hearing (held for the purpose of confirming the roll). 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 33-84. - Conflict and severability. 
As to sidewalk, tree, and service lead assessments, if any part of this article or the application thereof to any persons or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by any court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts or application of this article which can be given effect without the invalid part or application, provided such remaining parts are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end all provisions of this article are declared severable. The article is to read in conjunction with the Charter and city ordinances; if however, there is conflict with other ordinance language, this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 2, 3, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-582, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Secs. 33-85—33-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-90. - Use of funds by special assessment. 
Monies raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvements for which the assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments, as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-91. - Inability to pay assessment. 
Any person who, in the opinion of the city assessor, and upon confirmation by the city council, are, by reason of poverty, unable to contribute toward the cost of the making of a public improvement may execute to the city an instrument prepared by the city attorney, creating a lien for the benefit of the city on all or any part of the real property owned by them and benefitted by any public improvement, which lien will mature and be effective from and after the execution of such instrument; and shall be enforceable in the event that title to or any interest in such property is thereafter transferred in any manner whatsoever, or in the event that, in the opinion of the city assessor, upon confirmation by the city council, such condition of poverty ceases to exist. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-92. - Deferment of special assessment. 
(a)  Eligibility. An owner of a homestead who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older or who is totally and permanently disabled, a citizen of the United States, a resident of this state for five (5) or more years, and the sole owner of the homestead for five (5) or more years is eligible for the deferment of special assessments on that homestead pursuant to Act No. 225 of the Public act of 1976, as amended that being MCL 211.761 et seq. 
(b)  Application. An owner may apply to the assessor's office for deferment of the payment of special assessments on the owner's homestead. The application shall be made upon an affidavit form to be furnished and made available by the Michigan Department of Treasury at convenient locations throughout the state. The affidavit form shall contain the following statement in 10-point boldface type located immediately above the affiant's signature: 
"If this deferment is authorized the state will place a lien on your property." 
A person making a false affidavit for the purpose of obtaining deferment of special assessments under this act is guilty of perjury. If the homestead is owned jointly by husband and wife, each spouse shall sign and file the affidavit. If the homestead is encumbered by a mortgage or an unpaid balance on a land contract, a deferment of special assessments shall not be made without the written consent of the mortgagee or the land contract vendor, which shall be filed with the affidavit. The affidavit shall be filed with the assessor's office at least thirty (30) days after the due date of a special assessment or installment of a special assessment for which deferment is requested. 
(c)  Determination of eligibility by assessor. Upon receipt of the affidavit, the assessor shall promptly examine it to determine if the applicant meets the requirements of this article and state law. The assessor's office shall make an inspection of the property and property records and conduct an investigation and survey as it deems necessary. An applicant shall not be compelled to supply information not reasonably essential to a proper determination of the eligibility of the owner and the homestead for the relief provided under this article and state law. The assessor shall promptly make its decision with respect to an application under this section and shall notify the applicant of its decision not later than the due date for a special assessment involved in the application. A decision of the assessor shall be final except as otherwise provided pursuant to the constitution. 
(d)  Procedure. The procedure relating to deferment of special assessments on homesteads are governed by MCL 211.761 et seq as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-93. - Liability for public improvements. 
The owners of all real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, or exempted by the board of review (assessing), and with or without valuation placed thereon, shall be liable for the cost of public improvements benefiting such property, unless exempted from special assessments by law, the same as other property, as provided herein and such special assessments shall be levied, collected and returned, and the premises may be sold or forfeited in the same manner as for nonpayment of city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-94. - Action in assumpsit for delinquent assessments. 
In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-95. - Consent by owners for alternative procedure. 
If any person or property owner to be affected by any proposed improvement agrees that such proposed improvement be made and that a special assessment be levied in connection therewith, the City may, in lieu of the foregoing procedure in this chapter enter into a written contract with the person or property owner affected thereby, which contract when properly approved and executed, shall operate as a complete special assessment procedure and the assessment shall be made in accordance with the contract. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 33-96. - Resolution of council prerequisite to financing improvements. 
No public improvement to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment shall be made before the city council determines by resolution to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 80-557, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Chapter 33.5 - LOW INCOME HOUSING TAX CREDIT PROGRAM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq.), Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended and General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq.). 
 
ARTICLE I. - ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE PAYMENT EQUAL TO SIX (6) PERCENT OF THE ANNUAL SHELTER RENT COLLECTED IN LIEU OF AD VALOREM PROPERTY TAXES FOR PATRIOT PLACE HOMES HOUSING DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 33.5-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter provides for an annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes for a city housing development identified within this chapter as "Patriot Place Homes" to service low income or moderate income persons or families to be financed with a federally-aided mortgage or Authority-aided mortgage, or an advance or grant from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority (Authority) as defined in the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq.) (Act 346). 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-2. - Preamble. 
(a)  It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for low income or moderate income persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for an annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes in accordance with Act 346. The city is authorized by Act 346 and this chapter to establish or change the annual service charge payment to be paid in lieu of taxes by any and all classes of housing exempt from taxation under Act 346 at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid, but for Act 346. It is further acknowledged that housing for low income or moderate income persons or families is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing real estate tax exemptions for such housing is a valid public purpose. It is further acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of this chapter for tax exemption and an annual service charge payment in lieu of all ad valorem taxes during the period contemplated within this chapter are essential to the determination of economic feasibility for the housing development identified as Patriot Place Homes that is to be constructed and financed in reliance upon such tax exemption. 
(b)  The city acknowledges that Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners (the sponsor) has offered, subject to receipt of the low income housing tax credit allocated by the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to construct, own and operate a housing development identified herein as "Patriot Place Homes" on certain properties located within Warren, Michigan, which are identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter, to serve low income or moderate income persons or families, and the Sponsor has offered to pay to the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge payment for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-3. - Definitions. 
The following terms and phrases, when used within this chapter shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Act 346: means the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 Public Acts of Michigan 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq.). 
Ad valorem property taxes : means a tax with the amount based upon the assessed value of the property. 
Annual shelter rent(s) or shelter rent(s) or contract rent(s) : means the total actual collections received in connection with the operation of Patriot Place Homes housing development during an agreed upon annual period from all occupants representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of furnished utilities. 
Authority: means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority created within the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 Public Acts of Michigan 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401, et seq.)(Act 346). 
Authority-aided mortgage or an advance or grant from the Authority: means that the Authority may make a mortgage loan or loans to the Sponsor for the construction or for the long-term financing of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development. 
Federally-aided mortgage: means any of the following: 
(1)  A below market interest rate mortgage insured, purchased, or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
(2)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and augmented by a program of rent supplements; 
(3)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
(4)  A mortgage on a housing development (Patriot Place Homes) to which the Authority allocates the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program pursuant to Act 346, as amended; 
(5)  A mortgage receiving special benefits under another federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate income housing, consistent with Act 346, as amended. 
Housing development: means any of the following: 
(1)  Residential real property developed or to be developed (Patriot Place Homes) or receiving benefits under Act 346 to service low income or moderate income persons or families; 
(2)  A specific work or improvement either for rental or for subsequent sale to an individual purchaser undertaken by a nonprofit housing corporation (sponsor) pursuant to or receiving benefits under Act 346 to provide dwelling accommodations, including the acquisition and construction of lands; or 
(3)  Social, recreational, educational or communal facilities that the Authority finds to serve and improve a residential area in which housing described above herein subparagraphs (1) or (2) is located or is planned to be located, thereby enhancing the viability of the housing development. 
Limited dividend housing association: means a limited divided housing association that is an association organized and qualified exclusively to provide housing facilities for persons or families of low income or moderate income and shall include a general or limited partnership or other joint venture relationship as approved by the Authority. 
Low Income Housing Tax Credit or Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program and/or Tax Exemption: means the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program allocated by the Authority under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Low income or moderate income persons or families: means persons or families who cannot afford to pay for housing at the cost that a private establishment requires, as defined in Act 346. 
Sponsor: for purposes of this chapter, the sponsor is identified as Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners. To receive the Low Income Housing Tax Credit, the sponsor is required to receive or assume a federally-aided mortgage, Authority-aided mortgage or an advance or grant from the Authority. 
Utilities: means the charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer and other similar services that are furnished to the occupants and paid for by Patriot Place Homes. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-4. - Class of housing development. 
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which an annual service charge payment shall be paid in lieu of ad valorem property taxes shall be housing developments for low income or moderate income persons or families that are financed with a federally-aided mortgage, Authority-aided mortgage or an advance or grant from the Michigan State Housing Authority. It is further determined that Patriot Place Homes Housing Development is of this class. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-5. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
(a)  In reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this chapter, and in reliance upon the qualification of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development as it relates to the annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes, both the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility pertaining to the development, construction and operation of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development as established within this chapter, which the city acknowledges. 
(b)  In consideration of the sponsor's offer to develop, construct, and operate the Patriot Place Homes housing development, the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes that would otherwise be assessed to Patriot Place Homes Housing Development under Michigan law. The sponsor hereby agrees that Patriot Place Homes is to be developed, constructed and maintained in compliance with this chapter, the city's Code of Ordinances, and the real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Homes. 
(c)  The housing development identified as Patriot Place Homes and the properties on which it will be located, identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter, shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes from and after the commencement of construction for the duration stated within this chapter, and subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The adoption of this chapter; 
(2)  Executing a real estate purchase agreement; 
(3)  Executing a real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Homes; 
(4)  Subject to the sponsor's timely filing, with the city assessor, a certified notification of exemption relating to receiving the low income housing tax credit allocated by the Authority before November 1 st of the year preceding the tax year in which the exemption it to begin; 
(5)  So long as the purpose for the development and construction of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development is to service low income or moderate income persons and families, and is financed with a federally-aided mortgage, authority-aided mortgage or an advance or loan from the Authority; and 
(6)  This tax exemption for Patriot Place Homes shall only apply to ad valorem property taxes and will not apply to any other form of property taxation such as special assessments. 
(d)  Subject to the sponsor's substantial compliance with all of the requirements, terms and conditions set forth within this chapter, the annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes relating to Patriot Place Homes Housing Development shall be equal to six (6) percent of the annual shelter rents and contract rents actually collected during each operating year. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-6. - Limitation on the annual service charge payment. 
With respect to the payment of the annual service charge, notwithstanding section 33.5-5 of this chapter, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of ad valorem property taxes for the part of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development that is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than low income or moderate income persons or families or if the sponsor is not in compliance with the Code of Ordinances or the real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Homes, then the amount due shall be equal to the full amount of taxes which would be paid on that portion of Patriot Place Homes if it were not tax exempt and such amount shall be added to the service charge. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-7. - Contractual effect of chapter. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of Act 346 to the contrary, a contract is effectuated by the enactment of this chapter between the city and the sponsor (Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners) with the authority acting as a third party beneficiary under the contract. Said contract is to provide Patriot Place Homes Housing Development with a tax exemption and for the city to accept an annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes for Patriot Place Homes Housing Development. The terms and conditions of this contract are set forth within this chapter, and the real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Homes. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-8. - Payment of service charge. 
(a)  The annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes as determined under this chapter shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city and distributed to the several units levying the general property tax in the same proportion as prevailed with the general property tax in the previous calendar year. The annual service charge payment for each operating year shall be paid on or before July 1 st of the following year. Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq.). 
(b)  Any late annual service charge payments will be subject to a late fee, as determined by the city assessor. After a ten (10) day late fee written notice, any default regarding the service charge payment or late fee shall result in revocation of this chapter; thereby causing the tax exemption to automatically terminate, requiring the full amount of the ad valorem property taxes that would be applied to Patriot Place Homes Housing Development due and payable to the city. The nonpayment of an annual service charge or late fee shall result in the city placing a lien upon the appropriate property(s). 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-9. - Duration. 
(a)  This chapter shall remain in effect and shall not terminate for a maximum term of sixteen (16) consecutive years commencing the first year in which the Sponsor activates this tax exemption, subject to section 33.5-9(b) and the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  So long as the properties associated with Patriot Place Homes Housing Development, identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter, are subject to an outstanding and unpaid federally-aided mortgage, Authority-aided mortgage or an advance or grant from the Authority (but not more than sixteen (16) years as stated above); 
(2)  As long as Patriot Place Homes Housing Development serves low income or moderate income persons or families and complies with the rent restrictions pursuant to the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program requirements (but not more than sixteen (16) years as stated above); and 
(3)  If the sponsor (Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners) files, with the city assessor, the required certified notification of exemption relating to receiving the Low Income Housing Tax Credit allocated by the Authority before November 1 st of the year preceding the tax year in which the exemption is to begin, pursuant to section 15a of Act 346 (but not more than sixteen (16) years as stated above). 
(b)  This exemption allowing for an annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes for Patriot Place Homes Housing Development shall automatically expire, terminate and be of no effect if: 
(1)  The construction of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development does not commence within two (2) years from the date the Sponsor acquires the city owned lots identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter; 
(2)  The sponsor failing to substantially comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter; or 
(3)  The sponsor failing to substantially comply with the terms and conditions set forth within the real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Homes. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-10. - Filing of annual audit. 
All annual audits relating to Patriot Place Homes Housing Development required by any entity (federal government, State of Michigan, the Authority or any other) shall be simultaneously filed with the city assessor. In the event that an annual audit is not required by any entity, then the city requires an annual detailed audit to be filed with the city assessor pertaining to the occupancy of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development disclosing such information as the annual shelter rents received, annual contract rents received and the cost associated with the furnished utilities and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-11. - Compliance requirements. 
(a)  This exemption allowing for an annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes for Patriot Place Homes Housing Development is subject to strict compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, codes, development agreements, and ordinances, including this chapter, the Authority and Act 346 relating to the construction, completions, maintenance and occupancy of Patriot Homes. Upon such violation, this chapter shall automatically expire, terminate and be of no effect thereby requiring all ad valorem property taxes pertaining to Patriot Place Homes Housing Development due and payable to the city as of the date of such default. 
(b)  In the event, the Sponsor (Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners) or any successor or assign changes the scope or purpose of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development without obtaining written consent from the city, after thirty (30) days from the city's written notice to cure has concluded, then this chapter creating a tax exemption for Patriot Place Homes shall automatically expire, terminate and be of no effect thereby requiring all ad valorem property taxes pertaining to Patriot Place Homes Housing Development due and payable to the city as of the date of such default. 
(c)  This chapter allowing for an annual service charge payment in lieu of ad valorem property taxes for Patriot Place Homes Housing Development is subject to strict compliance with all applicable housing discrimination laws, statues, acts, and regulations relating to all areas of housing (real estate purchase, sale, rental, lease, financing, auditing, rental application(s), rental processing, housing fees and but not limited to advertising of housing). Upon such violation, this chapter shall automatically expire, terminate and be of no effect thereby requiring all ad valorem property taxes pertaining to Patriot Place Homes Housing Development due and payable to the city as of the date of such default. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-12. - Description of Patriot Place Homes Housing Development. 
The Patriot Place Homes Housing Development shall consist of the following sixty-nine (69) vacant lots described below by their tax identification numbers: 
13-27-327-022, 13-27-328-029, 13-376-006, 13-28-452-023, 13-28-452-024, 13-27-378-001, 13-27-359-012, 13-33-205-027, 13-33-205-029, 13-33-206-014, 13-33-227-003, 13-34-107-024, 13-34-131-026, 13-34-203-010, 13-34-108-027, 13-33-228-016, 13-33-207-039, 13-33-208-001, 13-33-208-005, 13-33-208-013, 13-34-228-052, 13-34-229-020, 13-34-229-013, 13-34-229-035, 13-34-205-018, 13-34-134-006, 13-34-110-008, 13-33-230-014, 13-34-181-011, 13-34-181-034, 13-34-256-008, 13-34-252-034, 13-34-157-024, 13-34-152-024, 13-34-157-007, 13-33-277-002, 13-33-257-003, 13-34-158-007, 13-34-158-009, 13-33-257-026, 13-33-258-010, 13-34-154-012, 13-34-179-004, 13-34-184-004, 13-34-184-002, 13-34-185-009, 13-34-185-001, 13-34-160-026, 13-34-160-019, 13-33-258-023, 13-33-254-002, 13-33-254-003, 13-33-254-004, 13-33-426-022, 13-34-301-039, 13-34-302-047, 13-33-406-038, 13-33-427-021, 13-34-302-050, 13-33-409-002, 13-33-409-006, 13-33-409-011, 13-33-428-029, 13-34-328-019, 13-34-329-008, 13-34-329-007, 13-34-304-008, 13-34-304-007, and 13-33-411-033. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-13. - Real estate purchase agreement and development agreement effect of chapter. 
(a)  Within sixty (60) days from the sponsor filing a certified notation of receiving the low income housing tax credit allocated by the Authority with the city assessor, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, a separate written real estate purchase agreement shall be drafted by the city attorney's office and executed by the city and the sponsor (Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners) pertaining to the sixty-nine (69) vacant lots identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter. The real estate purchase agreement shall set the purchase price of each vacant lot at one dollar ($1.00) per lot, for a total sale price in the amount of sixty-nine dollars ($69.00). The Sponsor is to develop and construct only single-family homes on the sixty-nine (69) vacant lots identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and the real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Homes. This real estate purchase agreement is effectuated by enactment of this chapter. Said purchase agreement shall be approved by the city attorney's office and a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Within ninety (90) days from the sponsor filing a certified notation of receiving the Low Income Housing Tax Credit allocated by the Authority with the city assessor and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, a separate written real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Housing Development shall be drafted by the city attorney's office and be executed by the city and the sponsor (Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners) regarding the sixty-nine (69) vacant lots identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter. The real estate development agreement shall include but not be limited to the following terms and conditions: the development of single-family homes, construction, completion, operation, maintenance and annual service charge payment associated with Patriot Place Homes Housing Development. This real estate development agreement is effectuated by enactment of this chapter. Said development agreement shall be approved by the city attorney's office and a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and recorded in the Macomb County Register of Deeds Office. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-14. - Real estate conveyance effect of chapter. 
Upon the sponsor receiving the Low Income Housing Tax Credit allocated by the Authority and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and in the real estate development agreement pertaining to Patriot Place Homes, the city shall convey, by quit claim deed(s), the sixty-nine (69) vacant lots identified in section 33.5-12 of this chapter which are located within Warren, Michigan to the Sponsor (Patriot Place Homes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, Michigan Limited Partners) to construct Patriot Place Homes Housing Development. This real estate conveyance is effectuated by enactment of this chapter, all real estate documents associated with this conveyance shall be drafted and approved by the city attorney's office and a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. In addition, the quit claim deed(s) shall be recorded in the Macomb County Register of Deeds Office. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-15. - Severability. 
The various sections and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remainder sections and provisions of this chapter, and the remaining sections and provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Sec. 33.5-16. - Repeal. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 80-751, § 1, 2-28-17)  
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate streets and public ways, § 3.1(b)(3). 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); distributing handbills in public places, § 3-18; animals running at large prohibited, § 7-3; dogs running at large prohibited, § 7-26; cats running at large prohibited, § 7-101; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; moving buildings, § 9-341 et seq.; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 20; spitting in public places, § 22-3; disobeyance of signs and persons supervising public places, § 22-21; offenses against public peace, § 22-106 et seq.; parks and recreation, Ch. 23; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 24; railroads, Ch. 28; special assessments, Ch. 33; subdivision regulations, Ch. 35; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 37; vehicles for hire, Ch. 39; water and sewers, Ch. 41; zoning, App. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Destruction, etc., of street installations on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, damage, deface or remove any barrier erected to protect any excavation or obstruction in any street, alley or public place, or any light placed as a warning of such excavation or obstruction; or any street sign placed to designate the name of the street, avenue, court or place; or any street lamp, light post, pole or any of the parts or attachments thereto, or any telephone or telegraph pole or any wire or appliances thereof, or any device erected by the authority of the city, or any public property whatsoever. 
(Code 1967, § 7-134) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.  
Sec. 34-2. - Placing snow, dirt and litter on public ways. 
(a)  No person shall place, sweep, push, plow, shovel or cause to be placed, swept, pushed, plowed or shoveled, any snow, ice, dirt, oil, grease, flammable liquid, wastewater, or litter of any kind from any private property or building upon any street or public way of the city. 
(b)  No person shall place, sweep, push, plow, shovel or cause to be placed, swept, pushed, plowed or shoveled, any snow, ice, dirt, oil, grease, flammable liquid, wastewater, or litter of any kind from any private property or building upon any parking space designated for the use of handicapped individuals as defined in MCL 257.942a. 
(c)  No person shall place, sweep, push, plow, shovel or cause to be placed, swept, pushed, plowed or shoveled, any snow, ice, dirt, oil, grease, flammable liquid, wastewater, or litter of any kind in or on any parcel of land not belonging to the depositor. This subsection shall not be construed to permit depositing on one's own property if said depositing is prohibited by any other ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1967, § 7-136; Ord. No. 80-579, § 1, 2-26-02; Ord. No. 80-728, § 1, 2-24-15) 
Cross reference— Littering generally, §§ 16-10, 21-5; deposit of unwholesome substances, § 21-3.  
Sec. 34-3. - Placing leaves, grass, etc., on public ways or private property. 
(a)  No person shall cause to be placed or burned any grass clippings, leaves, lawn rakings, tree or bush trimmings, tree trunks, stumps, ashes, soil, dirt or household debris in or on any street, alley or public way in the city. 
(b)  No person shall cause to be placed any grass clippings, leaves, lawn rakings, tree or bush trimmings, tree trucks, stumps, ashes, soil, dirt or household debris in or on any parcel of land not belonging to the depositor. This section shall not be construed to permit depositing on one's own property if said depositing is prohibited by any other ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1967, § 7-137; Ord. No. 80-444, § 1, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 34-4. - Exhibition of goods and merchandise. 
(a)  No person shall place, store, display or exhibit, or cause to be placed, stored, displayed or exhibited, any goods, articles, materials, merchandise or objects in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or property. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to grant a special permit for any of the above prohibited uses after having received the recommendation of the police commissioner, and may impose reasonable conditions thereon in order to protect the public health, safety, peace and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1967, § 7-138(b))  
Sec. 34-5. - Shopping carts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this section, shall have the following respective meanings, which definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Cart means any rolling or nonrolling basket or container commonly used in so-called supermarkets or self-service stores. 
Property means and includes any cart. 
Store means and includes any individual store, chain store and/or supermarket. 
(b)  Removal from premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use without authority any cart from the premises of any store, without intent to steal the same. 
(c)  Abandoning carts on public ways. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or suffer to be abandoned any cart, from any store or supermarket, on any street, highway, alley, boulevard or public place within the city. 
(d)  Metallic tag required. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide carts for patrons' use on the store premises, unless such carts bear thereon a welded metallic tag denoting the name of the owner. 
(e)  Impounding of abandoned carts. Whenever any cart is found abandoned on any street, highway, boulevard, alley or other public place in the city, the property shall be impounded by the police, who shall notify the owner thereof, who may reclaim the same by the payment of five dollars ($5.00). If the property is not reclaimed in a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, it shall be disposed of as unclaimed property in the manner provided by section 26-41 et seq. 
(Code 1967, § 7-140)  
Sec. 34-6. - Planking and paving required at crossings. 
Every railroad company shall cause its tracks, where the tracks cross any public way in the city, to be properly planked or paved upon both sides of the tracks and between the rails at an even level with the top of the rails at such crossings. 
(Ord. No. 80-626, § 4, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 34-7. - Snow alerts. 
(a)  Purpose. Severe winter weather frustrates vehicular and pedestrian mobility, and creates a risk of harm to public health, safety, and welfare. As a preventative measure, this section gives the mayor the authority to declare a snow alert prompting the removal of parked cars, trailers, and other motor vehicles from city streets. The City of Warren engages in various efforts to subdue the risks created by inclement weather by reducing or eliminating the accumulation of snow and ice from public roadways. The primary and most efficient method by which the city engages such efforts is through use of snow plows and salt trucks. Motor vehicles which have not been removed will cause portions of the streets to remain unplowed and slick. Therefore, the city streets need to be clear of parked motor vehicles and trailers for the city to effectively reduce or eliminate the hazardous conditions. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be interpreted as defined below, unless the context of the reading clearly manifests a contrary intent. 
City. City of Warren, Macomb County, Michigan. 
Mayor. The mayor of the City of Warren, or in the mayor's absence, his or her authorized representative. 
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way which is publicly maintained for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled conveyance used for, or capable of being used for, purposes of land transportation. 
Trailer. Any apparatus, motorized or not, designed to be used in conjunction with or separate from a motor vehicle, which may be used for transportation or dwelling purposes. 
Stalled vehicle. A motor vehicle or trailer which has become immobilized due to the failure or absence of one (1) or more components essential to its operation. 
Snow alert. A parking prohibition caused by hazardous winter weather conditions, which becomes effective upon the declaration by the mayor in a manner prescribed by this section. 
(c)  Snow alert implementation; automatic effect; exemptions. 
(1)  Whenever the mayor finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, freezing rain, or a forecast by the United States Weather Bureau or other weather service, that weather conditions will make it necessary for motor vehicle traffic to be expedited and that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for snowplowing and other relevant purposes, the mayor may put into effect a parking prohibition on some streets, all streets, or parts thereof, within the boundaries of the City of Warren. 
(2)  This parking prohibition shall take immediate effect upon the mayor's declaration of a snow alert in a manner prescribed by this section. 
(3)  Any street on which parking is prohibited by the snow alert, but which has become clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the entire length of the street, shall then be excluded from the parking restrictions imposed by the implementation of this section. 
(d)  Notice and termination. 
(1)  Upon the mayor's declaration of a snow alert, appropriate notice specifying the affected area(s) in which the parking prohibition has taken effect shall be publicly announced by means of television and radio broadcasts and/or telecasts by stations whose operating range services the entire city. Notice of the snow alert shall be placed on the city's online website and on the city's government television channel. 
(2)  When the conditions which gave rise to the declaration of the snow alert no longer exist and the purpose of this section has been served, the mayor shall terminate the parking prohibition by means of notice in a manner substantially consistent with the method in which the snow alert was announced. 
(e)  Prohibited parking; exemptions. 
(1)  While the snow alert is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked, any motor vehicle, on any street within the city, on which parking has been prohibited by the mayor's declaration of the snow alert. 
(2)  In all areas where the snow alert has taken effect, owners of motor vehicles which have a license plate or properly placed placard which designates the vehicle for disabled parking shall be exempt from the parking restrictions imposed by this section; residents exempt under this subsection are required to park their motor vehicles as close to the curb as possible to provide maximum street access for plow trucks and emergency vehicles. 
(f)  Stalled vehicles. Whether in violation of this section or not, whenever any vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, on any city street within the City of Warren, the owner and/or operator of the vehicle shall take immediate action to have the stalled vehicle towed or otherwise removed from the city street. When a snow alert has been declared, no owner and/or operator shall abandon or leave the stalled vehicle on the city street regardless of whether the owner and/or operator has made an indication of the vehicle's stalled status, except for the actual time required to secure assistance and return without delay. 
(g)  Presumption of responsibility. For purposes of this section, the registered owner or lessee shall be presumed to be the party responsible for parking and/or leaving the motor vehicle in violation of this section. In any prosecution regarding a motor vehicle parked in violation of this section, proof that the motor vehicle was parked in violation of this section together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was the registered owner or lessee of the motor vehicle at the time the violation occurred, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the named defendant is the party responsible for violating this section. 
(h)  Time for removal of vehicle; impoundment. 
(1)  Within six (6) hours after the snow alert has taken effect, all motor vehicles and trailers must be removed from any city street over which the snow alert has been declared. 
(2)  Upon the expiration of the six-hour period for removal, and pursuant to authority granted by MCL 257.252d(f), any motor vehicle or trailer parked on any city street subject to the snow alert, may be removed and impounded by order of the police department or a governmental agency designated by the police department. 
(3)  In addition to any fines which may be assessed for a violation of this section, the owner of the removed motor vehicle or trailer will be responsible for paying any costs related to its towing and impoundment. 
(i)  Penalty. 
(1)  The owner of any parked or stalled motor vehicle in violation of this section shall be responsible for the penalties outlined below in Section 34-8. 
(2)  The owner of any parked or stalled motor vehicle in violation of this section may be issued a municipal civil infraction for each 24-hour period the motor vehicle remains parked in violation. 
(j)  Existing traffic or zoning regulations. While temporarily in effect, this section shall not be interpreted as permitting parking in any area of the city where parking a motor vehicle or trailer is already prohibited by another provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 80-672, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-672, adopted Oct. 28, 2008, amended § 34-7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 34-7 pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No. 80-626, adopted Mar. 14, 2006.  
Sec. 34-8. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of article I is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-672, § 2, 10-28-08)  
Secs. 34-9—34-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VACATING PUBLIC WAYS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to vacate public ways, § 3.1(b)(3)(a). 
 
Sec. 34-26. - Council authority. 
The city council shall have power to vacate any street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, subject to state law. Such power may be exercised by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 7-101)  
Sec. 34-27. - Resolution required; delivery to planning commission; exception. 
Whenever the city council shall deem it advisable to vacate any street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, the city council shall by resolution so declare, and a copy of such resolution shall be delivered to the planning commission, except that when a petition for the vacating of any street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, shall have been duly executed by sixty (60) percent of all owners of record of land contiguous and adjoining such street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, being vacated, such petition shall be filed with the city clerk and by him or her delivered to the planning commission within seven (7) days after receipt thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 7-102)  
Sec. 34-28. - Consent by owners; hearing, notice not required. 
If the petition under section 34-127 shall have been duly executed by all owners of record of property contiguous and adjacent to such street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, as shown by the official records of the city, the planning commission may consider the petition and proceed as hereinafter provided, except that no publication of notice of public hearing shall be required. 
(Code 1967, § 7-103)  
Sec. 34-29. - Planning commission hearing; notice required. 
Within sixty (60) days from the delivery to the planning commission of the petition or copy of the city council's resolution pertaining to the vacating of any street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, the commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed vacating of such street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, and make its report and recommendations thereon to the council; provided, however, that at least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall be given by United States mail to all owners of record of property contiguous and adjacent to such street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, at their respective addresses as indicated in the last assessment roll, and to each public utility company and each railroad company owning or operating across, upon or within three hundred (300) feet of such street, alley or public place, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 7-104)  
Sec. 34-30. - Council determination; resolution required. 
Any resolution vacating a street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, shall be adopted in the same manner as other resolutions, except as otherwise provided in this article; provided, however, that any resolution which overrules the recommendations of the planning commission shall require an affirmative vote of at least six (6) members of the city council. Action of the city council refusing to vacate any street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, shall be by resolution. 
(Code 1967, § 7-105)  
Sec. 34-31. - Vesting title under state law. 
Title to the land included within any street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, vacated under the provisions of this article, shall vest in the person entitled to the same under state law; provided, however, that in any case or cases not controlled by state law, the city council may provide for the vesting of title by the same resolution in which any street, alley or public place or any part thereof is vacated and may in such instances authorize the making and delivery of quit claim deeds on behalf of the city, to facilitate such vesting of title. 
(Code 1967, § 7-106) 
State Law reference— Disposition of vacated lands under state subdivision control act, MCL 560.227a.  
Sec. 34-32. - Resolutions vacating public ways; filing required. 
Within thirty (30) days after the adoption of a resolution vacating any street, alley or public place, or any part thereof, the city clerk shall file with the county register of deeds and the auditor general for the state, a certified copy of the resolution together with his or her certificate giving the name of any plat, subdivision or addition affected by the resolution. The city clerk shall further cause copies of the resolution to be recorded or filed in such other place and shall perform such other acts in relation thereto as may be required by law. 
(Code 1967, § 7-107)  
Sec. 34-33. - Vacating fees. 
The application shall be accompanied by a check for two hundred dollars ($200.00), payable to the city treasurer, to cover the costs of processing the application. This is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and as approved by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 80-410, § 1, 6-23-92)  
Secs. 34-34—34-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-51. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Contractor means the party performing the work. 
Driveway approach/apron means the improved portion of the street right-of-way designed to provide for vehicular travel from private property to a public roadway. 
Inspector means any representative of the city engineer designated to act as an inspector. 
Owner means the party holding title to the property abutting upon the public property or, for a condominium abutting upon public property, the condominium association. 
Sidewalk means squares of concrete generally parallel with the street and usually located one (1) foot from the property line in the public right of way and which is designed for pedestrian travel and does not include a lead walk or a driveway approach. 
Specifications means the standard specifications for sidewalks, driveways and curb cuts established by and on file with the division of engineering. 
(Code 1967, § 7-108; Ord. No. 80-559, § 2, 7-11-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-52. - Permit required for construction and repair. 
No person shall construct, alter, change or repair any sidewalk, crosswalk, driveway approach, or any opening in or through any curb in any street or public way except in accordance with the lines, grade, slope and specifications as established by the city engineer and without first procuring a permit from the division of buildings and safety engineering or obtaining a street excavation permit from the department of public service. Permits shall be prominently displayed on the construction site. Permits may be revoked for failure to comply with the lines, grade, slope or specifications of the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 7-109; Ord. No. 80-559, § 2, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 34-53. - Unsafe, dangerous conditions prohibited. 
No person shall permit any sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway approach which adjoins property owned by him or her to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe or to be blocked by obstructing the same with bushes, trees, fixtures, or any other thing so that pedestrians or travelers on that sidewalk or vehicles traveling on the driveway approach do not have full use of the sidewalk or driveway approach. A violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Code 1967, § 7-110; Ord. No. 80-527, § 23, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-559, § 2, 7-11-00) 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 34-54. - Determination and procedure for repair and construction. 
(a)  Whenever the city engineer or his designate shall determine that, pursuant to the engineering division specifications, a sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach is required to be constructed for the public health, safety or welfare, or is in a state of disrepair, unsafe or blocked for use, he/she or his/her designate, shall give a written notice to repair thereof to the owner. The notice to repair shall specify the construction of the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach required, or the nature of the repairs to be made. The notice to repair shall also state that if the owner fails to comply within the specified time, then the city shall construct, reconstruct, or repair such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach and charge the expense to the premises and the owner together with an administrative charge to cover administrative, bidding, engineering, and collection expenses. The appeal process whereby the owner may contest the notice to repair requirements shall also be included in the notice to repair. 
(b)  The engineering division shall develop a sidewalk policy and procedure manual and a copy shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  The notice to repair shall be served by first class mail and a postcard notifying the owner of the need to repair shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the owner's property abutting/adjacent to the sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway approach/apron. Information as to the identity of the property owner is limited to the records maintained in the assessor's office at the time of the first notice to repair. 
(d)  The owner shall have forty-five (45) days from the date of the notice to repair to construct, reconstruct, or repair the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach. If the owner fails to comply within forty-five (45) days, the engineering division or appropriate division may proceed with the required work. 
(e)  Appeal. The owner has twenty-one (21) days from the date of the notice to repair to appeal the order of repair to the director of public service or his/her designate. The director of public service or his/her designate shall hear the appeal and determine if the construction, reconstruction, or repair is necessary for the interest of public safety of the city. The director of public service or his/her designate may uphold orders, modify orders, invalidate orders or make such other determinations. The determination of the director of public service shall be final. If the owner fails to comply with the order of the public service director, the engineering division may proceed with the construction or repair. 
(f)  The engineering division may dispense with the notice requirement and proceed with the construction or repair of the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach, if, in its opinion, the condition of the sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway approach is unsafe and dangerous and requires immediate repair to assure public safety and to prevent the possibility of city liability for personal injury or property damage. 
(g)  The costs for construction or repair including administrative costs, penalties, and interests therein shall be a lien against the property abutting the sidewalk. If the owner fails to pay the costs of construction or repair, including administrative costs, the city may recover the money in an appropriate court of law and/or add all costs to the taxes assessed against the property as described in chapter 33. The costs when collected, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 7-111; Ord. No. 80-407, § 1, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 80-559, § 2, 7-11-00) 
Charter reference— Special assessments, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference— Special assessments generally, Ch. 33.  
Sec. 34-55. - Driveway approaches required for curb cuts. 
No permit to cut any curb along a paved street shall be issued by the division of buildings and safety engineering unless the applicant shall agree in the application, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to install a driveway approach of concrete within ninety (90) days after completion of the cut; provided, however, that if the work is stopped by the city because of cold weather, the ninety-day time limit will be tolled and will commence again from the date upon which further work is authorized to be resumed by the city engineer. Materials other than concrete may be allowed by the city engineer if in his or her judgment the construction is to be considered as temporary. 
(Code 1967, § 7-112)  
Sec. 34-56. - Paving of driveway approaches. 
(a)  Any existing driveway approach abutting a concrete street, or a concrete street overlayed with asphalt, shall be paved with concrete. If the driveway or approach is not paved with concrete, the director of public service shall give the property owner thirty (30) days' notice to pave the same, and if the person shall neglect or refuse to do so, the director of public service shall cause the driveway approach to be paved and he or she shall make a detailed report to city council of the cost and expense of performing such work, which cost and expense shall be charged to the property owner in the manner provided by the Charter relative to special assessments and pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Any existing driveway approach abutting an asphalt street, be paved with asphalt. If the driveway or approach is not paved with asphalt, the director of public service shall give the property owner thirty (30) days' notice to pave the same, and if the person shall neglect or refuse to do so, the director of public service shall cause the driveway approach to be paved and he or she shall make a detailed report to city council of the cost and expense of performing such work, which cost and expense shall be charged to the property owner in the manner provided by the Charter relative to special assessments and pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  The design cross-sections governing the construction of an asphalt or concrete drive approach will be according to the standards set forth and maintained by the engineering division. 
(Code 1967, § 7-113; Ord. No. 80-620, § 1, 4-12-05) 
Charter reference— Special assessments, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference— Special assessments generally, Ch. 33.  
Sec. 34-57. - Completion of work. 
Work contemplated under any permit under this article shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the permit, unless the work shall have been stopped by the city because of cold weather. In such case, the ninety (90) days will be tolled and will commence again from the day upon which further work shall be authorized by the city engineer. The division of engineering shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the commencement of any concrete pouring under the permit. No concrete shall be placed until an inspection of all proposed work has been approved by the division of engineering. 
(Code 1967, § 7-117)  
Sec. 34-58. - Building materials, etc.; safety requirements. 
No person owning, building or repairing any house or other building shall permit any lumber, brick, plaster, mortar, earth, clay, sand, stone or other material to remain on the sidewalk after sunset of the day upon which it was placed there, without written permission from the police commissioner, subject to safeguards he or she may prescribe. 
(Code 1967, § 7-119)  
Sec. 34-59. - Temporary sidewalks. 
If a sidewalk is removed during construction, the owner or contractor shall furnish a temporary sidewalk to the satisfaction of the director of public service. The temporary sidewalk shall be replaced within thirty (30) days after construction is completed, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. 
(Code 1967, § 7-120)  
Sec. 34-60. - Removal of snow and ice. 
The occupant of any premises, or the owner of any unoccupied premises, is required to keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises cleared, so far as is practicable and reasonable, from snow and ice to facilitate pedestrian use. Where there are no sidewalks, the occupant or owner shall clear a path free from snow and ice where a sidewalk would otherwise be, to facilitate pedestrian use. Whenever any snow or ice has fallen or accumulated, it shall be cleared within twelve (12) hours after it has fallen or accumulated. The violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Code 1967, § 7-121; Ord. No. 80-527, § 23, 1-13-98) 
Charter reference— Authority to require removal of snow, ice, dirt, etc., § 3.1(b)(3)(e).  
Sec. 34-61. - Limited guarantee—Sidewalk replacement. 
(a)  The city will replace a sidewalk not more than once every ten (10) years if it meets all the following criteria: 
(1)  If roots from a tree located in the public right-of-way caused the sidewalk to fall within the city's repair criteria; and 
(2)  The sidewalk was built on or after the effective date of this section pursuant to a permit and in full compliance with city standards and guidelines; and 
(3)  The property owner paid for the cost of replacing the existing sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 80-559, § 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 34-62. - Permit for temporary holiday sidewalk displays. 
Anyone wanting to erect a temporary holiday sidewalk display shall contact the city's engineering division for a free permit. The proposed temporary holiday display shall not exhibit any public safety concerns such as trip hazards or exposed wiring hazards, which will be determined by the city's engineering division. The holiday display permit shall be valid for thirty (30) days. The permit holder may apply once for a three-week extension by contacting the city's engineering division. All fees and costs associated with a temporary holiday sidewalk display permit shall be waived. 
(Ord. No. 80-775 , § 1, 3-12-19)  
Secs. 34-63—34-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 34-71. - Required. 
All contractors laying, constructing or replacing sidewalks, crosswalks and/or driveway approaches or altering or cutting curbs within the city shall be required to obtain a license to perform such work from the office of the city clerk prior to the commencement of any of the aforementioned work as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 7-118(a))  
Sec. 34-72. - Application. 
All applicants for a license under this division shall be required as a condition precedent to obtain a license to identify themselves; describe the type of entity, i.e., corporation, partnership or sole ownership; give the names, home addresses and titles of all corporation officers, number of partners, or sole owners. All applications must be signed by the applicant or his or her authorized representative, and the signature shall be notarized by a duly authorized notary public. 
(Code 1967, § 7-118(d))  
Sec. 34-73. - Fee. 
The license fee under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 7-118(a))  
Sec. 34-74. - Bond required. 
No license shall be issued to any contractor, firm or corporation until a blanket cash or surety bond in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) is filed with the office of the city clerk, conditioned upon the faithful performance of all of the provisions of this article and all of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city pertaining to the work to be done under any permit issued under this article, and shall be further conditioned upon the keeping and maintaining of all sidewalks, crosswalks and/or driveway approaches laid, constructed or replaced by him or her under any permit covered by the bond in good condition and fit for public travel for a period of two (2) years from and after the date of the final work inspection by the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 7-118(b))  
Sec. 34-75. - Insurance required. 
As a condition precedent to obtaining the license under this division, the contractor, at his or her expense, shall provide and keep in force during the entire year, comprehensive general liability insurance in the minimum limits of liability with respect to bodily injury of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for each person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for each occurrence, and in respect to property damage one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident. The policy of insurance shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the public ways of the city and for which the city may be held liable by reason of, or which is occasioned by, the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the above license was granted. The policy of insurance shall be issued by an insurance company and in form satisfactory to the city, shall provide for at least ten (10) days prior written notice to the city in the event of cancellation or any material change, and a copy of such policy shall be delivered to the city prior to the issuance of the license. If the policy of insurance is cancelled or materially changed, the contractor's license shall be immediately suspended until a policy of insurance acceptable to the city has been reobtained; provided, however, that no such bond or insurance aforementioned shall be required of any owner for the laying, construction or replacement of any sidewalk, crosswalk and/or driveway approach adjoining property owned by such owner where such work is to be done and is in fact done personally by such owner. The applicant must submit in writing an agreement to hold the city harmless of every other damage of every other nature whether to persons or property, for which the city may be held liable, by reason of, or which is occasioned by, the doing of a thing or the exercise of a privilege for which the above license was granted. 
(Code 1967, § 7-118(c); Ord. No. 80-457, § 1, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 34-76. - Revocation. 
Giving false information in the application for a license or continued violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of this license by the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 7-118(d))  
Secs. 34-77—34-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 34-86. - Required. 
No work shall be performed under this article without a permit as provided in this division.  
Sec. 34-87. - Plans and specifications; supervision. 
No work for which a permit is required under this division shall be done by any person except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer, and all work shall be done under the supervision of the division of engineering. 
(Code 1967, § 7-114)  
Sec. 34-88. - Permit fee required. 
A fee for a permit to construct or replace a curb cut, sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway approach shall be collected by the division of buildings and safety engineering as established by resolution adopted by city council. 
(Code 1967, § 7-116; Ord. No. 80-359, § 1, 6-28-88; Ord. No. 80-559, § 4, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 80-609, § 1, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 34-89. - Refusal to issue; appeal, hearing. 
If the division of buildings and safety engineering shall refuse to issue any permit under this division, the applicant may appeal to the city council which shall grant a hearing thereon, and the decision of the city council shall be final. In granting a permit after the hearing, the city council may impose such conditions therefor as it may deem desirable to protect the safety of persons and property. 
(Code 1967, § 7-122)  
Sec. 34-90. - Suspension and revocation. 
All work done pursuant to any permit under this division shall be inspected by the city engineer, and he or she may suspend or revoke any permit so granted where either the workmanship or materials used does not conform to the plans and specifications approved or required upon issuance of the permit, or when the terms of any permit or of this article are violated. No person shall perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any such work to be performed while that permit is suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1967, § 7-115)  
Secs. 34-91—34-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET EXCAVATION OR OPENINGS 
 
Sec. 34-111. - Permit required. 
No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street or public place without first procuring a permit from the department of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 7-123)  
Sec. 34-112. - Construction regulations of department of public service. 
The department of public service may make such regulations pertaining to the making of openings or excavations in streets or public places as are necessary to secure the health and safety of the public and for the protection of property, and such regulations shall constitute the standards upon which the permit required under this article shall be issued. 
(Code 1967, § 7-126)  
Sec. 34-113. - Bond and/or insurance required. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted under this article until a bond or policy of insurance has been filed with the department of public service. The bond or policy of insurance shall be in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), unless a larger bond shall be required by the director of public service. All bonds or policies of insurance shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the streets of the city and to hold the city harmless of every other damage of every other nature, whether to persons or property, for which the city may be held liable by reason of, or which is occasioned by, the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the bond or policy of insurance was based, was granted. 
(b)  Excavations on local residential streets shall require a minimum surety bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), insurance coverage in limits of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) public liability and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) property damage, a maximum surety bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), and insurance coverage in the limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) public liability and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) property damage. 
(c)  Excavations on major thoroughfares shall require a minimum surety bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and insurance coverage in the limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) public liability and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) property damage, a maximum surety bond in the amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00), and insurance coverage in the limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) public liability and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) property damage. 
(Code 1967, §§ 7-125, 7-125.1)  
Sec. 34-114. - Barricade required. 
No person making an opening in a street or public way shall fail to guard the same fully during the period of construction, and no person causing any such opening to be used, nor the owner thereof, shall fail to guard or barricade the same while in use, so as to protect the safety of the public. No person using any street opening, or causing the same to be used, shall fail to close the opening in accordance with the directions of the director of public service immediately after use. 
(Code 1967, § 7-124(a))  
Sec. 34-115. - Liability to city for loss or damage. 
Whenever any person performs any work, as provided in this article, either under contract with the city or by virtue of any permit issued by the city, such person shall be liable to the city for any and every loss or damage which the city may sustain and for all sums which it may have to pay to any person by reason of any loss or injury sustained through any carelessness or negligence in doing the work, or by reason of any neglect or failure to comply with the provisions of this article or Code. 
(Code 1967, § 7-133)  
Chapter 35 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Planning department, planning commission, § 7.22. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(8); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 20; signs, Ch. 31; soil removal, dumping and regrading, Ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; water and sewers, Ch. 41; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq.; minimum standards, MCL 560.259. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Warren Subdivision Regulations 
(Code 1967, § 6-501)  
Sec. 35-2. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city, in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the community. 
(b)  This chapter is designed to: 
(1)  Provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community, consistent with the master plan; 
(2)  Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; 
(3)  Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; 
(4)  Ensure adequate provisions for water, drainage and sanitary sewer facilities, and other health requirements; 
(5)  Secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites, and other public facilities; and 
(6)  Facilitate the further resubdivision of large tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(c)  This chapter is also formulated to aid in the enforcement of development standards as authorized in the building code, zoning ordinance and the master plan for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 6-502)  
Sec. 35-3. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Accessible means that the parcel: 
(1)  Has an area where a driveway does provide or can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and the area meets all applicable standards of the state department of transportation, county road commission, or city ordinance; or 
(2)  Is served by an existing easement or proposed easement that provides or can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that area meets all applicable standards of the state transportation department, county road commission, or city ordinance. 
Alley means public or private right-of-way which provides a secondary means of access to a lot, block or parcel of land. 
Block means property abutting one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreages, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
Building line or setback line means a line parallel to a street right-of-way line, shore of a lake, edge of a stream, river bank or drain, established on a parcel of land or on a lot for the purpose of prohibiting construction of a building, parking area or other structure between such line and right-of-way, public area or shore of a lake, edge of a stream, river bank or drain. 
Building site means any parcel or lot described as a single parcel or lot in an instrument of conveyance or plat and intended for building development. Designation of a parcel identification number does not signify that the site is buildable. A lot or parcel of land shall not be a building site unless the lot or parcel conforms to the minimum area dimensions required for the zoning district in which it is located; except those lots described and fixed in a plat recorded prior to the time of the adoption of the zoning ordinance shall still be considered building sites even if they do not meet the minimum lot dimensions. 
Caption means the name by which the plat is legally and commonly known. 
Commercial development means a business center establishing building area, parking areas, service areas, screen planting and widening, turning movement and safety lane roadway improvements. 
Comprehensive development plan or master plan means the comprehensive land use plan for the city, including graphic written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the city and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly adopted by the planning commission and certified to the city council and to the county register of deeds. 
County plat coordinating committee (P.C.C.) means a committee represented by the officers of the county road commission, the county public works commission, the county department of health and the county planning commission and established for the purpose of reviewing preliminary plats to afford, advise and give assistance to the developer and his or her engineer. 
Dedication means the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to public use. 
Developer. See "subdivider." 
Division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns that results in one (1) or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 
The Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq., does not designate a property transfer between two (2) or more adjacent parcels where the property taken from one (1) parcel is added to an adjacent parcel a division, however, such property transfer shall be reviewed pursuant to section 35-27 to determine whether the resulting parcels are in conformity with the Code of Ordinances. Any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to all requirements of the Code of Ordinances. 
Easement means a right or privilege over a specific portion of land area granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some particular person or persons for specific uses and purposes, and which is designated a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature of the user. 
Exempt split means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor that does not result in one (1) or more parcels of less than forty (40) acres or the equivalent provided that the resulting parcels are accessible. 
The Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq., does not require approval under the Act for an exempt split when the property transfer is between two (2) or more adjacent parcels and the property taken from one (1) parcel is added to the adjacent parcel, however, such property transfer shall be reviewed pursuant to section 35-27 to determine whether the resulting lots or parcels are in conformity with the Code of Ordinances. Any resulting lot or parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the lot or parcel conforms to all requirements of the Code of Ordinances. 
Floodplain means that area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other watercourse which will be inundated by a flood as defined by the zoning ordinance for the city. 
Greenbelts or bufferparks means a strip or parcel of land, privately restricted or publicly dedicated as open space located between similar or dissimilar uses for the purpose of protecting and enhancing each use. 
Health department means the state, city, county or district health department having jurisdiction. 
Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary and storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, trees, and other additions to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability. 
Industrial development means a planned area designed specifically for nonresidential use with special accommodations for industrial uses providing screened buffers, streets with seventy (70) feet of right-of-way and turning movement and safety lane roadway improvements where necessary. 
Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
(1)  Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
(2)  Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the setback line and at right angles to the lot depth. 
Lot split means the partitioning or splitting of a lot described and fixed in a recorded plat into one (1) but no more than four (4) lots. 
Master plan. See "comprehensive development plan." 
Outlot, when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park, or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which is described in an instrument of conveyance or survey prepared by a professional surveyor. 
Performance guarantee means any security including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements, which may be accepted by the city council as a guarantee that required subdivision improvements will be made by the developer. 
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land drawn in accordance with this chapter. 
(1)  Pre-preliminary plat means a map drawn to scale, showing the existing features of a site and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed subdivision prepared in conformance with section 35-22. 
(2)  Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision of land submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration prepared in conformance with the Subdivision Control Act and sections 35-23 and 35-24. 
(3)  Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision prepared and the accuracy certified by a registered civil engineer or professional surveyor in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act and section 35-25 and suitable for recording. 
Professional surveyor means a land surveyor who is licensed and registered in the state. 
Property transfer means the transfer of ownership of property by an instrument of conveyance such as, a deed or land contract. 
Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any combination that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
Public open space means land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public. It includes, but is not limited to parks, parkways, recreation areas, school sites, community or public building sites, streets and highways, and public parking spaces. 
Public reservation means a portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public use and made available for public use and acquisition. 
Public utility means any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission, duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing under state or city regulations to the public: gas, steam electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water or other services of a similar nature. 
Replat means the process of changing, or a map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof as provided in the Subdivision Control Act. 
Right-of-way means land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley, walkway or other public purposes. 
Sight distance means the unobstructed vision on a horizontal plane along a street centerline, from a driver-eye height of three and three-fourths (3.75) feet and an object height of six (6) inches. 
Sketch plan. See "preliminary plat." 
Street means a public way or right-of-way dedicated to public use, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane or however otherwise designated, and includes the land between right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved and may compromise pavement, shoulders, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, lawn areas and other areas within the right-of-way lines. The following are included. 
(1)  Collector street means a street intended primarily to gather traffic from minor streets and carry it to major streets. 
(2)  Cul-de-sac means a short minor street, having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn around. 
(3)  Expressway means those streets designed for high speed, high volume traffic, with full or limited access, some grade crossings and limited driveway connections. 
(4)  Freeway means those streets designed for high speed, high volume through traffic with completely controlled access, no grade crossings and no private driveway connections. 
(5)  Industrial street means a street serving or intended to serve lots of parcels of land platted or to be developed for industrial use or as an industrial subdivision. 
(6)  Major thoroughfare means an arterial street of great continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic way for both the immediate area and region beyond, and may be designated in the master road plan as a major thoroughfare. 
(7)  Marginal access street means a minor street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(8)  Minor street means a street supplementary to a secondary thoroughfare and intended to serve primarily the local needs of the neighborhood and of limited continuity used primarily as access to abutting residential properties. 
(9)  Public walkway means a public right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian access to residential areas, and located so as to connect to two (2) or more streets, or a street and parcel of land, or other open space. 
Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor that results in one (1) or more parcels of less than forty (40) acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements under section 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act. 
The Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq., does not require subdivision for a property transfer between two (2) or more adjacent parcels where the property taken from one (1) parcel is added to the adjacent parcel, however, such property transfer shall be reviewed pursuant to section 35-27 to determine whether the resulting parcels are in conformity with the Code of Ordinances. Any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to all requirements of the Code of Ordinances. 
Subdivider means a person or persons, firm, corporation, association, partnership, trust or any legal combination of them or any other legal entity proceeding under this chapter to affect a division or subdivision of land under this chapter. The word "subdivider" shall include the word "proprietor." 
Subdivision Control Act means Act 288 of Public Acts of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended, and retitled the Land Division Act, Public Act 591 of 1996. 
Topographical survey map means a map indicating all the dimensions, physical characteristics, and if requested, contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of existing and proposed grades and drainage. 
Tract means two (2) or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
(Code 1967, § 6-503; Ord. No. 80-563, § 1, 11-28-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, MCL 560.102.  
Sec. 35-4. - Variances. 
(a)  Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, or other such not self-inflicted condition, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this chapter, the planning commission may vary, modify or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that any such variance, modification or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter and the master plan for the city. 
(b)  In no case shall any variation, modification or waiver be more than a minimum easing of the requirements and in no instance shall it have the effect of reducing the traffic capacity of any street (below that shown of the master plan for the city) or be in conflict with any existing zoning regulations. 
(c)  Such variances, modifications and waivers may be granted only by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members of the planning commission. 
(d)  In granting variances, modifications and waivers, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so affected. 
(Code 1967, § 6-549)  
Secs. 35-5—35-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING PROCEDURE AND DATA REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 35-21. - Preapplication investigation. 
(a)  Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may meet informally with the planning department and other city agencies concerned to investigate the procedures and standards of the city. 
(b)  The subdivider shall familiarize himself or herself with the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, engineering specifications and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvements of land, so as to make himself or herself aware of the requirements of the city. 
(c)  The subdivider shall review the area zoning for the proposed subdivision to determine if it is properly zoned for the intended use. 
(d)  The subdivider shall complete an investigation of existing schools and of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(e)  The subdivider shall investigate the relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to the master thoroughfare plan. 
(f)  The subdivider shall investigate the standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the city and county, and the health standards of the county and the state. 
(g)  The subdivider shall review the Subdivision Control Act, and the requirements of those state and county agencies which are required by such public act to review and approve the plat. 
(Code 1967, § 6-504)  
Sec. 35-22. - Preapplication review. 
(a)  The preapplication layout, if submitted, shall consist of the following: 
(1)  General layout of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form; 
(2)  Existing conditions and characteristics of the land and adjacent to the site; 
(3)  Any general area set aside for schools, parks and other community facilities. 
(b)  Procedure: 
(1)  The subdivider shall submit ten (10) copies of the preapplication layout to the county plat coordinating committee for their preliminary review and present evidence of having done so with the city planning department. 
(2)  The subdivider shall submit twelve (12) copies of the preapplication layout to the planning department. 
(3)  The planning department will review the plan with the subdivider or his or her agent. The review shall consist of examining the following: 
a.  Major thoroughfares in the area; 
b.  Utility systems available to service the platted areas; 
c.  Adjacent land use; 
d.  Unusual development problems; 
e.  Topography; 
f.  Existing zoning; 
g.  Adequacy of existing schools and public open space; 
h.  Availability and feasibility of providing city services; 
i.  Conformance to the master plan; 
j.  Application ordinance provisions; 
k.  Environmental effects. 
(4)  The planning department shall review the proposed subdivision and: 
a.  Stipulate the necessary changes that would make the plat acceptable for processing; 
b.  Notify the proprietor of the results of the preapplication review. 
(5)  The subdivider shall submit to the county plat coordinating committee seven (7) copies for their preliminary review and present evidence of having done so with the planning department. 
(Code 1967, § 6-504)  
Sec. 35-23. - Application, review and tentative approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Procedure. The subdivider shall submit to the city clerk not less than thirty (30) copies of the preliminary plat and location map, together with a written application in triplicate and other data required by this chapter. 
(b)  Submittal. The following shall be shown on the preliminary plat or submitted with it: 
(1)  Statement of intended use of the proposed plat, such as residential single-family, two-family and multiple housing, commercial, industrial or recreational; 
(2)  Proposed sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry and other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings; 
(3)  Any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public uses. 
(c)  Fees. The application shall be accompanied by a check for five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first five (5) acres or portion thereof plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional one (1) acre or portion thereof as required in accordance with this chapter and as approved by city council resolution. 
(d)  Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat, with a topographical map superimposed at the same scale, shall contain the following information and shall be drawn up and submitted in the following manner: 
(1)  Scale of map (minimum scale one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet); 
(2)  Name of and acreage contained within the proposed subdivision; 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of subdivider, proprietor, owner, engineer, land surveyor, designer or planner who prepared the preliminary plat: 
(4)  Location of the subdivision, giving the numbers of section, town and range, and the name of the city and county; 
(5)  Date of preparation, scale and north point; 
(6)  Lots and outlots shall be known as follows: 
a.  All lots to be numbered consecutively; 
b.  Total number of lots to be shown; 
c.  All outlots to be lettered alphabetically; 
d.  Total number of outlots to be shown; 
e.  The length of each lot line; 
f.  Width of each lot; 
g.  Building setback lines; 
h.  Width and location of any known existing easement. 
(7)  Existing elevations around the perimeter of the property to be subdivided to a point two hundred fifty (250) feet outside the perimeter. The elevations shall be given at all points or locations where property lines change course or at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet. Contour lines shall be shown at one (1) foot intervals except where the topography is such that the intervals except where the topography is such that the interval should be increased for clarity, in which case contours shall be shown at two (2) foot or five (5) foot intervals as determined by the city engineer; 
(8)  The proposed street layout shall be shown indicating: 
a.  Width of the right-of-way; 
b.  Proposed connections with existing or future streets; 
c.  Width and location of public walkways; 
d.  Rights-of-way and easements, showing location, width and purpose. 
(9)  Designation of any land proposed to be acquired, reserved or dedicated for public use and/or the use of property owners in the subdivision; 
(10)  All land within the boundaries of the plat shall be shown thereon in such a manner that title to the area may be clearly established as to whether dedicated to public use or reserved to private use; 
(11)  The exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall include and correctly show the area within the existing right-of-way of any abutting street, county road or state trunk line highway, if such area has not previously been dedicated to public use and if it is the proprietor's land; 
(12)  When any part of this land lies within or abuts a flood plain area, the plat shall include the following: 
a.  The flood plain, as established by ordinance of the city, shall be shown within a contour line; 
b.  The flood plain area shall be clearly labeled on the plat. 
(e)  Review of preliminary plat (step 1): 
(1)  Upon being furnished with all the required information and data, the preliminary plat and location map shall be referred to the appropriate city departments, the appropriate local school districts, Michigan Bell, Detroit Edison, Consumers Power, Comcast Cablevision of Warren, and any other governmental board, agency or authority the city deems has an interest or concern in the plat for their review and recommendations. 
(2)  Following review of the preliminary plat by the above, it shall be forwarded to the planning department with written comments and recommendations by the reviewing party. 
(f)  Review of preliminary plat (step 2): 
(1)  The planning department shall also incorporate into its review the reports filed by the various city departments other governmental authorities and utility companies as provided for in subsection (e)(1). In addition, the planning department shall incorporate the findings and reports from the county plat coordinating committee. 
(2)  The planning department shall prepare a report of its findings and recommendations based on the above review and shall submit same to the planning commission at the time of the hearing before the planning commission. 
(g)  Notice of hearing. The planning commission shall hold a hearing on the proposed plat and notice of the hearing shall be sent to the name and address shown on the plat by registered or certified mail; the notice shall inform of the time and place of the meeting of the planning commission which will consider the plat; the notice shall be sent not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear on the tax records of the city or county. A notice of hearing shall be sent to Michigan Bell, Detroit Edison, Consumers Power Company and any other affected public utility company. 
(h)  Tentative approval of preliminary plat by planning commission. Following the receipt and review of all comments and recommendations and following the hearing on the plat, the planning commission shall, if it finds that all conditions have been met, recommend tentative approval of the preliminary plat and record same on the plat in its minutes; or recommend disapproval of the proposed plat with reasons for such disapproval to be recorded in the minutes of the planning commission meeting, and forward the same with a letter advising of the approval or disapproval and the reasons therefor to the city council and the subdivider. The planning commission shall forward its recommendations to the city council within fifty-six (56) days after submittal of the application to the city clerk. 
(i)  Tentative approval of preliminary plat by city council. The city council, within ninety (90) days from the date of filing of application, shall tentatively approve the proposed plat and date its approval on the plat which is to be returned to the developer; or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative approval. The ninety-day period may be extended if the applicant consents. 
(j)  Conditions and duration of tentative approval. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of one (1) year from date approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 6-505; Ord. No. 80-411, § 1, 6-23-92) 
State Law reference— Preliminary plat, MCL 560.111 et seq.  
Sec. 35-24. - Final approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Distribution to authorities. The subdivider shall submit an approved tentative preliminary plat to the various authorities as required by Sections 112 through 119 of the Subdivision Control Act. 
(b)  List of authorities. The subdivider shall file with the director of public service a list of all authorities to whom validated copies of the preliminary plat have been distributed. 
(c)  Submittal to the city clerk: 
(1)  When the subdivider has secured the approval of the various approving authorities as required by Sections 112 and 119 of the Subdivision Control Act he or she shall deliver all copies plus not less than twenty (20) copies of the proposed final preliminary plat to the city clerk. 
(2)  A certificate signed by a registered engineer or surveyor certifying that all proposed lots conform to the minimum requirements for the particular zoning district as set forth in the zoning ordinance shall accompany the submittal. 
(3)  The application shall be accompanied by a check for five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first five (5) acres or portion thereof plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional one (1) acre or portion thereof as required in accordance with this chapter and as approved by city council resolution. 
(d)  Review and final approval of preliminary plat: 
(1)  The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the director of public service in order that the director shall make written comments to the city council regarding the preliminary plat. 
(2)  The planning department shall also review the preliminary plat and prepare a written report for the director of public service relative to how the plat conforms with the approved tentative plat with respect to street layout and lot orientation. 
(3)  If the preliminary plat does not meet all requirements the director of public service shall notify the subdivider by letter of what specific requirements have not been met and the information necessary to meet requirements for approval and the date for resubmission of required information. 
(4)  When the preliminary plat meets all requirements laid down for tentative approval and the certifications required by Sections 112 through 119 of the Subdivision Control Act have been verified the director of public service shall forward the preliminary plat to the city council. 
(e)  Final approval of the preliminary plat by city council: 
(1)  The city council shall consider and review the preliminary plat at its next meeting, or within twenty (20) days from the date of verified compliance with all conditions of tentative approval of preliminary plat. 
(2)  The city council shall give final approval of the preliminary plat, if the proprietor has met all conditions laid down for approval of the plat, or reject the plat and advise the proprietor of the reasons for the rejection. 
(3)  The city council shall instruct the city clerk to promptly notify the proprietor of approval of rejection in writing. 
(4)  The city council shall instruct the city clerk to note all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which minutes shall be open for inspection. 
(5)  The twenty-day period for consideration by the city council may be extended if the applicant consents. 
(f)  Conditions and duration of approval of preliminary plat: 
(1)  Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat, but rather, that final plat approval shall be conditional on all requirements being met. 
(2)  Final approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval by the city council, but may be extended for periods not to exceed one (1) year, if applied for by the subdivider in writing and granted in writing by the city council. 
(3)  No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the final approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, final approval of engineering plans by the city engineer and payment of all fees to the city treasurer as required under the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Final engineering plans review fee schedule. All final plat fees shall be determined by the director of public service and collection of same verified by the director of public service and collection of same verified by the director of public service. All fees shall be established by council resolution and collected in advance of the installation or construction of any improvements. 
(Code 1967, § 6-505; Ord. No. 80-412, § 1, 6-23-92) 
State Law reference— Preliminary plat, MCL 560.111 et seq.  
Sec. 35-25. - Final plat. 
The procedure for preparation and review of the final plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  Requirements: 
a.  The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Control Act. 
b.  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat (stage 2) as approved, shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this chapter. 
c.  A written application for approval and the filing and recording fee required by Section 241 of the Subdivision Control Act shall accompany all final plats. 
(2)  Filing and review: 
a.  One (1) mylar and not less than twenty-five (25) copies of the final plat shall be filed with the city clerk and the subdivider shall deposit such sums of money as required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city with the city treasurer. 
b.  The final plat shall be reviewed by the director of public service as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
c.  The director of public service shall notify the city council of their recommendations for approval or rejection of the final plat. 
(3)  Final approval: 
a.  The city council shall consider and review the final plat at its next meeting within twenty (20) days from the date of submission to the city clerk. 
b.  If the final plat meets all requirements, the city council shall prepare a resolution of approval of the final plat and authorize the city clerk to sign the plat on behalf of the city. 
c.  If the final plat does not meet all requirements, the city council shall reject the plat and specify the reasons for rejection. 
d.  Upon the approval of the final plat by the city council the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the Subdivision Control Act. The mylar copy shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county plat board. 
(Code 1967, § 6-506) 
State Law reference— Submission of final plat, MCL 560.161 et seq.  
Sec. 35-26. - Lot splits. 
(a)  Application. The applicant filing a request to split a lot located within a recorded plat shall submit an application to the planning commission for lot split. The application shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  An application for approval of lot split shall be submitted to the planning department. Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning commission shall schedule and hold a hearing. An application is complete upon receipt of: 
a.  The required maps of the proposed lot split; 
b.  The application fee; and 
c.  Any other information specified by the planning department to ascertain that the proposed lot split conforms to the provisions of the ordinance. 
(2)  Owner's name, address and signature assenting to the application; 
(3)  Full legal description including subdivision name and lot numbers; 
(4)  Names of abutting subdivisions or names of the owners of the abutting un-platted property; 
(5)  Twenty-four (24) maps of the proposed lot split, drawn to a scale required by the planning department, and prepared by a professional surveyor. 
(6)  Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of two-hundred dollars ($200.00). Such fee is required to cover the costs of processing the application, holding the hearing and conducting a site inspection. 
(b)  Map specifications. The map of the proposed lot split shall be prepared pursuant to the specifications required by the planning department. 
(c)  Review of proposed lot split. The map of the proposed lot split shall be distributed and reviewed by the following city departments: 
(1)  Assessing department to determine whether the number of splits exceed the allowable number of divisions under the Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 
(2)  Building division, to determine whether the split complies with all applicable building regulations. 
(3)  Zoning official to determine whether each resulting lot is accessible; the proposed split complies with all applicable zoning ordinance provisions; and the resulting lots meet the minimum lot size dimensions. 
(4)  Engineering division to assess whether the lots and abutting streets are satisfactorily graded and drained. 
(5)  Fire department to determine whether each resulting lot is accessible. 
(6)  Treasurer to determine whether the currently due taxes have been paid. 
Each department shall review the map of the proposed lot split and provide a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the planning commission within fifteen (15) days before the scheduled hearing date. 
(d)  Review of proposed lot split by planning department. The planning department shall review the proposed lot split for conformance with all ordinances, the Land Division Act requirements, applicable administrative regulations and the master plan for the City. Such review shall include a site inspection. A recommendation shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission for consideration at the hearing. No approval shall be recommended unless: 
(1)  Each resulting lot is accessible. 
(2)  The proposed split complies with all applicable ordinance provisions. 
(3)  The proposed split does not render an existing structure to not comply with the zoning ordinance, unless such structure is removed. 
(4)  The number of splits do not exceed the allowable number of divisions under the Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 
(5)  The lots and abutting streets are graded and drained to the satisfaction of the engineering division; and 
(6)  The utility companies are provided with notice of the proposed lot split so that they have an opportunity to acquire any easement they may require. 
(7)  All taxes currently due and owing on the parent parcel are paid in full. 
(e)  Hearing. The planning commission shall schedule and hold a hearing on the proposed lot split within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application. The planning commission shall provide notice of the hearing to all abutting property owners as found in the records of the city assessor. A notice of hearing and location map shall be sent to the school district affected, county drain commission, county road commission, and all applicable utility companies. 
(f)  Planning commission recommendation. After holding a public hearing on the proposed lot split, if it is determined that the proposed lot split complies with all applicable requirements, the planning commission may recommend approval. If it is determined that the proposed lot split does not meet all requirements of the ordinances, the planning commission shall recommend disapproval. If the proposed lot split does not meet a requirement of the zoning ordinance, the applicant may seek a variance from the zoning board of appeals before the recommendation of the planning commission is forwarded to the city council. 
(g)  City council consideration. A resolution containing the planning commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council. They shall consider the proposed lot split. The city council shall not approve any lot split that does not comply with all applicable ordinance requirements. If it is determined that the proposed lot split complies with all applicable requirements, the council may adopt a resolution approving the lot split. The resolution shall be forwarded to the city clerk for recording with the Macomb County Register of Deeds, to the city assessor for assignment of new parcel identification numbers, and a copy provided to the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 6-507; Ord. No. 80-413, § 1, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 80-563, § 2, 11-28-00) 
State Law reference— Further partition or division of property, MCL 560.263.  
Sec. 35-27. - Division of non-subdivided property. 
(a)  Application. The applicant filing a request to divide a non-subdivided parcel or tract of land shall submit an application for land division to the planning department. The application shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  Owner's name, address and signature assenting to the application; applicant's name, address and authorization for representation. 
(2)  Full legal description of the parcel or tract of land and the proposed legal descriptions of the land as divided. 
(3)  Names of abutting subdivisions or names of the owners of the abutting un-platted property. 
(4)  Fourteen (14) parcel maps of the proposed land division, drawn to a scale required by the planning department, and prepared by a professional surveyor. 
(5)  Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of one-hundred dollars ($100.00). Such fee is required to cover the costs of processing the application and conducting a site inspection. 
(6)  A final decision approving or disapproving the land division shall be rendered within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the complete application. An application will be deemed complete upon receipt of all information required to ascertain if the provisions of the ordinance have been met, the required maps of the proposed land division, and the application fee. 
(b)  Parcel map specifications. The proposed land division map shall be prepared pursuant to the land division parcel map specifications required by the planning department. 
(c)  Review of proposed land division. The proposed land division map shall be distributed and reviewed by the following city departments: 
(1)  Assessing department to determine whether the number of divisions exceed the allowable number of divisions under the Land Division Act. 
(2)  Building division, to determine whether the division complies with all applicable building regulations. 
(3)  Zoning official to determine whether each resulting parcel is accessible; the division complies with all applicable zoning ordinance provisions; and the resulting parcels meet the minimum lot size dimensions. 
(4)  Engineering division to assess whether the parcels and abutting streets are satisfactorily graded and drained. 
(5)  Fire department to determine whether each resulting parcel is accessible. 
(6)  Treasurer to determine whether the taxes currently due have been paid. 
Each department shall review the proposed land division map and provide a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the planning department within fifteen (15) days. 
(d)  Review of proposed land division by planning department. The planning department shall review the proposed land division for conformance with all ordinances, Land Division Act requirements, applicable administrative regulations and the master plan for the city. Such review shall include a site inspection. No approval shall be granted unless: 
(1)  Each resulting parcel is accessible. 
(2)  The proposed division complies with all applicable ordinance provisions. 
(3)  The proposed division does not render an existing structure to not comply with the zoning ordinance, unless such structure is removed. 
(4)  The number of divisions do not exceed the allowable number of divisions under the Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 
(5)  The parcels and abutting streets are graded and drained to the satisfaction of the engineering division; and 
(6)  The utility companies are provided with notice of the proposed division so that they have an opportunity to acquire any easement they may require. 
(7)  All taxes currently due and owing on the parent parcel are paid in full. 
(e)  Planning department approval. If it is determined that the proposed division complies with all ordinance requirements, the planning department shall approve the proposed land division. If it is determined that the proposed division does not meet all requirements of the ordinances, the planning department shall disapprove the land division. If the proposed land division does not meet a requirement of the zoning ordinance, the applicant may seek a variance from the zoning board of appeals before a final decision is made. The approval or disapproval shall be provided in writing to the applicant, and shall further comply with the following: 
(1)  If the land division is approved conditionally, the conditions and reasons supporting the conditions shall be specified in the written approval. In the event an application is approved conditionally, the planning department may require the applicant to submit a revised land division map prior to final processing. 
(2)  If the recommendation is to disapprove the application, the reasons supporting disapproval shall be stated in the written disapproval. 
(f)  Recording of approval. The land division approval shall be prepared in a recordable form and shall be forwarded to the city clerk for recording with the Macomb County Register of Deeds, to the city assessor for assignment of new parcel identification numbers, and a copy provided to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 80-563, § 3, 11-28-00)  
Secs. 35-28—35-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 35-51. - Street plan and relation to adjoining street system. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the city master thoroughfare plan and this chapter. 
(b)  All such streets shall be related to existing and proposed streets in the area, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and existing and proposed land uses along such streets. 
(c)  All streets shall be platted in such a manner that all resulting lots shall conform to the applicable zoning regulations. 
(d)  Where such streets are not shown in the master plan, the arrangements of these streets in the subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in the surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the planning commission. 
(e)  Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic. 
(f)  Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning commission may require: 
(1)  Marginal access streets; 
(2)  Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line; 
(3)  Deep lots with rear service alleys; or 
(4)  Such other treatment as may be necessary for the adequate protection and stabilization of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 6-508)  
Sec. 35-52. - Relation to railroad rights-of-way. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way. 
(Code 1967, § 6-509) 
Cross reference— Railroads generally, Ch. 28.  
Sec. 35-53. - Reserve strips prohibited. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 6-510)  
Sec. 35-54. - Street alignment. 
(a)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
(b)  A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(c)  When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one (1) point by more than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a site distance of not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet for minor collector streets and of such greater radii as the planning commission shall determine for special cases. The planning commission shall determine the radius of the curve required, generally in consultation with the city engineer and local traffic authorities. 
(Code 1967, § 6-511)  
Sec. 35-55. - Street rights-of-way and roadway widths. 
(a)  Street rights-of-way and roadway widths shall conform to the master thoroughfare plan. 
(b)  All streets shall be paved. 
(c)  The following minimum standards shall apply: 
Street Type 	Right-of-way 
Width 
(feet) 	Roadway 
Width 
(feet) 
Super highways 	204 	as determined by proper authorities 
Major thoroughfares 	120 	as determined by proper authorities 
Collector roads 	86 	38 
Industrial road 	70 	38—40 
Minor res. streets 	60 	28—32 
Multiple apt. streets 	60 	36 
 
(Code 1967, § 6-512; Ord. No. 80-340, § 29, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-56. - Half streets. 
(a)  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  In no event, however, shall lots facing a one-half minor residential street be permitted. 
(c)  Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be planned within such tract. 
(Code 1967, § 6-513)  
Sec. 35-57. - Street and subdivision names. 
(a)  No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. 
(b)  Street and subdivision names shall be subject to the approval of the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-514)  
Sec. 35-58. - Street grades. 
(a)  The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.3 percent or otherwise as approved by the director of public service. 
(b)  The maximum grade of all streets shall not be greater than six (6) percent or otherwise as approved by the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-515; Ord. No. 80-340, § 30, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-59. - Street intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles where possible, and may be curved, if necessary, in order to make this possible. In no event shall a street intersect any other street at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees. 
(b)  Street corners on local residential streets shall have a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet at curb line or its equivalent. Street corners on commercial and industrial streets shall have a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet at the curb line or its equivalent. Street intersections involving major thoroughfares shall have a minimum street corner radius of thirty (30) feet at the curb line or its equivalent. 
(c)  All street corner radii shall be shown on the street improvement plan. 
(Code 1967, § 6-516)  
Sec. 35-60. - Corner visibility. 
A twenty-five-foot area of clear vision at street intersections in subdivisions shall be provided. This area shall be kept clear of all structures and vegetation exceeding a height of three (3) feet above the curb line. 
(Code 1967, § 6-517)  
Sec. 35-61. - Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets. 
(a)  The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be six hundred (600) feet. 
(b)  Each cul-de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  The road surface within the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall have a minimum radius of thirty-six (36) feet. 
(d)  In the case of temporarily dead-ended streets, which are stub streets designed to provide future connection with unsubdivided areas adjoining, the planning commission may require: 
(1)  Temporary easement for a turn-around having a radius of fifty (50) feet; or 
(2)  An appropriate area for a back-around. 
(e)  In all instances, proper provision shall be made for adequate storm drainage so that storm water does not collect at the ends of these streets. 
(Code 1967, § 6-518; Ord. No. 80-340, § 31, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-62. - Alleys. 
(a)  In general, service alleys shall not be platted in residential districts and the planning commission reserves the right to determine the need for such alleys in commercial and industrial districts. 
(b)  Where alleys are permitted, the following shall be applied: 
(1)  Minimum width of twenty (20) feet; 
(2)  All alleys shall be paved; 
(3)  Abrupt changes in alignment or dead-ends shall be avoided. 
(c)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible. If unavoidable, such alleys shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the deadend, as determined by the planning commission. 
(Code 1967, § 6-519)  
Sec. 35-63. - Easements. 
(a)  Where alleys are not provided or may not be used for that purpose, easements shall be provided as may be advisable for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains and lines, and other similar purposes. 
(b)  Rear yard easements shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide. If one-half of an easement is platted, it shall be not less than six (6) feet in width. 
(c)  Where a subdivision is transversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. 
(d)  Sixty-foot utility easements shall be provided at the end of cul-de-sacs along major thoroughfares. 
(Code 1967, § 6-520)  
Sec. 35-64. - Aerial easements. 
(a)  A three-foot aerial easement shall be provided along all side lot lines in proposed subdivisions to provide street light drop-outs for the Detroit Edison Company. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision: 
(1)  A statement shall be obtained from the Detroit Edison Company indicating that it has been granted these easements. 
(2)  A notation shall be made on the final canvasback indicating the following: "All side lot lines are subject to street light drop-out rights granted to Detroit Edison Company." 
(Code 1967, § 6-521)  
Sec. 35-65. - Blocks. 
(a)  In general, blocks should have the following dimensions: 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Length (feet) 	750 	1500 
Width (feet) 	200 	400 
 
(b)  The foregoing dimensions shall be subject to adjustment by the planning commission where topography, the character of the proposed development, or other similar conditions, justify blocks of greater or lesser length and/or width. 
(c)  Block lengths and widths shall be measured from the street right-of-way line. 
(d)  Wherever blocks are longer than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet, crosswalks may be required at the approximate center of the block. 
(Code 1967, § 6-522)  
Sec. 35-66. - Lots. 
(a)  The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation, and the minimum building setback lines, shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(b)  Lot dimensions shall conform to existing zoning regulations. 
(c)  The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot with satisfactory access at least twenty (20) feet in width to an existing public street by means of a public street or by an easement for ingress and egress of motor vehicles. The said easement shall be irrevocable and shall run with the land. 
(d)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where their use will produce definite advantages in meeting special situations in relation to topography, sound site planning, and proper land use. 
(e)  A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(f)  Corner lots should have such extra width and area beyond the minimum requirements for other lots as may be necessary to permit appropriate set-backs on both streets and assume adequate visibility in furtherance of traffic safety. 
(g)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(h)  Lot remnants or lots below minimum area, left over after subdividing tracts of land, should be added to adjacent lots rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
(Code 1967, § 6-523; Ord. No. 80-453, § 1, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 35-67. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be required in conjunction with any street or highway except in R-1-A districts where the planning commission finds that sidewalks would detract from the country-like appearance of the area and where the low density character of the area does not make such sidewalks necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 6-524)  
Sec. 35-68. - Crosswalks. 
Where necessary to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation in a subdivision and where blocks exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length, the planning commission may require a paved and fenced crosswalk or pedestrian way six (6) feet wide. 
(Code 1967, § 6-525)  
Sec. 35-69. - Parking. 
Proper consideration shall be given to providing suitable off-street parking, consistent with the requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 6-526)  
Sec. 35-70. - Trees. 
(a)  A minimum of one (1) street tree shall be planted in front of each lot, between the curb and sidewalk. The builder shall deposit with the division of buildings and safety engineering, the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) for each lot in his or her subdivision, which money shall be used by the city forester to purchase a tree to be placed in front of each lot. 
(b)  Before planting, the builder shall consult with the director of parks and recreation regarding approved tree species, placement regulations, and requirements of chapter 38 relative to trees and shrubs. 
(Code 1967, § 6-527; Ord. No. 80-340, § 32, 6-9-87) 
Cross reference— Vegetation generally, Ch. 38.  
Sec. 35-71. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a)  Where a site for a proposed park, playground, playfield, school, library, fire station, or other public use is proposed by the master plan for the city, or is deemed by the planning commission to be necessary, is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the planning commission may require the reservation of such area within the subdivision. 
(b)  The developer shall give the public agency involved thirty (30) days written notice of the proposed subdivision, with a copy of such notice to be mailed to the planning commission. During that thirty-day period, the agency may or may not express its interest in the proposed subdivision in connection with the provision of appropriate public site. Should such interest be expressed, that agency shall have a period of thirty (30) days within which to arrange for the acquisition of the public site under consideration. 
(c)  Where the proposed subdivision is too small to provide space of suitable size for the public site intended, the site provided may be combined with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas. Thus, in the aggregate, there will be provided site of suitable size for the purpose intended. 
(Code 1967, § 6-528) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation generally, Ch. 23.  
Sec. 35-72. - Community unit development. 
(a)  The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the planning commission in the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the planning commission will provide adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and the service needs of the area when fully developed and populated. 
(b)  Such plan and program shall include such legal provisions as will assure achievement of the plan as finally approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1967, § 6-529)  
Secs. 35-73—35-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 35-91. - Survey monuments. 
(a)  A complete survey of the subdivision shall be made by a registered civil engineer or surveyor. 
(b)  The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the tract and of each block, when computed from field measurements of the ground, shall close within a limit of error of one (1) foot to ten thousand (10,000) feet of the perimeter. 
(c)  Permanent metal monuments shall be installed in compliance with and as specified by the Subdivision Control Act. 
(Code 1967, § 6-530) 
State Law reference— Survey monuments, MCL 560.125.  
Sec. 35-92. - Streets. 
(a)  The developer shall provide streets constructed according to plans, profiles, cross-sections and specifications prepared by or for him or her and approved by the director of public service, prior to the start of any development. 
(b)  The classification of streets shall be in accord with the master thoroughfare plan and shall conform to roadway widths specified in section 35-55. 
(c)  All streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way as shown on plans and profiles approved by the director of public service. 
(d)  All streets shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete in accordance with cross-sections and detailed specifications on file in the office of the director of public service and as otherwise specified in this chapter. In addition, all developers shall execute a bond in the amount of twenty-five (25) percent of actual pavement costs in a form acceptable to the city attorney, guaranteeing that the developer will repair and maintain all defects in street paving projects arising from faulty material or workmanship, for a period of three (3) years of acceptance by the city; provided, however, that any person damaging the pavement after installation shall be responsible to the city. 
(Code 1967, § 6-531; Ord. No. 80-340, § 33, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-93. - Portland cement concrete pavements. 
(a)  All required pavements are to be constructed of Portland cement concrete in accordance with the standard specifications for roads as designated by the Michigan Department of Transportation standard specifications for construction. 
(b)  All pavement designs, including drainage, thickness and grades, shall be in accordance with specifications on file in the office of the director of public service and as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(c)  All drawings shall be presented in accordance with the specifications on file in the office of the director of public service. 
(d)  All pavements shall attain a strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch by standard tests and shall be acquired in twenty-eight (28) days. 
(e)  Pavement thickness: 
(1)  Residential pavements shall not be less in thickness than the conventional six (6) inch uniform pavement design, except, however, that uniform eight (8) inch thick pavement shall be provided in residential streets as follows: 
a.  Intersections, as measured from the point of tangency of the street lines with each radii approaching the intersection; 
b.  Cul-de-sacs and turn-arounds, as measured from the points of tangency of the street lines and the radii approaching the turn-around; 
c.  "Bubbles or eye-brows," as measured from the points of tangency of the street line and the radii approaching the eyebrows. 
(2)  Pavements for major thoroughfares and streets intended to handle heavy traffic loads, as determined by the director of public service, shall be not less than nine (9) inches in thickness. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial pavements shall be not less than eight (8) inches in thickness. 
(f)  The construction period for all street pavements shall comply with dates established by the Michigan Department of Transportation. A deviation from these dates may be authorized by the director of public service in the event of unusual weather conditions permitting the construction of concrete pavements. In no case, however, shall the construction deadline extend beyond November fifteenth. 
(Code 1967, § 6-532; Ord. No. 80-340, § 34, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-94. - Portland cement concrete curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Curbs and gutters are to be constructed of Portland cement concrete in accordance with the standard specifications for roads as designated by the Michigan Department of Transportation standard specifications as amended. 
(b)  "7" "Roll" type curbs shall be provided and shall be in accordance with standard specification drawings on file in the offices of the director of public service. 
(c)  The thickness of all curbs shall conform with the type and thickness of the pavement to which it is connected. 
(d)  Curbs and gutters shall attain a strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch by standard tests and shall be acquired in twenty-eight (28) days. 
(Code 1967, § 6-533; Ord. No. 80-340, § 35, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-95. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be installed in all subdivisions and along all abutting major thoroughfares and collector roads. 
(b)  The planning commission may waive the sidewalk requirement on one or both sides of a street in subdivisions where lots have a width of ninety (90) feet or more at the building line. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet. 
(d)  The construction of sidewalks shall conform to the specifications on file in the office of the director of public service. Sidewalks shall attain a strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch by standard tests and shall be acquired in twenty-eight (28) days. 
(e)  Sidewalks shall be extended to the curb at all street intersections. 
(Code 1967, § 6-534; Ord. No. 80-340, § 35.1, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-96. - Crosswalks. 
(a)  Where required by the planning commission, crosswalks through blocks shall be constructed to a line and grade as determined by the director of public service. 
(b)  Walkways shall be surfaced with Portland cement concrete to a width of five and one-half (5.5) feet and fenced on both sides with a four (4) foot high cyclone fence. 
(c)  All crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with section 35-95(d). 
(Code 1967, § 6-535)  
Sec. 35-97. - Excavations. 
(a)  Excavations within the dedicated right-of-way for sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, gas or electrical conduits over five (5) feet in depth and other utilities, shall be backfilled to the subgrade elevation with the excavated material. 
(b)  In the case of existing paved or traveled roads or in streets where a new pavement base has been constructed, all trenches and excavations under or within three (3) feet of the pavement shall be backfilled with sand to subgrade elevation and properly compacted either by tamping or flooding with water, as directed by the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-536)  
Sec. 35-98. - Fill compaction. 
(a)  For roadways, sidewalks and curbs to be built on fill, such fill shall be compacted by mechanical equipment ahead of the rolling operation and shall be subject to the approval of the director of public service. 
(b)  A slope of at least two (2) to one (1) shall be maintained at the sides to properly support the fill. 
(Code 1967, § 6-537; Ord. No. 80-340, § 36, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-99. - Storm sewers. 
(a)  The developer shall provide and be responsible for proper and adequate disposal of all surface and underground storm water. Existing water courses that are retained, shall be dedicated as drainage courses. 
(b)  Storm sewers shall be designed to flow full and shall be designed for the storm of that intensity which can be interpreted as the conventional ten-year storm for the area. The run-off from platted areas shall in no case be considered less than thirty (30) percent and in case of large paved areas not less than seventy-five (75) percent. 
(c)  Storm sewers shall be connected on crowns and when the velocity exceeds twenty (20) feet per second, the invert shall be paved with vitrified tile or other abrasion-resisting material. Storm sewers may be vitrified tile, reinforced concrete pipe or cement asbestos pipe of adequate load carrying capacity as determined by the city engineer. 
(d)  Catch basins shall be so placed that the line of travel from the sidewalk can be made without crossing the gutter flow. In areas outside traveled roadways, plain concrete pipe will be permitted when depth consideration is adequately protected. 
(e)  The type, extent, location and capacity of all drainage facilities shall be determined by the director of public service. 
(f)  All properties shall be served by underground storm sewer systems discharging into approved outlets and constructed in accordance with standard specifications on file in the office of the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-538; Ord. No. 80-340, § 37, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-100. - Open channels. 
(a)  The director of public service may waive the requirement of complete rip-rap or any portion thereof depending upon the degree of proposed alteration to the existing ditch alignment, velocity of flow or other physical features. 
(b)  Where it has been decided the surfaces shall have rip-rap, it shall be of a good quality native limestone or other stone of acceptable quality. The stones shall not be less than six (6) inches in width, twelve (12) inches in length or nine (9) inches in thickness nor the volume less than one-half cubic foot. Gravel used for filling joints shall be compiled of pebbles which will pass a three-fourths inch ring. Mortar where required shall conform to the requirements specified. Gravel used for foundations shall be bank run gravel, reasonably free from loam, clay and organic matter. 
(c)  The foundation for stone rip-rap shall be thoroughly compacted and covered with six (6) inches of gravel. The stones shall be rough dressed, set to line and grade and firmly embedded in the grade so as to break joints. Joints shall not exceed three-quarters inch in width and shall be well filled with fine gravel. 
(Code 1967, § 6-539)  
Sec. 35-101. - Rear yard storm drainage. 
(a)  The developer shall provide for adequate and safe disposal of all rear yard storm water. 
(b)  Rear yard storm drainage pipe shall be provided in the rear yard of each lot with suitable catch basins provided at intervals of four hundred eighty (480) feet in areas of sixty-foot lots, or the equivalent of four (4) lots each direction of flow for a total of eight (8) lots between catch basins in areas of lots exceeding sixty (60) feet in width, at the discretion of the city engineer. All such construction shall be under the supervision of the director of public service. 
(c)  All tile drains shall comply with the following specifications: 
(1)  Six (6) inches C700 bell and spigot or perforated P.V.C. for ready entrance of water. The pipe shall be laid in an accommodating trench with proper grades and horizontal bearing with proper bell holes. 
(2)  The trench shall be filled with uniform gravel at one-half inch, three-fourths inch, and not to exceed one (1) inch to a point about six (6) inches below the top. This top six (6) inches to be filled with dirt to accommodate grass or sod as a part of the six (6) inches. 
(Code 1967, § 6-540; Ord. No. 80-340, § 38, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-102. - Sanitary sewers. 
(a)  The developer shall provide a complete sanitary sewer system discharging into an outlet as approved by the director of public service. 
(b)  The construction of the sanitary sewer system for the entire subdivision shall be done in accordance with standard specifications on file in the office of the director of public service. 
(c)  Sanitary sewers shall be designed to run half full, be connected on center lines and the velocity in same limited not to exceed five (5) feet per second. Sanitary sewers shall be capable of carrying four hundred twenty-five (425) gallons per capita per day. Wherein syphons or clean-outs become involved, the design should be handled on an individual basis subject to the complete approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 6-541; Ord. No. 80-340, § 39, 6-9-87) 
Cross reference— Sewers generally, § 41-56 et seq.  
Sec. 35-103. - Water supply. 
(a)  Water mains properly connected with the public water supply system shall be provided to adequately serve the use intended for each lot and for adequate fire protection. 
(b)  The sizes of mains, locations and types of valves and hydrants shall be constructed in accordance with standard specifications on file in the office of the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-542) 
Cross reference— Water generally, § 41-21 et seq.  
Sec. 35-104. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  The developer shall provide for fire hydrants in compliance with requirements of this chapter and those requirements of the fire commissioner. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall be placed not over six hundred (600) feet apart. 
(c)  The hydrant nozzles shall be set at eighteen (18) to twenty-one (21) inches above the finished grade and shall be constructed in accordance to the standard specifications on file in the office of the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-543) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 35-105. - Underground fed ornamental street lights. 
Where ornamental street lights are to be installed, the developer shall post a bond to the satisfaction of the director of public service and legal department. Such bond shall cover all costs involved in the installation of such lights, including necessary equipment. 
(Code 1967, § 6-544)  
Sec. 35-106. - Guarantee of completion of improvements. 
(a)  The developer shall be responsible for the provision of all required improvements to the subdivision. This may be accomplished by either the full installation of all required improvements by the developer at the time that the final plat is to be forwarded to the city council with a recommendation of approval, or by the provision of a financial guarantee of performance in one (1) or a combination of the following arrangements: 
(1)  Subdivision improvement bond: 
a.  Acceptance of bond. Bond must be approved by the director of public service and the legal department. 
b.  Amount of bond. An amount satisfactory to the director of public service, not to exceed the cost of sanitary and storm sewers and related drainage appurtenances, water mains and paving. 
c.  Length of term. A period to be specified by the director of public service, but such period shall not exceed twenty-four (24) months from the time that the final plat is recorded. 
(2)  Cash deposit, certified check or negotiable bonds. A deposit shall be made by the developer with the city treasurer, or a responsible escrow agent, or trust company, subject to the approval of the legal department, of money or negotiable bonds in the same amount of the kind approved by the provision of law for requiring deposits of public money on banks. If a cash deposit is made, the agreement shall provide that progress payments shall be made to the contractor or the developer out of the deposit as work progresses. 
(b)  if the developer shall in any case fail to complete such work within such period as required by the conditions of the guarantee, the city shall have such work completed. In order to reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof, the city may appropriate the deposit of cash money or negotiable bonds which the developer may have deposited in lieu of a subdivision improvement bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance under the bond. 
(Code 1967, § 6-545)  
Sec. 35-107. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspectors authorized by the city shall be required to inspect the construction of all required improvements on a continuous basis. The improvement contractors shall place the full estimated cost of city inspection into cash escrow with the city prior to installation. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the improvement contractors to notify the director of public service at least three (3) days in advance for the following periodic inspections: 
(1)  Storm sewers, laterals and catch basins before the trenches for these improvements are backfilled; 
(2)  Forms set for curb and gutter after subbase has been put in place and before any concrete is poured; 
(3)  Forms set for sidewalks before any concrete is poured; 
(4)  All subgrade that has been shaped and rolled, before the compaction test is made; 
(5)  Forms for pavement before any concrete is poured; 
(6)  Base courses; 
(7)  Sanitary sewers and water mains. 
(c)  No work covered by the bond shall be accepted or bonds released until these inspections have been made and work found to be satisfactory. 
(Code 1967, § 6-546; Ord. No. 80-340, § 40, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 35-108. - Fees for inspections of installed improvements. 
The agreement to install required public improvements shall also provide for checking of improvement plans and continuous inspection of all improvements by the city for the cost of checking and inspections. 
(Code 1967, § 6-547)  
Sec. 35-109. - Data required on drawings. 
(a)  The drawings submitted to the director of public service for approval of required improvements shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the proposed subdivision; 
(2)  Names and addresses of the owner, developer and engineer; 
(3)  Date, north arrow and scale, written and graphic; 
(4)  Boundary lines and acreage of the tract to be subdivided; 
(5)  Names of abutting subdivisions; 
(6)  A key map locating the subdivision by section, township and range and identifying major and collector roads; 
(7)  Elevations based on a datum plane approved by the city engineer; 
(8)  Street names, rights-of-way and roadway widths of all existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
(9)  Proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers and water mains; 
(10)  All existing structures and other physical features which would influence the layout and design of the subdivision; 
(11)  Location, width and purpose of easements; 
(12)  Sites proposed to be acquired for recreation areas, schools and other public uses; 
(13)  Lot lines, approximate lot dimensions and lot numbers; 
(14)  Topographic data indicating ground elevations shown at two (2) foot contour intervals; 
(15)  Location, size and elevation of all existing utility lines. 
(b)  Specifications of required improvements shall be submitted in accordance with standard specifications on file in the office of the director of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-548)  
Sec. 35-110. - Operation of construction site. 
(a)  The developer shall conduct the excavation, construction or other operations required for the completion of the required subdivision improvements in a manner as directed by the City Engineer so that surrounding properties will not be adversely affected by the noise, debris or other harmful effects. 
(b)  The developer shall not conduct any cement batching operations unless a permit is obtained from the Warren City Council as required in Warren Code of Ordinances Section 21-29(b), specifying the location, method and hours of operation. 
(c)  Any failure or refusal to comply with the provisions of the permit shall result in a revocation of the permit. 
(d)  To insure compliance with this ordinance and the provisions of this permit, the developer shall provide a bond in the amount satisfactory to the Director of Public Service, covering the estimated costs of restoring the site, said bond shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit and shall continue until all of the operations are complete and the site is restored. 
(Ord. No. 80-424, § 1, 12-22-92)  
Chapter 36 - TATTOO PARLORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Health officer authorized to promulgate rules and regulations; periodic inspections by health officer. 
The health officer shall promulgate rules and regulations covering establishments doing tattooing, and shall periodically inspect the premises to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated by it. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1908)  
Sec. 36-2. - Sterilizing equipment required; equipment and materials to be sterilized before use. 
Every tattoo establishment shall be equipped with sterilizing equipment prescribed by the health officer. The sterilizing equipment must be maintained in proper sanitary manner and be at all times in proper working order. No tattooing shall be performed unless the tattooing equipment and materials have been sterilized before attempting to tattoo each customer. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1909)  
Sec. 36-3. - Tattooing of minors prohibited; exceptions. 
The tattooing of minors is hereby prohibited, except with the written permission or in the presence of the parent or guardian of the minor. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1910)  
Secs. 36-4—36-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 36-26. - Required. 
No person shall maintain an establishment in the city to engage in or do tattooing unless such person has secured a license to do so from the city clerk as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1901)  
Sec. 36-27. - Exemption. 
The license required by this article shall not be required of a registered physician who, in his or her office or in a hospital, causes a person to be tattooed for medical identification. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1902)  
Sec. 36-28. - Inspection of premises by certain city departments prior to licensing; certification to clerk. 
The premises proposed to be used for a tattoo parlor shall be inspected by the health officer, the police commissioner, and the division of buildings and safety engineering, who shall certify to the clerk that the parlor complies with applicable city ordinances. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1903)  
Sec. 36-29. - Fee. 
The license fee under this article shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1905);  
Sec. 36-30. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of article I is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 24, 1-13-98)  
Chapter 37 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-568, adopted May 8, 2001, amended and renumbered the provisions of Ch. 37. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said ordinance. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate vehicles and trains, § 3.1(b)(3)(g). 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); placing handbills in vehicles, § 3-19; ambulances, Ch. 5; moving buildings, § 9-341 et seq.; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 20; unlawful noise from horns and signal devices, § 21-22; unlawful noise or commotion in vehicles, § 21-31; sound trucks, § 21-32; offenses, Ch. 22; driving and parking vehicles in parks, § 23-6; repairing, cleaning, etc., vehicles restricted in parks, § 23-7; police, Ch. 26; railroads, Ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; vehicles for hire, Ch. 39. 
State Law reference— Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 
 
ARTICLE I. - MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE AND UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Michigan Vehicle Code Adopted. 
The Michigan Vehicle Code (MVC), 1949 P.A. 300, M.C.L. 257.1 to 257.923, as amended, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-2. - Uniform Traffic Code Adopted. 
The Uniform Traffic Code (UTC), promulgated by the Department of State Police pursuant to 1956 P.A. 62, M.C.L. 257.951 et seq., as amended, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-3. - References in Codes. 
(a)  "Local authorities" defined. References in the MVC and the UTC to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Warren. 
(b)  "Chief of police" amended. References in the MVC and the UTC to "chief of police" and "police chief" shall be amended to "police commissioner or his/her designee." 
(c)  Method of citing this article. For purposes of citing this article, the section number of the respective Code should be inserted following reference to 37-1 or 37-2, as applicable. For example: 
M.C.L. 257.626b 	Careless Driving 	City of Warren Cite: 	37-1:626b 
UTC Sec. 5.98 	Impeding Traffic 	City of Warren Cite: 	37-2:5.98 
 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions in the UTC and the MVC shall apply to this chapter unless modified by this section. 
(b)  For the purpose of impounding or removing vehicles pursuant the MVC's provisions for abandoned vehicles, impoundment of vehicles, and removal of vehicles from public or private property: 
(1)  Vehicle means every self-propelled vehicle, including but not limited to industrial equipment such as a forklift, front-end loader, or other construction equipment, watercraft, snowmobiles, off-road vehicles, and trailers, whether or not the MVC requires registration. 
(2)  Vehicle identification number means a numeric or alphanumeric symbol assigned or affixed to a vehicle for the purposes of registration and/or identification. For vehicles that do not bear vehicle identification numbers, any registration number, identification mark, or other information which serves to identify or track a particular vehicle shall suffice. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-5. - Notice to be published. 
A complete copy of the MVC and the UTC shall be available to the public at the office of the city clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-6. - Penalties. 
The penalties of the MVC and the UTC are adopted by reference, provided that the city may not enforce any provision for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than ninety-three (93) days and no fine shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). However, the city may enforce MCL 257.625(1)(c) for which a violation is punishable by community service for not more than three hundred sixty (360) hours, imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00), or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 80-717, § 1, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 37-7. - Conflict between the UTC and the MVC. 
In case of conflict between the provisions of the MVC and the UTC which cannot be resolved by construing them to be complementary or supplementary to each other, the provisions of the MVC shall control. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-8. - Vehicle removed by police. 
The police department or a governmental agency designated by the police department may provide for the removal of a vehicle from public or private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the last titled owner of the vehicle in any of the following circumstances in addition to all circumstances specified in the Motor Vehicle Code (specifically, M.C.L. 257.252 et seq. as amended. 
(1)  If the vehicle is not removed by the owner or occupant of a premises within forty-eight (48) hours after the police department or designated building official attaches a written notice pursuant to M.C.L. 257.252a. 
(2)  If the vehicle has an improper plate attached to the car pursuant to M.C.L. 257.256 or if the vehicle has a false, stolen, or counterfeit plate attached pursuant to M.C.L. 257.257. 
(3)  If the vehicle is operated by an unqualified driver. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 5, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 80-600, § 1, 12-23-03; Ord. No. 80-730, § 1, 6-9-15)  
Secs. 37-9—37-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT  
DIVISION 1. - WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED 
 
Sec. 37-26. - Adoption of federal standards and definitions. 
(1)  The city hereby adopts the following provisions of title 49 of the code of federal regulations, on file with the city clerk except where modified by this article, to provide for the safe transportation of persons and property with the intent of following the policies and procedures of the United States Department of Transportation's federal highway administration as they relate to title 49 of the code of federal regulations and the North American standard uniform out of service criteria and inspection procedures: 
(a)  Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 C.F.R. part 382, part 387, parts 390 through 393, parts 395 through 397, and part 399 including appendices 1, D, E, and G, except for the following: 
(i)  Where the term "United States Department of Transportation", "federal highway administration," "federal highway administrator," "director," "bureau of motor carrier safety," "research and special projects administration," or "associate administrator for hazardous materials safety" appears, it refers to the department of state police and/or City of Warren Police Department, as applicable. 
(ii)  Where "interstate" appears, it shall mean intrastate or interstate, or both, as applicable, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  Where "special agent of the federal highway administration," "administration personnel," or "hazardous materials enforcement specialist" appears, it either means a peace officer or an enforcement member or a vehicle inspector of the motor carrier division of the department of state police and/or City of Warren Police Department, as applicable. 
(c)  Where MCS 63 appears, it means MC 9 and MC 9b. 
(d)  Where MCS 64 appears, it means MC 5. 
(e)  Exempt intra city zones and the regulations applicable to exempt intra city zones do not apply to this article. 
(2)  When a commercial motor vehicle is operated entirely within this state and not otherwise involved with the movement of interstate property or passengers in commerce, the definitions in this subsection apply. The definitions contained in those parts of 49 C.F.R. adopted in subsection (1)(a) apply to this article except for the following definitions as added or modified: 
Appeal board means the motor carrier safety appeal board created in section (1)(a). 
Bus means any motor vehicle designed for carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver. Bus does not include a school bus, a bus defined and certificated under the motor bus transportation act, Act No. 432 of the Public Acts of 1982, being sections 474.101 to 474.141 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a bus operated by a public transit agency operating under any of the following: 
(i)  A county, city, township, or village as provided by law, or other authority incorporated under Act No. 55 of the Public Acts of 1963, being sections 124.351 to 124.359 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Each authority and governmental agency incorporated under Act No. 55 of the Public Acts of 1963 has the exclusive jurisdiction to determine its own contemplated routes, hours of service, estimated transit vehicle miles, costs of public transportation services, and projected capital improvements or projects within its service area. 
(ii)  An authority incorporated under the metropolitan transportation authorities act of 1967, Act No. 204 of the Public Acts of 1967, being sections 124.401 to 124.426 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or that operates a transportation service pursuant to an interlocal agreement under the urban cooperation act of 1967, Act No. 7 of the Public Acts of the Extra Session of 1967, being sections 124.501 to 124.512 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(iii)  A contract entered into pursuant to Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of the Extra Session of 1967, being sections 124.531 to 124.536 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or Act No. 35 of the Public Acts of 1951, being sections 124.1 to 124.13 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(iv)  An authority incorporated under the public transportation authority act, Act No. 196 of the Public Acts of 1986, being sections 124.451 to 124.479 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a nonprofit corporation organized under the nonprofit corporation act, Act No. 162 of the Public Acts of 1982, being sections 450.2101 to 450.3192 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, that provides transportation services. 
(v)  An authority financing public improvements to transportation systems under the revenue bond act of 1933, Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, being sections 141.101 to 141.140 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
Commercial motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or used on public highways to transport passengers or property, except for a bus exempted as defined above, if the vehicle is one (1) or more of the following: 
(i)  Has either a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross weight or gross combination weight rating or an actual gross combination weight of ten thousand and one (10,001) or more pounds. 
(ii)  Is designed for carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver. 
(iii)  Is used in the transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180. 
Gross combination weight or GCW means the combined weight of a combination of vehicles and any load on those vehicles. 
Gross weight, gross vehicle weight, or GVW means the combined weight of a motor vehicle and any load on that vehicle. 
Hazardous material vehicle inspection or repair facility is a commercial enterprise that performs inspections, certification, testing, or repairs to commercial motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials as required by 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180 and includes motor carriers that perform the inspections, certification, testing, or repairs to vehicles owned or leased by the motor carrier. 
Motor carrier means a carrier of passengers or property in a commercial motor vehicle and includes a person who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle or that assigns employees to operate the vehicle. Motor carrier includes a motor carrier's agents, officers, and representatives, as well as employees responsible for hiring, supervising, training, assigning, or dispatching of drivers and employees concerned with the installation, inspection, and maintenance of motor vehicle equipment and accessories. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6a, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-751. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.11a.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-27. - Appeal board; members, power and duties. 
(1)  The motor carrier safety appeal board is created. The board shall consist of the director of the department of state police or his or her designee, the secretary of state or his or her designee, the director of the state transportation department or his or her designee, and two (2) representatives of the motor carrier industry chosen jointly by these three (3) department heads and the Michigan trucking association. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and decide applications for waivers from medical requirements of this article and the rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6b, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-752. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.11b.  
Sec. 37-28. - Qualifications of bus, truck, truck tractor operators, etc. 
A person shall not drive, and an individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not employ, engage, hire, or contract for hire any person to operate, drive, or maintain, any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles unless the person meets the qualifications as set forth by this article and the department of state police under the authority of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6c, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-753. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12a.  
Sec. 37-29. - Safety standards for drivers or operators and for equipment and devices. 
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not operate any truck, truck tractor, or trailer or permit any person to drive any bus, truck, or truck tractor, or certain other motor vehicles which does not meet driver or operator safety standards, safety standards for equipment and devices on buses, trucks, truck tractors, or trailers, or certain other motor vehicles and the loading and unloading thereof as set forth in this article and rules promulgated by the department of state police. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6d, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-754. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12b.  
Sec. 37-30. - Safety standards for operational maintenance of facilities for transporting persons or property. 
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not operate or maintain any facility used in connection with the transportation of persons or property by any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer which facility does not meet safety standards for the operation and maintenance of such facility as set forth in this article or rules promulgated by the department of state police. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6e, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-755. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12c.  
Sec. 37-31. - Drivers; qualifications. 
(1)  A person shall not drive a commercial motor vehicle unless he or she is qualified to drive that vehicle. A motor carrier shall not require or permit a person to drive a commercial motor vehicle unless that person is qualified to drive that vehicle. 
(2)  A person is qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle if he or she meets all of the requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391 except for the following circumstances: 
(a)  In the case of intrastate transportation, meets one (1) or more of the following: 
(i)  Is at least eighteen (18) years old when transporting intrastate property or passengers, except as provided in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii). 
(ii)  Is at least sixteen (16) years of age when acting as a farm vehicle driver as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5. 
(iii)  Is at least twenty-one (21) years old when transporting hazardous materials in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to the provisions of 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180. This subparagraph does not apply to a vehicle eligible for and displaying valid farm plates with a gross vehicle weight of forty thousand (40,000) pounds or less if the driver is eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
(b)  In the case of intrastate transportation, is eligible for and displays a valid medical waiver card or grandfather rights card issued in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6f, 5-8-01) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 37-756. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12d.  
Sec. 37-32. - Drivers; medical examiner's certificate. 
A person shall not drive a commercial motor vehicle unless he or she is physically qualified to do so and, except as provided by this article, has on his or her person the original, or a photographic copy, of a valid medical examiner's certificate that he or she is physically qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6g, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-757. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12i.  
Sec. 37-33. - Drivers; medical examinations. 
(1)  Except as provided in this article, the following persons must be medically examined and certified in accordance with 49 C.F.R. 391.43 as physically qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle: 
(a)  Any person who has not been medically examined and certified as physically qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle. 
(b)  Any driver who has not been medically examined and certified as qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle during the preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
(c)  Any driver whose ability to perform his or her normal duties has been impaired by a physical or mental injury or disease. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6h, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-758. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12j.  
Sec. 37-34. - Physical disqualifications; waivers. 
(1)  A person who is not physically qualified to drive under 49 C.F.R. 391.41 and who is otherwise qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle may drive a commercial motor vehicle if the motor carrier division of the department of state police or the appeal board has granted a waiver to that person. 
(2)  A waiver is valid for not more than two (2) years, and a waiver may be renewed upon submission of a new application in accordance with state law. 
(3)  Any individual who has obtained a waiver shall have the waiver letter from the motor carrier division of the state police or a legible copy of it in his or her possession when he or she drives a commercial motor vehicle or is otherwise on duty. 
(4)  The motor carrier division of the department of state police may suspend a waiver at any time. The motor carrier division may revoke a waiver after the person to whom it was issued is given notice of the proposed revocation and a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6i, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-759. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12k.  
Sec. 37-35. - Waivers, medical qualifications; drug testing; grandfather rights; preexisting medical conditions. 
(1)  The provisions in this article pertaining to an intrastate driver's medical qualifications do not apply to any driver who: 
(a)  Has been a regularly employed driver of the motor carrier for a continuous period which began on or before June 10, 1984. 
(b)  Has continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor carrier. 
(c)  Is otherwise qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle under section 37-31. 
(d)  Has made application to the appeal board claiming grandfathering rights. 
(e)  Has received a waiver of medical qualification from the motor carrier division of the department of state police. The "medical waiver - grandfather rights" card, motor carrier division form number MC-22, shall be carried at all times on the person of the driver while he or she is operating a commercial motor vehicle. The original "medical waiver - grandfather rights", motor carrier division form number MC-25, will be retained in the driver's qualification file in accordance with state law. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), the provisions of this article pertaining to random, reasonable cause, and post-accident drug testing apply to all drivers granted grand fathering rights under this section. 
(3)  Grandfather rights shall remain valid until December 31, 2032. 
(4)  The exemption from medical qualifications under this section applies only to preexisting conditions before the effective date of the amendatory act that added this subsection. Any medical condition that would normally disqualify a driver under this article automatically voids any grandfather rights. Any driver who develops a normally disqualifying medical condition after being issued a grandfather card must return the grandfather card to the appeal board and apply for a medical waiver as provided in section 37-34. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6j, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-760. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12n.  
Sec. 37-36. - Bus drivers, waivers, medical qualifications; drug testing; grandfather rights, preexisting medical conditions; exemptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this article pertaining to an intrastate driver's medical qualifications do not apply to a bus driver who: 
(a)  Has been a regularly employed driver of the motor carrier for a continuous period which began on or before March 3, 1991. 
(b)  Has continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor carrier. 
(c)  Is otherwise qualified to drive a bus under section 37-31. 
(d)  Has made application to the motor carrier division of the department of state police claiming grandfathering rights. 
(e)  Has received a waiver of medical qualification from the motor carrier division of the department of state police. The medical waiver grandfather rights card, motor carrier division form number MC-22, shall be carried at all times on the person of the driver while he or she is operating a motor vehicle under the applicability of these rules. The original medical waiver grandfather rights, motor carrier division form MC-25, will be retained in the driver qualification file in accordance with state law. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), the provisions of this article pertaining to random, reasonable cause, and post-accident drug testing apply to all drivers granted grandfathering rights under this section. 
(3)  Grandfather rights shall remain valid until December 31, 2032. 
(4)  The exemption from medical qualifications under this section applies only to preexisting conditions before the effective date of the amendatory act that added this subsection. Any medical condition that would normally disqualify a driver under this article automatically voids any grandfather rights. Any driver who develops a normally disqualifying medical condition after being issued a grandfather card must return the grandfather card to the appeal board and apply for a medical waiver pursuant to MCL 480.12k. 
(5)  The provisions of 49 C.F.R., section 391.68, excepting private motor carriers of passengers (nonbusiness) from certain federal regulations shall apply also to motor carriers of passengers (nonbusiness) operating wholly within this city. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6k, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-761. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12o.  
Sec. 37-37. - Farm vehicle drivers; exception. 
The provisions of 49 C.F.R. 391.41 to 391.45 to the extent that they require a driver to be medically qualified or examined and to have a medical examiner's certificate on his or her person do not apply to a farm vehicle driver as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6l, 5-8-01) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 37-762. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12q.  
Sec. 37-38. - Mechanics; applicability of article. 
(1)  The provisions of this article, except 49 C.F.R. part 382, do not apply to a mechanic who services motor carrier equipment during the intrastate operation of this equipment when all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The vehicle or combinations are not being used to transport passengers or property or any for hire or compensated transportation including paid haulage when the units are empty. 
(b)  The mechanic is not otherwise being used as a regularly employed driver. 
(c)  The mechanic is test driving a loaded commercial motor vehicle within 10 miles of the repair facility. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6m, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-763. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12r.  
Sec. 37-39. - Utility, telephone, and cable television employees; applicability of article. 
(1)  This article does not apply to utility, telephone, and cable television company service employees if those employees: 
(a)  Are not otherwise being used as a regularly employed driver. 
(b)  Are not used to operate a bus or a commercial motor vehicle, except a motor home, having a gross vehicle weight rating or a gross combination weight rating of twenty-six thousand and one (26,001) or more pounds, a motor vehicle towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or a motor vehicle carrying hazardous material and on which is required to be posted a placard as defined and required under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6n, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-764. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12s.  
Sec. 37-40. - Truck tractors and semitrailers; underride guard, requirements; asphalt hauling vehicles exempt; construction of vehicle to meet compliance with section. 
(1)  In addition to the requirements of 49 C.F.R. 393.86, a truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer than fifty (50) feet whose frame or body extends more than thirty-six (36) inches beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than thirty (30) inches above the roadway shall not be operated on the highways of this state unless equipped with an underride guard on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The underride guard shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground clearance of twenty-two (22) inches, as measured with the vehicle empty and on level ground. 
(b)  Extend to within four (4) inches of the lateral extremities of the trailer on both left and right sides. 
(c)  Be substantially constructed and firmly attached. 
(2)  An asphalt hauling vehicle that is required to be equipped with an underride guard under this section shall be exempt from that requirement of this section if the underride guard prevents the vehicle from being attached to an asphalt paving machine. As used in this section, "asphalt hauling vehicle" means a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer specifically designed for attachment to asphalt paving machines and which is used for hauling asphalt paving materials. 
(3)  A commercial motor vehicle constructed and maintained so that the body chassis or other parts of the vehicle afford the rear end protection contemplated by this section is in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6o, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-765. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12t.  
Sec. 37-41. - Applicability of federal regulations to commercial motor vehicles, exceptions. 
(1)  The rules in 49 C.F.R. part 395 apply to all drivers of commercial motor vehicles as defined in section 37-26 except: 
(a)  Farm vehicle drivers as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5. 
(b)  Any driver of a public utility service vehicle when being used in cases of emergency. As used in this subdivision, "emergency" means any instance of loss of public utility service due to an unforeseen circumstance, a natural disaster, or an act of God. A declaration of emergency by a public official is not required to constitute an emergency under this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6p, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-766. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12u.  
Sec. 37-42. - Drivers; hour limitations on driving, applicability. 
(1)  A motor carrier shall not permit or require a driver of a commercial motor vehicle, regardless of the number of motor carriers using the driver's services, to drive for any period after having been on duty sixty (60) hours in any seven (7) consecutive days if the employing motor carrier does not operate every day in the week, or having been on duty seventy (70) hours in any period of eight (8) consecutive days if the employing motor carrier operates commercial motor vehicles every day of the week. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to the following drivers if their total driving time does not exceed forty (40) hours in any period of seven (7) consecutive days: 
(a)  Any driver-salesperson. 
(b)  Any driver delivering home heating fuel from the months of October through April in a commercial motor vehicle of less than forty thousand (40,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
(c)  Any driver involved with the pickup or delivery of crude oil products during the time when weight limitations are imposed due to seasonal climatic changes. 
(d)  Any driver of a commercial motor vehicle engaged in seasonal construction related activities within a one hundred (100) air mile radius of the normal work reporting location. 
(e)  Any driver of a commercial motor vehicle which is being used in the delivery of beverages to retail businesses. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6q, 5-8-01) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 37-767. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12v.  
Sec. 37-43. - Consecutive hours on duty; applicability. 
The twelve (12) consecutive hours on duty requirement contained in 49 C.F.R. 395.8(l)(1)(ii) shall not apply to intrastate drivers of commercial motor vehicles described in section 37-42(1)(b), (d), and (e) who return to the work reporting location, and are released from work within fifteen (15) consecutive hours of being on duty. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6r, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-768. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.12w.  
Sec. 37-44. - Exceptions. 
(1)  This article and the rules promulgated under this article do not apply to: 
(a)  A semitrailer or truck used exclusively for storage purposes. 
(b)  A commercial motor vehicle owned and operated by a unit of government or its employees, except as otherwise provided in this article, and except for the following parts of 49 C.F.R.: part 382, controlled substances and alcohol use and testing; part 391, qualification of drivers; part 392, driving of motor vehicles; and part 393, parts and accessories necessary for safe operation. 
(c)  A self-propelled implement of husbandry or a drawn implement of husbandry if: 
(i)  The implement of husbandry is as defined by section 21 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being section 257.21 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(ii)  The motor vehicle hauling the implement of husbandry does not exceed a maximum speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour if the drawn or self-propelled implement of husbandry being drawn is not equipped with brakes or coupling devices, or both, that meet the standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. 393.40 adopted by this article. 
(iii)  It does not exceed any other implement or component design maximum speed limitation. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6s, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-769. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.13.  
Sec. 37-45. - Trailers or trailer-vehicle combinations; surge brakes equipment for intrastate operation. 
Trailers with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds or less or trailer-vehicle combinations with an actual gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or less may be equipped with surge brakes for intrastate operation as allowed by section 705(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.705. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 6t, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-46. - Rules and regulations; rescission. 
(1)  The department of state police may promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary to the accomplishment of the purpose of this article. 
(2)  The administrative rules promulgated pursuant to the authority granted under subsection (1) that were filed with the secretary of state on June 22, 1984 and any subsequent revisions to those rules are hereby rescinded on the effective date of the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6u, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-770. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.14.  
Sec. 37-47. - Inspection of cargo or vehicle. 
A police officer may, without a warrant, require the cargo carrying portion of a vehicle to be opened for inspection of the cargo, any object within that portion of the vehicle, or the interior of the vehicle or any compartment within the interior of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6v, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-771. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.16.  
Sec. 37-48. - Violations; penalties; motor vehicles, stopping and inspecting, notice to appear, receipt of inspection. 
(1)  Except as provided in sections 37-49, 37-50, and 37-51, any person, driver, or operator who violates this article or a rule promulgated under this article, or an owner or user of a bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles or an officer or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by a court that is the owner or user of a vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or drive a bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles in violation of this article or a rule promulgated under this article, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
(2)  A peace officer or an officer of the motor carrier division of the department of state police, upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this article or a rule promulgated under this article, may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear for that violation. If a motor vehicle is inspected by breaking the load seal, then the peace officer shall give to the driver a signed receipt of inspection and the peace officer shall be responsible for reapplying a Michigan Department of Transportation seal. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6w, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-772. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.17.  
Sec. 37-49. - Serious safety defect; requiring or permitting driver or operator to operate with defect; fine; definition. 
(1)  A driver or operator or an owner or user of any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles or any officer or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court that is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate a vehicle with a serious safety defect is subject to a civil fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each violation. 
(2)  As used in this section, "serious safety defect" means a violation of this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article relative to brakes, tires, steering, coupling devices, headlights, taillights, brake lights, and turn signals that results in the vehicle being placed out of service. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6x, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-773. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.17b.  
Sec. 37-50. - Transportation of packages, hazardous materials; violations; penalties. 
(1)  A driver or operator or an owner or user of a bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, or an officer or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation, or association, or their lessees or receivers appointed by a court that is the owner or user of a vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or drive a bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, that violates this article or a rule promulgated under this article if the vehicle is transporting a package required to be marked or labeled under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(2)  An officer, employee, owner, or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation, or association, or their lessees or receivers appointed by a court that is the owner or user of any hazardous materials vehicle inspection or repair facility that violates a section of this article, or a rule promulgated under this article, related to the transportation of hazardous materials, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 6y, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-51. - Compliance and shut down orders; issuance, contents; vehicles in transit; violations, penalties. 
(1)  As used in this section: 
Immediate destination means the next scheduled stop of a commercial motor vehicle already in motion where the cargo on board can be safely secured. 
Person means an individual, driver, or employee or a firm, motor carrier, lessee, lessor, association, partnership, or corporation, and their affiliated or related successors, that undertakes to control, direct, conduct, or otherwise perform transportation by commercial motor vehicle upon the public highways of this state. 
Shut down order means a court order issued to a motor carrier upon proof shown of unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard. 
Unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard shall be defined as any condition of commercial motor vehicle, employee, or commercial motor vehicle operation which creates, causes, or compounds the substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, or severe personal injury may occur if not discontinued immediately. 
(2)  Upon determination that the continued operation of commercial motor vehicles by a person upon the highways of this city poses an unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard to the public safety, the police shall issue a compliance order. The order may direct a person to make certain changes, repairs, or alterations to the person's vehicles or operations, to comply with the laws of this state. In making an order, restrictions shall not be imposed on any employee or person beyond that required to abate the hazard. Any vehicle or driver operating during the specified time period of the order shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and rules. 
(3)  A compliance order shall include the name and address of the person and the chief operating officer of the person, the reason or reasons for the order, and the requirements or conditions that must be met for rescission of the order. The order shall also include a statement that the person has thirty (30) days to comply with the order. If the thirty-day time limit expires and the person is not in compliance with the order, the police may seek a shut down order from a circuit court. 
(4)  Upon petition to the circuit court having jurisdiction by the police, the court may issue a shut down order. The order shall direct a vehicle or vehicles or employee or employees out of service from further operations, or shall direct a person to cease all or part of the person's commercial motor vehicle operation. In making such an order, restrictions shall not be imposed on any employee or person beyond that required to abate the hazard. 
(5)  A shut down order shall include the name and address of the person and the chief operating officer of the person, the reason or reasons for the order, the requirements or conditions that must be met for rescission of the order, and a statement of the right to appeal. 
(6)  An order to any person to cease all or part of its operation shall not prevent vehicles in transit at the time the order is served from proceeding to their immediate destinations, unless that vehicle or person is specifically ordered out of service. However, vehicles and drivers proceeding to their immediate destination shall be subject to compliance upon arrival. 
(7)  A person who fails to comply with a shut down order is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. A person or vehicle found operating on the highways of this state while under a shut down order shall be immediately stopped, and impounded or arrested. The owner or lessee of the vehicle shall be responsible for any costs incurred during impoundment. The vehicle shall be released upon the court's determination that the order has been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6z, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-775. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.17d.  
Sec. 37-52. - Venue. 
Any motor vehicle, driver, or operator who is situated or passes through the city in violation of this article or a rule promulgated by the state police may be prosecuted by the city attorney's office. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6aa, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-776. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.18.  
Sec. 37-53. - Incidents involving transportation of hazardous materials, death or hospitalization of persons, unintentional release of hazardous materials; notification to proper authorities. 
(1)  Immediately following any of the following occurrences involving the transportation of hazardous materials, the owner, driver, or lessee, or representative of the owner, driver, or lessee, shall notify the motor carrier division of the department of state police and the fire department of the incident and the known details regarding the incident: 
(a)  A person is killed. 
(b)  A person is hospitalized due to an injury. 
(c)  A person is hospitalized due to hazardous material contamination or exposure. 
(d)  There is an unintentional release of hazardous materials that affects highway transportation safety or is caused, or believed to be caused, by a violation of the law or a rule promulgated by the state police. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, "notify the motor carrier division of the department of state police" includes contacting the local state police post, the operations section of the department of state police, or the motor carrier division headquarters by telephone, facsimile machine, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6bb, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-777. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.19.  
Sec. 37-54. - Transportation of combustible liquids by vehicle combinations, equipment requirements; device; location of information on device; applicability; transportation of flammable liquids or gases. 
(1)  A truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and a trailer, or pulling two (2) semi trailers, shall not transport a combustible liquid unless the vehicle combination meets the following requirements: 
(a)  Is equipped with a device that restricts the horizontal and vertical rotation of the dolly assemblage of the vehicle combination in a manner that maintains the longitudinal tracking of the dolly and semitrailer in a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer combination, or the dolly and the truck in a truck and trailer combination. This device shall be welded to the vehicle in a workmanlike manner, and the efficiency of a weld shall not be less than eighty-five (85) percent of the mechanical properties of the adjacent metal in the chassis. 
(b)  Is equipped with stops in the spring hangers of each semitrailer and trailer in the vehicle combination in a manner that improves the stability of the vehicle combination by reducing the free play of the leaf spring suspension to a maximum of ¾ of an inch when the spring passes from tension to compression. 
(2)  The owner of the semitrailer or trailer to which the device described in subsection (1) is attached shall keep on file in their principal place of business the following information: 
(a)  Specifications and plans of the device. 
(b)  Name of the manufacturer of the device. 
(c)  Date of installation of the device. 
(d)  An individual manufacturer identification number which is stamped or permanently affixed to the device. 
(3)  The information required in subsection (2) shall be kept by the vehicle's owner and shall be transferred to the new owner if the vehicle is sold, or may be destroyed if the vehicle is retired from service or scrapped. 
(4)  The requirements specified in subsections (2) and (3) apply to devices affixed to vehicles on or after the effective date of this article. 
(5)  Commercial motor vehicles used to transport flammable liquids, flammable gases, or compressed flammable gases shall also comply with section 722a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being section 257.722a of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6cc, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-778. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.20.  
Sec. 37-55. - Inconsistent ordinances or resolutions; promulgation of inconsistent rules by state agency prohibited, applicability; definitions. 
(1)  The city, shall not adopt or enforce an ordinance or resolution that is inconsistent with state law or any rule promulgated pursuant to 1963 PA 181 as amended that being MCL 480.11 a et seq. 
(2)  A state agency shall not promulgate rules inconsistent with state law. This subsection does not apply to rules promulgated under the fire prevention code, Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of 1941, being sections 29.1 to 29.33 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, by the state fire safety board with respect to the transportation of liquefied petroleum gas. 
(3)  As used in this section, "inconsistent" means a rule or ordinance that is more permissive than the provisions of this article, or is more restrictive, or requires more action, equipment, or permits, or prevents or obstructs compliance with the provisions of 1963 PA 181 as amended that being MCL 480.11a et seq. 
(4)  The owner or operator of a commercial motor vehicle shall not be issued more than one (1) citation for each violation of a code or ordinance regulating the operation of a commercial motor vehicle and substantially corresponding to a provision of sections 683 to 725a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.683 to 257.725a, within a twenty-four-hour period. If the owner or operator of a commercial motor vehicle is issued a citation by the city for an equipment violation that does not result in the vehicle being placed out of service, the court shall dismiss the citation if the owner or operator of that commercial motor vehicle provides written proof to the court within fourteen (14) days after the citation is issued showing that the defective equipment indicated in the citation has been repaired. 
(5)  In order to be classified as a motor carrier enforcement officer, a police officer must have training equal to the minimum training requirements, including any annual training updates, established by the department of state police for an officer of the motor carrier division of the department of state police. A police officer who has received training equal to these minimum training requirements before May 15, 2000, is considered a motor carrier enforcement officer for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6dd, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-779. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 480.21.  
Sec. 37-56. - Transfer of hazardous materials on highways, roads, or streets prohibited; exceptions. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), a person, driver, owner, carrier, lessee, or lessor shall not transfer or allow to be transferred a hazardous material from a cargo tank, portable tank, or any other container to any cargo tank, portable tank, fuel tank, or any other container on a highway, road, street, or alley within this state. 
(2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to the following transfer situations: 
(a)  Fueling machinery or equipment for construction, farm, and maintenance use. 
(b)  Fueling emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Under emergency conditions if the transfer is made in a safe manner. The local fire chief, the state fire marshal, or a hazardous materials officer of the motor carrier division of the department of state police may prohibit a transfer pursuant to their respective authority under the fire prevention code, Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of 1941, being sections 29.1 to 29.33 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(Ord. No. 80-520, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 80-568, § 6ee, 5-8-01) 
Note— Formerly § 37-780.  
Secs. 37-57—37-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WRECKERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, adopted June 9, 2015, effective June 29, 2015, amended Ch. 37, Art. III, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 80-380, 3-13-90; Ord. No. 80-430, § 1, 4-13-93; Ord. No. 80-562, § 1, 8-9-00; Ord. No. 80-662, § 1, 11-13-07. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire generally, Ch. 39. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-551. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
(1)  Abandoned vehicle means any or all of the following: 
a.  A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner. 
b.  A vehicle that has remained on public property for a period of not less than forty-eight (48) hours, or on a state trunk line highway as described in MCL 247.651 as follows: 
(i)  If a valid registration plate is affixed to the vehicle, for a period of not less than eighteen (18) hours. 
(ii)  If a valid registration plate is not affixed to the vehicle. 
(2)  Dry run means that upon arrival no service for wrecker is required. 
(3)  Emergency towing means the towing, carrying, pushing, or otherwise transporting for a fee any motor vehicle, disabled in any manner, from any road, street or freeway in the city or from the scene of any accident. 
(4)  Standard tow, for rate purposes only, means the removal of any wrecked, disabled, impounded or abandoned vehicle from the traveled portion or berm of a highway by a service truck or a single crane tow truck. A standard tow shall include the removal of all debris, clean up, sweeping and administering oil dry if needed from the street. 
(5)  Active police tow list, means a list maintained by the police department containing the names of those wreckers authorized by city council and licensed by the city to respond to requests for the towing of vehicles made by the police department. 
(6)  Wrecker vehicle means a truck with a hoist, towing apparatus, or self-loading flatbed, or any combination of these items, permanently affixed to the truck, used to transport not more than two (2) vehicles, except for a motor vehicle equipped with a fifth wheel or a motor vehicle that tows the second vehicle on a trailer. 
(7)  Wrecker or wrecker owner means a person or entity engaged in the business of, or offering services of, a wrecker vehicle or towing service, whereby motor vehicles, including disabled vehicles, abandoned vehicles, or impounded vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one (1) place to another by the use of a motor vehicle adapted to and designated for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-552. - Duties of licensee. 
All wrecker licenses under this article shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Markings. Wrecker vehicles shall bear the name and address of the owner in letters painted on the vehicle not less than three (3) inches in height on each side of the vehicle and not lower than the bottom edge of the door. A licensed wrecker plate shall at all times be prominently displayed on the rear of each wrecker vehicle. Wrecker vehicles shall not display the words "police towing" or other similar language which indicates the vehicle is owned or operated by the police department. 
(2)  Equipment. Wrecker owners shall keep and maintain towing equipment which is adequate to perform such towing service in a reasonably workmanlike manner. All vehicles shall be equipped with warning lights required under state law. 
(3)  Rate schedule. No person performing towing or storage service on behalf of or at the direction of a Warren Police Officer on such wrecked, impounded, disabled or abandoned vehicles shall charge fees in excess of the following standard rates: 
a.  Towing rates: 
i.  Standard tow (including dolly or flatbed) ..... $145.00 
ii.  Vehicle in excess of 10,000 pounds ..... 175.00 
iii.  Vehicle in excess of 60,000 pounds ..... 325.00 
iv.  Tractor/trailer, empty ..... 325.00 
v.  Tractor/trailer, loaded ..... 375.00 
vi.  Hourly labor rate ..... 45.00 
vii.  Mileage charge—As determined by council resolution. 
viii  Administrative fee ..... 50.00 
ix.  Removal of all debris, clean up, sweeping, and administering oil dry shall not exceed that which may be allowed by the carrier insurance policy or the actual retail cost whichever may be less. 
b.  Daily storage rates: 
i.  Motorcycles and cars ..... $20.00 
ii.  Tractor/trailer ..... 30.00 
iii.  Boats/motor homes 22 feet or less ..... 30.00 
iv.  Boats/motor homes over 22 feet ..... 45.00 
v.  Storage of vehicle over 10,000 pounds ..... 30.00 
vii.  Mopeds ..... 10.00 
c.  [Additional rates.] An additional fifteen (15) percent may be charged for services rendered on any Sunday or legal holiday. 
d.  Vehicles placed on hold. Rates for vehicles placed on hold by the police or vehicles seized for drug or alcohol forfeiture are capped at six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
e.  Crime Victim Rights Act. Rates for vehicles towed from victims of crimes defined pursuant to the Crime Victim's Rights Act, Act 87 of 1985, MCL 780.751 et seq. as amended shall include: 
i.  Towing fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and may be waived/paid by the city, if approved by council. In the event the towing fee exceeds the standard fees normally assessed for a routine tow, the police commissioner is authorized to grant additional fees upon submission of proof by the wrecker owner and determination by the police commissioner that a deviation from the fifty dollars ($50.00) fee is warranted. 
ii.  No fee shall be generated for storage of the vehicle during the period where there is a police hold in effect. 
iii.  If the owner or secured party fails to pick up the vehicle within seventy-two (72) hours after removal from the police hold, the storage rates listed in subsection (b) may start accruing after the seveny-two (72) hour period has elapsed. This subsection supercedes any other fees set forth in this section. 
(4)  Liability. The wrecker owner shall assume all responsibility for all liability and shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from such liability for damages (or any loss to vehicles or contents while being towed or stored due to theft, vandalism or other damage), and for all personal injuries occurring to any of the wrecker owner's employees or other persons. 
(5)  Records. The police department shall maintain an approved records and claim check system to assure release of vehicles to the rightful owner or authorized person. 
(6)  Storage of towed vehicles. All vehicles towed at the request of the police department must be dropped and stored at a secured storage lot zoned in accordance with the provisions of section 17.02 of the zoning ordinance and which storage lot has been granted site plan approval pursuant to section 22.16 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-553. - Release of abandoned or abandoned scrap vehicles; right to a hearing; accrued towing and storage fees; and public sale. 
A person picking up an abandoned vehicle under this section must show valid driver's license and vehicle title/registration. The rights and duties relating to abandoned or abandoned scrap vehicles are set forth in Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.252 et seq. and as amended (see also MCL 257.252a and 257.252b). 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-554. - Removal of vehicle from public or private property to place of safekeeping. 
(a)  The rights and duties relating to removal of vehicle from public or private property to a place of safekeeping are set forth in Public Act 300 of 1949, MCL 257.252 et seq. and as amended. (see also MCL 257.252d) 
(b)  The owner of a vehicle towed and stored at the request of the police department may claim the vehicle from storage as follows: 
(1)  Provided there is no hold on the vehicle, the owner may obtain release of the vehicle from storage upon presentation of proof of ownership and payment of the towing and storage fees to the agency storing the vehicle. 
(2)  Vehicles held due to a Motor Vehicle Code violation shall be released only upon the payment of towing and storage fees and the repair of all violations so that the vehicle meets minimum safety requirements. 
(3)  No fees shall be assessed for owners of vehicles or their designee recovering personal property during business hours. 
(c)  No person shall refuse to promptly release from storage any vehicle to the owner or his designated representative if he has followed the requirements for release set forth in this section. In addition, all persons picking up a vehicle must show a valid driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-555. - Emergency towing; written permission required. 
No person shall perform any emergency towing without first having obtained written permission, on forms approved by the police department, from the driver or owner of the vehicle or until the police officer of the city investigating the wrecked or disabled vehicle shall have completed his or her investigation and has given written permission for the emergency towing service. A copy of the completed permission form shall be given to the authorized person. Any person performing emergency towing shall maintain a record of completed permission forms of all emergency towing for a period of six (6) months. Completed forms must show total fees charged for services rendered. In addition, forms should list to whom vehicle was released with driver's license numbers and other appropriate identification. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-556. - Solicitation of business. 
No wrecker vehicle may respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the purpose of towing vehicles unless specifically called there by the police or person involved in the accident or emergency. This section is intended to prohibit wrecker owners from soliciting business at the scenes of accidents and emergencies and shall not be construed to prohibit any wrecker owner from contracting with any person, firm or corporation, provided the wrecker owner, his agents and employees do not solicit towing contracts at the scenes of accidents or emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Secs. 37-557—37-570. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 37-571. - License required. 
No wrecker vehicle or wrecker owner shall operate any or cause to be operated any towing services in the City without first procuring a license issued by the city clerk as required in this Article and Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-572. - Application. 
Any person desiring to perform towing work in the city shall submit an application for a wrecker vehicle/tow service license to the city clerk, which shall include: 
(1)  The name of the owner, home and business address, home and business phone, and name under which the business will operate; 
(2)  If applicable, the location, size and security features of the storage lot on which towed vehicles will be stored in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 37-552(6); 
(3)  The location, description and hourly availability of the wrecker vehicle owned or operated by the applicant; 
(4)  The location to which the public must come to claim stored vehicles; 
(5)  A complete listing of the insurance policies, carriers and agents the owner would place into effect upon licensing approval. 
(6)  A complete list of all employees who will act as drivers of any wrecker vehicles owned or operated by the applicant, with verification of each driver holding the required, proper Commercial Driver's License. 
(7)  A statement that, pursuant to Public Act No. 391 of 1919 (MCL 256.541 et seq.), the wrecker owner will accept responsibility for any and all personal property left in towed or stored vehicle, along with a description of the place he or she would use to adequately protect the property left in towed or stored vehicles. 
(8)  The requirements set forth in section 18-5 of Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-573. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a license under this division, the city clerk shall refer the same to the police commissioner who shall conduct an investigation to determine the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application. 
(b)  Upon completion of the investigation, and review by the building department, the police commissioner shall forward a copy of the application for a wrecker vehicle service license to the city clerk, along with a recommendation for approval or disapproval of a license and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. 
(c)  Upon receiving the application, the city clerk, on behalf of the city, shall determine whether or not the applicant has complied with the necessary standards and criteria. If he or she finds the applicant qualified, then the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a wrecker vehicle service license and forward this information to the city council if the applicant desires to be considered for the active police tow list. 
(d)  If applicant desires to be considered for police towing, then applicant shall submit to city council their complete file for review by city council's towing committee and request for appointment to the police towing master list. 
(1)  The city council may, with a recommendation of the towing committee appoint from this master list to the active police tow list. 
(2)  All appointments/reappointments to the active police towing list shall be for a period of one (1) year and subject to annual renewal by city council. Appointments/reappointments shall take place at the second council meeting in March unless postponed by city council. Applications shall be filed with the council office no later than the first business day in February. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall this license be transferrable without city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-574. - Fee 
A license fee under this division shall be in the amount set forth in section 18-18. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-575. - Insurance required. 
No wrecker license shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the city clerk the following insurance policies: 
(1)  Garage keeper's policy. A garage keeper's legal liability policy covering fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with each vehicle suffering damage being deemed a separate claim. 
(2)  Garage liability policy. A garage keeper's legal liability policy covering the operation of the owner's business, equipment or other vehicles for any bodily injury or property damage. 
(3)  Notice of change or cancellation. Each policy required under this section must contain an endorsement by the carrier providing ninety (90) days notice to both the city clerk and the insured if there is any material change or cancellation. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-576. - Expiration 
The license year shall terminate on the thirty-first day of March at midnight, next after the issuance of the license. The expiration date of each license shall be indicated on the face of the license. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
DIVISION 3. - POLICE DEPARTMENT TOWING LIST 
 
Sec. 37-577. - Authorization. 
The police department shall maintain a list (Active Police Tow List) of active wrecker vehicles that are authorized by the city council to perform police authorized towing. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-578. - Requirements. 
The wrecker or wrecker owner shall make application to the city council for inclusion on the police department towing list. The number of wreckers or wrecker owners on the active police tow list shall be recommended annually by the police commissioner based on the needs of the department; recommended by the towing committee and approved by city council. No wrecker shall be included on the active police tow list unless it complies with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  The wrecker or wrecker owner shall be licensed by the city to perform towing service in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances and this article. 
(2)  The wrecker or wrecker owner shall present information to the police department regarding the location, size and security features of the storage lot on which towed vehicles will be stored. 
(3)  The wrecker or wrecker owner presents proof to the police department that all vehicles towed at the request of the police department shall be dropped and stored at a secured storage lot zoned in accordance with the provisions of section 17.02 of the zoning ordinance and which lot has been granted site plan approval pursuant to section 22.16 of the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Response Time. The response time for wreckers should be speedy and shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes under normal conditions. If the response time is greater than thirty (30) minutes, the police department may disregard the call for service and contact the next wrecker in the rotation. In addition, the wrecker that was terminated on the call will still be charged for the tow on the rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-579. - Removal from active police tow list. 
The police commissioner shall recommend to city council with the recommendation of the towing committee the removal of any wrecker assigned to the active police tow list for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The number of wreckers or wrecker owners on the list exceeds the needs of the police department. 
(2)  The police department is not satisfied with the services of the wrecker or wrecker owner and/or their employees, or with the cooperation that the department has received from the wrecker or wrecker owner. 
(3)  Any of the grounds listed in section 37-578, section 37-582(1) and Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Any other justifiable cause related to the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 2, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-580. - Suspension from the active police tow list. 
(1)  Duration. The police commissioner may recommend to the Towing Committee and to city council, suspension of any wrecker or wrecker owner assigned to the active police tow list for any of the grounds set forth in this article and Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(a)  First time violation, suspension up to twenty-one (21) days; 
(b)  Second violation within a two (2) year period from the first suspension, suspension up to ninety (90) days; 
(c)  Third violation within a two (2) year period from the first suspension, suspension up to one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 3, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-581. - Notification and hearing for removal or suspension from the active police tow list. 
The procedure for notification and hearing for removal or suspension from the active police tow list shall be described in section 37-582. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 3, 6-9-15)  
DIVISION 4. - DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION—IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37-582. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
(1)  Standards for denial, suspension, revocation. The city clerk may deny, suspend, or revoke any license under this article, when the clerk finds: 
(a)  That the license was secured by fraud or by the concealment of a material fact by the wrecker vehicle owner and such fact, if known, would have caused the refusal to issue a license; 
(b)  That the wrecker vehicle owner has violated any of the requirements or regulations established under this article; 
(c)  That the licensee paid, in the form of a gratuity, to any third person not involved in an accident for information as to the location of an accident; 
(d)  Any causes set forth in chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Notification and appeal. Notification of denial, revocation or suspension shall be in writing and delivered by first class mail to the address listed on the license application. The licensee shall be notified of: 
(a)  The nature of the violation; 
(b)  The proposed action and the reasons for the proposed action; 
(c)  That the licensee has a right to a hearing before city council with the recommendation of the towing committee regarding the proposed action, provided a written request is filed with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days following the delivery or mailing of the notice of the notice of denial, revocation or suspension. 
(3)  Hearing and decision for revocation, suspension or termination. The hearing before city council with the recommendation of the towing committee shall be limited to determining by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not the city clerk's determination as set forth in the notice of revocation, suspension or termination was in accordance with grounds set forth in this article and Chapter 18. 
(a)  Procedure. Any hearing before city council shall comply with the following procedures: 
i.  The administrative hearing shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
ii.  The licensee may present evidence and testimony, may cross-examine witnesses, and may be represented by an attorney. 
iii.  City council may reverse or affirm the determination to: issue or to deny the issuance of a license; revoke a license; or to suspend a license. 
iv.  City council may grant or reinstate the license. 
v.  City council shall submit to the licensee a written statement of its findings, determination, and specific grounds for affirming or reversing the termination. 
(b)  No person, wrecker or wrecker owner shall operate any business during any time when the wrecker/tow service license has been denied, suspended, or revoked or cancelled. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 4, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 37-583. - Conflict and severability. 
(1)  Conflict. In case of a conflict between the provisions of this article and Chapter 18, which cannot be resolved by construing them to be complementary or supplementary to each other, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(2)  Severability . The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be independent and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of all provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby declared that such provisions would have been passed independently of such provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this chapter be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-730, § 4, 6-9-15)  
Secs. 37-584—37-590. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING LOTS AND STATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-591. - Defined. 
"Open parking station," for the purposes of this article, means any plot, piece or parcel of land used for the purpose of parking and storing motor vehicles where the owner or person storing such vehicles is charged a fee, whether such lots or parcels of land are enclosed or unenclosed, and which are open to the general public. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1401) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 37-592. - Signs required; rates; refusal to accept vehicles. 
(a)  Each licensee under this article shall maintain at each entrance to such open parking station a permanently affixed sign stating the name of the licensee; the hours of the day and/or night during which such place is open for business; the rates charged; and the closing hour of such station. The letters and figures on such sign indicating the rates charged and the closing hour of such business shall be not less than six (6) inches in height. Where the licensee operates a receiving station, in which cars are accepted with the understanding that such cars may be removed to another station, the licensee shall post on such sign, in letters not less than twelve (12) inches in height, the following statement: "Receiving station. Cars parked here may be moved to No. ___________ Street." (Stating the address to which such cars are moved.) All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the city clerk. 
(b)  Where separate rates or charges are made for day parking and for night parking, the change in rate shall become effective at 5:30 p.m. and notice thereof shall be posted on the sign as is prescribed in subsection (a). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his or her agent to refuse to accept for parking any motor vehicle driven into such station, unless the capacity of such station for the storage of cars has been reached. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1406)  
Sec. 37-593. - Parking checks. 
At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for storing or parking in an open parking station, the person conducting the same, his or her agent, servant or employee, shall furnish to such person parking his or her motor vehicle, a distinctive check which shall be numbered to correspond to a coupon placed upon such motor vehicle, which check shall contain the name and address of the licensee operating such open parking station and upon which shall be written, or stamped, the date and the license number of the motor vehicle. This provision shall not apply where cars are stored on a monthly fee basis. It shall be unlawful to affix any parking tags on any motor vehicle so as to obliterate in whole or in part any portion of the motor vehicle license plates on such vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1407)  
Sec. 37-594. - Charges. 
No licensee under this article shall make any charge for parking or storing any motor vehicle in an open parking station in excess of that set forth in his or her application for a license unless and until he or she has notified the city clerk in writing of the change and posted signs showing such increase in the same manner as set forth herein. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1408)  
Sec. 37-595. - Claims; liability. 
(a)  Each licensee under this article shall immediately notify the city clerk of any claim made by reason of any loss, theft or conversion occurring upon his or her premises or of any claim for damages arising from the operation of his or her open parking station. 
(b)  The obligations herein created of any person operating or conducting an open parking station under the terms of this article to the owner of a motor vehicle parked therein, shall not extend beyond the regular business hours as posted upon such open parking station and printed upon the regular receipt furnished to such motor vehicle owner. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1409)  
Sec. 37-596. - Agreement limiting liability prohibited. 
No contract, agreement, lease, receipt, rule or regulation shall exempt any licensee from liability for damage or loss caused by the negligence of the licensee or his or her agents or employees. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1410)  
Sec. 37-597. - Fire extinguishers required. 
Open parking stations shall be equipped with fire extinguishers as specified by the fire commissioner and all motor vehicles shall be so stored as to be readily accessible in the event of fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1411) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 37-598. - Fences, sidewalks; entrance, etc., attendant required. 
(a)  Licensees under this article shall maintain on the perimeter of the premises a suitable fence, wall or other barrier, so that motor vehicles may not be removed from such stations except at the regular established entrances and exits. Each licensee shall keep the sidewalks abutting the premises free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall keep the sidewalks in safe condition for the travel of pedestrians. Unless otherwise approved by the city clerk, each station shall have one (1) common entrance and one (1) common exit, which may or may not be combined, and an attendant shall at all times during regular business hours be stationed thereat. 
(b)  Licensee shall maintain the premises free from dust by frequent sprinkling or the use of calcium chloride or other means to avoid nuisance to adjacent property owners or others. 
(c)  No licensee shall sublet, sublease or otherwise permit any parking lot or any portion thereof to be used by any vendor of goods, wares or merchandise or services unless such business is conducted in a permanent building or structure. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1412)  
Sec. 37-599. - Removal of vehicles; unauthorized use prohibited. 
No licensee or his or her agents or employees under this article shall sit in, drive, or otherwise make any unauthorized use of any motor vehicle parked or stored on the premises, except that the licensee may move any motor vehicle from a so-called receiving station to another parking lot if adequate signs as required by this article are properly erected and maintained; and that in such cases the licensee shall maintain, adequate service to assure prompt delivery of the car; and that such removal shall not exceed a distance of five (5) blocks from the receiving, station, and that the car is re-delivered within a reasonable time upon call of the customer. Vehicles remaining unlocked on lots after closing hours may be removed by the licensee to another lot, the location of which shall be designated by an appropriate sign on the lot; provided that the licensee shall be liable to the owner of any motor vehicle so moved for any damage to such motor vehicle caused by such moving. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1413)  
Secs. 37-600—37-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 37-611. - Required. 
No person shall maintain or conduct an open parking station within the city, without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1402)  
Sec. 37-612. - Application. 
Applications for licenses for open parking stations shall be made in the form and manner required by this Code, and shall set forth, among other things: 
(1)  The number of motor vehicles which may at any one (1) time be parked or stored upon the premises; 
(2)  The hours during which the motor vehicles may be parked or stored; 
(3)  A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for parking or storing motor vehicles; and 
(4)  The hours during which such lots shall be open for business. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1403)  
Sec. 37-613. - Fee. 
The license fee for the operation of an open parking station shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1404)  
Sec. 37-614. - Issuance. 
If, after investigation, the city clerk is reasonably satisfied that the applicant is a person of good moral character as provided in section 18-8, a license shall be issued upon payment of the required fee. The city clerk shall keep a record of all applications and licenses issued, indexed alphabetically and by location. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1405)  
Secs. 37-615—37-630. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SOIL, REFUSE OR FUEL CARRYING VEHICLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage and rubbish generally, Ch. 16; soil removal, dumping and regrading generally, Ch. 32. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-631. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the city council that this article be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of transporting soil, refuse and fuel in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1108)  
Sec. 37-632. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Fuel means coal, coke, charcoal, parts of trees not exceeding three (3) feet in length or six (6) inches in diameter, oil, gasoline, benzine, kerosene, or other similar oil or oily substance or liquid. 
Refuse means: 
(1)  Municipal waste or wastes consisting of discarded products incident to housekeeping and commercial enterprises. 
(2)  Garbage, including waste animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter incident to the use and storage of food for human consumption, and including spoiled food and dead animals. 
(3)  Rubbish, including waste materials resulting from the usual routine of housekeeping, miscellaneous waste materials resulting from the operation of mercantile enterprises, boxes, paper, rags, excelsior, grass, leaves, straw, barrels, waste from building construction, alteration or repair, and similar rejected matter. 
(4)  Ashes, including residue of combustion of any fuel such as wood, coal, coke, charcoal, or like substances. 
Soil means topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel, earth and similar materials removed from land. 
Soil, refuse and/or fuel carrying motor vehicles means all motor vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular power, and which are capable of transporting a load of soil, refuse or fuel. The term "soil, refuse and/or fuel carrying motor vehicles" shall include trailers and semi-trailers pulled or towed by self-propelled vehicles, but shall exclude tractors; and for the purpose of this article trucks, trailers and semi-trailers shall be construed to be separate units. The term "soil, refuse and/or fuel carrying motor vehicles" shall in no case be deemed to include any vehicle subject to the jurisdiction of the state public service commission pursuant to the State Motor Carriers Act, being Act No. 254 of the Public Acts of 1933 (MCL 475.1 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1101) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 37-633. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause or permit any of his or her agents or employees to operate, any soil, refuse and/or fuel carrying motor vehicle on any public street or alley in the city, contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1103)  
Sec. 37-634. - Complete enclosure required. 
Motor vehicles transporting refuse, soil or fuel through the public ways of the city shall be so constructed or equipped as to completely enclose and cover by an enclosure, the contents of such vehicle. Such construction or equipment shall be tightly fitted to exclude flies. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1105)  
Sec. 37-635. - Annoyance, etc. 
The transportation of soil, refuse and/or fuel through the streets and alleys of the city shall be conducted in such a manner as to create the least possible annoyance or irritation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1106)  
Secs. 37-636—37-645. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 37-646. - Required. 
No person shall operate any soil, refuse and/or fuel carrying motor vehicle without first procuring a city license and a license plate from the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1102)  
Sec. 37-647. - Application. 
The application for a license under this division shall state the: 
(1)  Applicant's name and address; 
(2)  Owner's name and address if the vehicle is not owned by the applicant; 
(3)  Make, model, type and year of truck; 
(4)  Annual state license number; 
(5)  Character of business; 
(6)  Rated capacity in tons; 
(7)  Vehicle weight or tare; 
(8)  Number of wheels; 
(9)  Width of all tires. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1102)  
Sec. 37-648. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1102)  
Sec. 37-649. - Plate. 
Every motor vehicle under this division shall have the license plate attached to the right hand side thereof, in some conspicuous place; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to vehicles subject to the jurisdiction of the state public service commission pursuant to the provisions of the State Motor Carriers Act, being Act No. 254 of the Public Acts of 1933 (MCL 475.1 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1102)  
Secs. 37-650—37-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OTHER TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 37-701. - Operation of motor vehicles on public property and public easements. 
(a)  Operation of motor vehicles on public property. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, including but not limited to motorcycles and mini-bikes, to operate on any public property, unless the public property can be identified as a street, alley, parking lot or driveway. 
(b)  Operation of motor vehicles on public easements. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, including but not limited to motorcycles and mini-bikes, on any public easement or utility corridor, without the expressed written consent of the owner; this provision, however, is not applicable to easements and corridors which can be identified as a street, alley, parking lot or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 10, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-702. - Commercial vehicles, vehicles; parking, night-time, residential areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle on any street in the city for a period longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. on the same day, including Sundays and holidays. The police commissioner, for good cause shown, may grant special parking permits permitting parking of commercial vehicles during the above hours, provided each permit is granted for a definite period of time. 
(b)  Upon the erection of signs sufficient to apprise the ordinarily observant person, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle any day between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the same day on those sections or segments of the public highways or streets within a specified area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck, truck tractor, truck trailer, or any combination of the foregoing, whether self-propelled or not, upon any street in a residential area within the city; provided, however, that any panel truck or truck with a load limit of three-quarters (¾) of a ton (one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds), or less, according to the manufacturer's rating, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; and provided, further, that temporary parking upon any street in a residential area by any truck, truck tractor, truck trailer or any combination thereof shall be lawful for the purpose of delivering merchandise to residences upon such street, or for the purpose of rendering other services to residences upon such street, or for the purpose of rendering other services to residences upon such street requiring the presence of such vehicle, or for the purpose of making emergency road repairs to such vehicle. The term "temporary parking" shall not include overnight parking. 
(d)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon or within any park or street, any commercial motor vehicle as defined in the chapter, or any other vehicles used for the hauling or distribution of merchandise, freight or material when the street is properly posted with the following sign: "Commercial vehicles keep off." Provided however, that such a truck or vehicle may be operated upon or within the parks or streets, for the shortest possible distance, when necessary to serve any property located within or upon the park or street or contiguous thereto or when it is necessary to cross any street. The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles operated by the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 80-568, § 10, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 37-703. - Use of mopeds, gopeds, and low speed vehicles by minors. 
(a)  The motor vehicle code applies to the operation of mopeds, gopeds, and other low speed vehicles on public streets and sidewalks. Section 257.312a requires any person before operating a moped, goped, or low speed vehicle on a public street to procure a license from the Secretary of State to operate the vehicle on the public streets. The parent of a minor or the guardian of a ward, shall not authorize or knowingly permit or allow the minor to operate a moped, goped, or low speed vehicle on a public street in the city unless the minor compiles with all of the following: 
(1)  The minor is at least fifteen (15) years of age; and 
(2)  If the minor does not have an operator's license, the minor has obtained a special restricted license, to operate a moped, from the Secretary of State; and 
(3)  The minor's parent or legal guardian has signed the special restricted license application in accord with established Secretary of State requirements; and 
(4)  The operation of the vehicle is in compliance with all rules set forth in the Motor Vehicle Code, MCL 257.656 et seq.; 
A violation of this section is a civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine to the minor's parent or legal guardian of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs and other applicable sanctions for each infraction. 
(b)  A moped, goped, or low speed vehicle shall not be operated on a sidewalk constructed for the use of pedestrians. Pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Code section 257.656, a person who violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(c)  Exemptions. The regulations contained in this section shall not apply to the operation of a toy electric vehicle operated by a minor on a sidewalk and which is powered by a twelve-volt battery and does not exceed a speed of five (5) mph. 
(Ord. No. 80-657, § 1, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 37-704. - Distracted driving. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c), a person shall not operate a motor vehicle on a highway, street, or other place open to the general public in a distracted manner. 
(b)  "Distracted manner" means performing an activity that diverts attention from operating the vehicle in such a way that it endangers drivers, pedestrians, or property. Activities that divert attention include using a cell phone or other electronic device, reading, writing, performing personal grooming tasks, or other similar actions. Endangering drivers, pedestrians, or property includes swerving, drifting, pulling out in front of other vehicles, or other similar dangerous driving maneuvers. 
(c)  The following are exemptions from the general prohibition listed in subsection (a): 
(1)  Peace officers, while performing their official duties as peace officers; 
(2)  A person reporting a traffic accident, medical emergency, road hazard, criminal activity, or other emergency situation that a reasonable person would consider an emergency justifying the violation. 
(d)  A violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-770 , § 1, 12-18-18)  
Chapter 38 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trees and shrubs, § 3.1(b)(3)(l). 
Cross reference— Noxious weeds, § 21-46 et seq.; design standards for trees in subdivisions, § 35-70. 
State Law reference— Care of trees and shrubs, MCL 247.241 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words have the meanings described below: 
Low growth area is an area that is made up of either (1) grass or other groundcover that is six (6) inches or less, or (2) a flat landscaping material that is flush with the sidewalk or surrounding property. 
Medium growth area is an area that is made up of plants that do not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
Native plant is a plant that: (1) is listed as a native plant in the Michigan State University Native Plants and Ecosystem Services' Southern Lower Peninsula Regional Plant List (RPL), as amended; or (2) has existed and evolved in Southeast Michigan over hundreds or thousands of years. A copy of the RPL is available in the clerk's office. 
Non-native plant is a plant introduced with human help (intentionally or accidentally) to a new place or new type of habitat where it was not previously found. 
Opportunistic plant is a plant that is: (1) listed as opportunistic by the RPL; or (2) is an invasive species. Invasive species include non-native plants that have no natural controls and are able to out-compete and gradually displace native plants or cause other economic or environmental harm. 
Planned natural landscaping area is a deliberate and maintained area consisting of native plants. Non-native plants are discouraged. Opportunistic plants are prohibited. 
Plant is any tree, shrub, herb, grass, fern, vine, or similar organism. 
Shrub is a low woody plant that is less than twenty (20) feet in height. Shrubs are typically bushy owing to multiple small trucks and branches that emerged from near the ground. 
Tree is a woody perennial plant that can grow taller than twenty (20) feet and has a single, usually elongated, main stem with few or no branches on its lower part. 
(Code 1967, § 7-201; Ord. No. 80-745, 11-22-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-2. - Control by director of parks and recreation in public places; rules and regulations. 
The director of parks and recreation shall have complete charge and control of the planting, cutting, trimming and removal of trees and other growth upon all public highways and places, and the director may promulgate and adopt rules and regulations to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 7-202)  
ARTICLE II. - VEGETATION REGULATIONS, AND PUBLIC WAY AND PLACES REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 38-3. - Prohibited varieties. 
The planting of any poplar, soft maple, box elder, tree of heaven, ash, wild chestnut, or cottonwood tree, or any variety thereof, in the public ways, parks or places in the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 7-203)  
Sec. 38-3.5. - Undesirable species. 
(a)  Undesirable species includes Box Elder, Chinese Elm, Cottonwood, Mulberry, Poplar, Silver Maple, Tree of Heaven, Willow and those other species that the director of parks and recreation determines are undesirable. 
(b)  Removal. Any owner of property may remove an undesirable species of tree by a city licensed and approved contractor on the condition that the new tree planted to replace the removed tree is a desirable species (as defined by the director of parks and recreation). 
(Ord. No. 80-558, § 1, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 38-4. - Permit required for planting, removing, etc., in public ways. 
No person, except the city, shall plant, remove or destroy any ornamental shade tree or shrub in any public way without first procuring a permit from the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 7-204)  
Sec. 38-5. - Permit required for trimming in public ways. 
(a)  No person shall cut, mutilate, remove, saw or trim any tree within any public way in the city to make room for any telegraph, telephone or electric lines, moving buildings or machinery or other things, or for repairing sidewalks, without first procuring a permit from the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  No person owning or operating any bus line or other motor transportation over the city streets, or any public utility lines upon, above or below the surface, shall trim, cut or cause to be trimmed or cut any tree, shrub or plant along any public way or park, without first having submitted to the director of parks and recreation a plan of the work to be done and having procured a permit for such work. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the removal, under the direction of the director of parks and recreation, of any stump, roots, tree, shrub, vine, plant or part thereof, wherever such removal shall be found necessary in the construction or repair of any street, sidewalk, sewer, pavement or other public improvement. 
(Code 1967, §§ 7-206, 7-207)  
Sec. 38-6. - Application for permits; approval requisite. 
Applications for any permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall be available in the office of the department of parks and recreation. No permit shall be granted until it has been approved by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 7-208)  
Sec. 38-7. - Repair of gas pipes and mains. 
Gas pipes or mains within or beneath any public way shall be maintained so as to avoid any leakage therefrom. If any leak exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of the pipe and main, and the leak shall be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours. The city may repair any leak not stopped within twenty-four (24) hours and the owner of the pipe or main causing the leak shall be charged with the cost of repair and the damage caused thereby. 
(Code 1967, § 7-205)  
Sec. 38-8. - Attaching articles or animals to trees in public ways prohibited. 
No person shall attach, tack or in any manner fasten to any tree in a public way any wire, rope, chain, cable, sign, card, board, poster or other article, nor hitch any animal thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 7-206)  
Sec. 38-9. - Obstructions to public-way prohibited. 
The owner or person in charge or control of any lot or parcel of land within the city upon which any tree, shrub, vine or plant may be standing adjacent to any public way, shall trim or cause to be trimmed, either at the property line or to a clear height of at least eight (8) feet above the surface of such public way, all branches thereof which overhang any portion of such public way, or which obstruct or interfere with the passage of light from any street lighting system, and shall not plant or maintain any thereof so close to any property line as to obstruct thereby the vision of travelers along the streets. The city may enter upon any such private premises to do such trimming as it determines necessary, or to remove such obstructions herein prohibited upon the failure of the owner to do so after notice to him or her in writing. The owner shall, or the city may, remove from such tree, shrub, plant or vine, all dead, decayed, unsightly, broken or dangerous limbs and branches that overhang or are close to the public way; and when any such tree, shrub, plant or vine is dead, the owner shall remove the same, or after notice of such intention to the owner, the city may do so and charge the cost thereof to such owner. 
(Code 1967, § 7-209)  
Sec. 38-9.1. - Obstructions to visibility. 
In order to provide for the safety of pedestrians, no person shall plant or maintain any shrub or hedge in the front yard of any dwelling that obscures the vision of a driver of an automobile exiting any driveway adjacent to such dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 80-428, § 1, 2-23-93)  
Sec. 38-10. - Excavations, etc., in public way; guards required. 
In any excavation, or the erection, alteration or repair of any building or structure, or other work, the owner thereof or someone for him or her shall place or cause to be placed such guards around all nearby trees, shrubs and plants in the public way as will effectually prevent injury to them. 
(Code 1967, § 7-210)  
Sec. 38-11. - Stones, bricks, sand, etc., injuring trees in public way. 
No person shall place or maintain upon the ground in any public way or public place of the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material or article which may injure or which may in any way impede the full and free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, shrub, vine or plant, without leaving an open space of ground not less than four (4) feet in diameter surrounding same. 
(Code 1967, § 7-211)  
Sec. 38-12. - Destruction of diseased trees, etc. 
The owner or occupant of any premises on which is located any tree or other growth, if infected by disease or by injurious insects or in a dangerous condition, shall destroy same when such destruction is necessary for the protection of other trees and growth and for the public safety, health and welfare. 
(Code 1967, § 7-212)  
Sec. 38-13. - Trees in front of dwellings. 
Wherever feasible, as determined by the director of parks and recreation, every dwelling in the city shall have a tree planted in front of the dwelling in the area between the sidewalk and the curb. All dwelling owners shall have one (1) year from the date of receipt of the notice from the director of parks and recreation to comply with this provision. 
(Code 1967, § 7-213)  
Sec. 38-14. - Failure of owners or occupants to comply with chapter. 
If the owner or occupant of any premises fails to perform any duty required of him or her by this chapter, the director of parks and recreation may serve notice upon such owner or occupant, directing him or her to cause such work to be done within thirty (30) days, and upon his or her failure to comply with the notice, the city may enter upon the premises and perform the work required and charge the cost thereof to the owner or occupant. The cost shall be charged in accordance with the provisions of the Charter relative to special assessments and pursuant to the provisions of chapter 33. 
(Code 1967, § 7-214)  
Sec. 38-15. - Removal of live trees from public places. 
Any person desiring to remove a live tree from any public place for the construction of walks, drives, buildings or any other structures for his or her own gain, shall deposit with the department of parks and recreation a sum equal to the value of the tree as determined by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 7-215)  
Sec. 38-16. - Tree requirements for construction of new dwellings. 
Any person desiring a building permit for the construction of a new dwelling in the city shall deposit with the division of buildings and safety engineering the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each permit issued, which shall be used by the director of parks and recreation to purchase a tree to be placed in the public right-of-way in front of the dwelling. The director of parks and recreation shall have complete discretion as to the type of tree to be planted, the time of such planting, and shall supervise the planting of the tree. 
(Code 1967, § 7-216; Ord. No. 80-533, § 1, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 38-17. - Guaranty of trees planted by city. 
Any tree planted by the city under the supervision of the director of parks and recreation shall be guaranteed by the city for a period of two (2) years after the date of planting; provided, however, that the city will not be responsible for the replacement of trees which were damaged or destroyed by the acts or omissions of the abutting property owner. The director of parks and recreation shall have the sole authority to determine whether a tree was so damaged or destroyed by the abutting property owner. 
(Code 1967, § 7-217)  
Sec. 38-18. - Penalty. 
Except if there is an administrative hearings officer vacancy as described in chapter 2.5, section 2.5-4(d), the violation of a provision of this Chapter is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator found responsible for a blight violation as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 25, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 80-632, § 1, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 80-655, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 80-731, § 11, 8-11-15; Ord. No. 80-750, § 2, 2-14-17)  
ARTICLE III. - PLANNED NATURAL LANDSCAPING AREA[2] 
State Law reference— MCL 117.4q. 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage and rubbish, Ch. 16; International Property Maintenance Code sections 302, 308, and 309 as adopted by Warren Code of Ordinances, §§ 28-1 and 28-2; Property maintenance generally, Ch. 28; and Zoning generally, Appendix A. 
 
Sec. 38-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to encourage property owners to plant and maintain planned natural landscaping areas. Planned natural landscaping areas and planting native plants reduces greenhouse gasses and pollution, reduces water consumption, supports native songbirds, pollinators, insects, and species diversity, saves money on watering, reduces soil erosion, decreases the need for pesticides, naturally cools the city, filters contaminated storm water, and reduces the potential of sewer overflow and basement flooding. 
(Ord. No. 80-745, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 38-20. - Goals. 
The city will strive to plant native plants, greatly reduce mowed turf grass areas, increase tree canopy, water during the hours of darkness, and encourage property owners to do the same. The city will work toward creating a thirty (30) percent tree canopy over the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-745, 11-22-16)  
Sec. 38-21. - Planned natural landscaping area requirements. 
(a)  Property owners may maintain a planned natural landscaping area, if the property owner complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Registers the property with the department of property maintenance; 
(2)  Does not have planned natural landscaping in the right-of-ways; 
(3)  Does not grow or allow excessive growth of any non-native plant that was not previously growing on the property before first registering the property as a planned natural landscaping area; 
(4)  Does not grow or allow excessive growth of any plant; 
(5)  Abides by all other applicable laws and ordinances not listed in section 38-21(c), including property maintenance ordinances prohibiting collection of junk or rubbish, rodent infestations, sanitation, grading and drainage, and rodent or other pest harborage; and zoning ordinances relating to corner visibility; 
(6)  Maintains a three (3) foot low growth area setback from any side and rear lot lines; 
(7)  Maintains a three (3) foot low growth area setback and a six (6) foot medium growth area buffer zone from the front lot line; and 
(8)  Regularly maintains the planned natural landscaping area. 
(b)  Registration. 
(1)  The property owner shall register the property every two (2) years. 
(2)  If the property owner sells the property, the registration is automatically transferred to the next owner until such a time that the registration requires renewal. 
(3)  The registration application shall include the name of the person registering the property, the address and parcel number of the property to be registered, an affidavit swearing that the person registering the property owns the property, and a statement that the registered property owner agrees to abide by all neighborhood resolution and appeal committee determinations and orders. 
(c)  Registered planned natural landscaping areas that comply with this section are exempt from the following vegetation-related property maintenance ordinances: 
(1)  The portions of chapter 21, section 21-47 banning growth of weeds or grass higher than six (6) inches and accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush; and 
(2)  International Property Maintenance Code Section 302.4 as incorporated into the Code of Ordinances in chapter 28, article I, International Property Maintenance Code banning certain weeds and plant growth. 
(d)  Noncompliance. 
(1)  If the property owner fails to register a planned natural landscaping area as required by section 38-21(a)(i), the city may issue blight tickets for violations listed in section 38-21(c). 
(2)  If the property owner fails to abide by the requirements listed in section 38-21(a)(ii)-(vi), the director of public service or his designee may (1) issue blight tickets for violations listed in section 38-21(c); (2) revoke or not renew the property owner's planned natural landscaping area registration; or (3) do both. 
(3)  The property owner may appeal a revocation or refusal to renew his planned natural landscaping area registration to the neighborhood resolution and appeal committee as provided for in section 38-21(e). 
(e)  Disputes and appeal. 
(1)  The mayor shall appoint a five (5) member neighborhood resolution and appeal committee. The committee shall be made up of Warren residents. 
(2)  The committee is responsible for: 
a.  Conducting dispute and appeal hearings; and 
b.  Making a final determination on the dispute or appeal following the hearing. 
(3)  Hearings. 
a.  If a property owner or resident lives on the same city block (both sides of the street) or the city block directly behind the planned natural landscaping area and has a complaint about the planned natural landscaping area, he may submit a request for a dispute hearing. The request shall state the nature of the dispute. 
b.  If the director of public service or his designee revokes or refuses to renew his planned natural landscaping area registration, the property owner may submit a request for an appeal hearing. 
c.  A request for a hearing shall be in writing and be submitted to the property maintenance department. 
d.  The committee shall conduct a hearing. At the hearing, the person who requested the hearing and the registered property owner may both address the committee. 
(4)  Final determination. 
a.  Following the hearing, the committee will make a final determination and order. 
b.  The final determination and order is binding on all parties. 
(5)  Failure to comply with the final determination is a blight violation. The administrative hearings bureau shall punish a violator as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, chapter 2.5, section 2.5-7. A blight violation is appealable to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 80-745, 11-22-16)  
Chapter 39 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a); authority to regulate vehicles for hire, § 3.1(b)(2)(e). 
Cross reference— Mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 20; railroads, Ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 37; wreckers, § 37-551 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 39-1. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of chapter 39 is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 26, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 39-2—39-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS AND MINIBUSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 39-21. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
License means the license issued by the city authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the city. 
Meter means any instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
Permit means the driver's permit granted by the city to a person to drive a taxicab on the streets of the city. 
Rate card means a card displayed by the holder of a license in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare then in force under the provisions of this article. 
Street includes any street, avenue, lane, court, public parking lot or public place in the city. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire and not operated on a fixed route. 
Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, not including any time that the taxicab is not in motion due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of a passenger. 
(Code 1967, § 5-201) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 39-22. - Equipment and maintenance. 
(a)  Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this article the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the police department for cleanliness, appearance, mechanical condition, and to determine that such vehicle complies with all requirements of this article. If any such vehicle shall be found to be unclean, unsanitary, unsightly, fail to comply with the provisions of this article or for any reason to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers for hire, the vehicle shall not be licensed for use as a taxicab. 
(b)  Every vehicle licensed and operating under this article shall be inspected by the police department every three (3) months after the first inspection and licensing of the vehicle to determine that the vehicle meets the foregoing requirements and if the vehicle fails to meet such requirements, the license of the vehicle shall be automatically revoked. 
(c)  Every vehicle licensed shall have a card carried in the vehicle at all times showing the make and motor and/or serial number of the vehicle, the date of original inspection and approval by the police department together with the date of expiration of each approval. A duplicate of the card shall be kept on file in the police department. It shall be a violation of this article to operate any unapproved vehicle or a vehicle upon which any approval has expired under any license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1967, § 5-215)  
Sec. 39-23. - Insignia, color, etc. 
Every taxicab operated under any license issued pursuant to this article shall prominently display the word "taxi" or "taxicab" on the outside of the vehicle and shall prominently display the insignia of the licensee designated in the application. If any licensee shall have designated a color scheme in his or her application, every vehicle licensed to be used by the licensee shall be painted in accordance with such color scheme. 
(Code 1967, § 5-216)  
Sec. 39-24. - Taximeter required. 
All taxicabs operated under this article shall be equipped with a standard meter device of a type and make approved by the police commissioner at the time of the application and issuance of the license. All meters shall be fastened in the front of the taxicab in a location visible to any passengers and the face of the meter shall be illumined after sunset. Each meter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is conveying any passenger, and it shall be the duty of the driver to show the flag of the meter in a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. All meters shall be subject to inspection by the police department. Any officer of the department is authorized either on complaint of any person or without complaint, to inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the driver operating the taxicab to cease operation. After such notice the taxicab shall not be used for transportation of passengers for hire until the meter is repaired and in proper working condition. 
(Code 1967, § 5-217)  
Sec. 39-25. - Rates of fare; display of rate card. 
(a)  No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than the schedule of rates approved by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Every taxicab operated under this article shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such place as to be in view of the passenger. 
(Code 1967, § 5-218)  
Sec. 39-26. - Refusal to pay fare; receipts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab licensed under this article after having hired same. The driver of any taxicab shall upon demand by any passenger deliver to the passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the licensee, license number of the taxicab, the name of the driver, amount of meter reading and/or charges and the date of the transaction. 
(Code 1967, § 5-219)  
Sec. 39-27. - Conduct of driver. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to: 
(1)  Drink alcoholic liquors while on duty and engaged in the business of driving a taxicab; 
(2)  Solicit passengers except when sitting in the driver's seat of the taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the side of the taxicab. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by any sign or in a manner so as to annoy any person or to obstruct the movement of any person or to follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage; 
(3)  Permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seated capacity of his or her taxicab. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger; 
(4)  Refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged; 
(5)  Engage in the selling of alcoholic liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute, to use or permit the use of any taxicab for unlawful purposes, to procure or aid in procuring any person for unlawful purposes or to allow any person in any taxicab while the same is at any taxicab stand or on any street waiting for customers; or to use the taxicab for any other purpose than for the transporting of passengers for hire; 
(6)  Fail, neglect or refuse to turn in to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours any lost article found in the taxicab; 
(7)  Occupy any stand or any public street or public place except such as may be designated as a taxicab stand by the police commissioner; 
(8)  Fail to notify the police department within one (1) hour after any accident, giving the time and location of the accident, the name of any person injured, the character of the injuries as far as known, and in case of property damage, the nature and estimated amount of the damage and the name of the owner of the property damaged. 
(Code 1967, § 5-220)  
Sec. 39-28. - Taxicabs licensed in other municipalities. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any licensed suburban or City of Detroit taxicab from coming into the city to discharge passengers accepted for transportation outside the City of Warren. While the vehicle is in the city, no roof light or other special light shall be used to indicate that the vehicle is vacant or subject to hire, and a white card bearing the words "Not For Hire" printed in black letters not less than two (2) inches in height shall be displayed at the right front corner of the windshield of the vehicle, in such manner as not to obscure the vision of the driver. No person shall be solicited or accepted in the vehicle for transportation from any place within the City of Warren. 
(Code 1967, § 5-221)  
Sec. 39-29. - Minibuses, multi-passenger van express service to designated locations; flat rate fare card. 
All persons licensed to operate a taxicab in the city may operate a minibus or a multi-passenger van. These vehicles may transport passengers from a designated location in the city to other designated locations outside of the city for a flat fare as set by a resolution adopted by the city council. Every vehicle shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rate and displayed in such a place as to be in view of the passengers. 
(Code 1967, § 5-222)  
Secs. 39-30—39-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 39-41. - Required. 
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him or her to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city without first having obtained a license from the city therefor as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 5-202)  
Sec. 39-42. - Application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be filed with the city clerk upon proper forms provided by him or her, and the application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and whether applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity; 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire; 
(3)  The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of any and all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments; 
(4)  Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that the public convenience and necessity require the issuance of a license; 
(5)  The number of vehicles proposed to be operated by applicant together with a list of such vehicles including the name, year, motor and/or serial number and the seating capacity of such vehicles according to its trade rating; 
(6)  The color scheme and/or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant; 
(7)  The type and make of taximeter to be used; and 
(8)  Such further information as the city clerk may require. 
(Code 1967, § 5-203)  
Sec. 39-43. - Investigation; report. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a license under this division, the city clerk shall refer the same to the police commissioner who shall make or cause to be made through the police department an investigation as to the good moral character as defined in section 18-8 and ability of the applicant to operate a taxicab business in the city, and the public convenience and necessity for the issuance of a license to the applicant. The applicant shall, upon the request of the police department, make available at the department any motor vehicle or vehicles proposed to be used in the taxicab business for inspection as to cleanliness, mechanical condition, appearance, and determination that such vehicle or vehicles are in a safe condition for the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(b)  Upon completion of the investigation and upon approval of the application by the police commissioner, the city clerk shall transmit the application and a report upon the condition of the vehicle or vehicles proposed to be used by applicant, together with his or her recommendation, to the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 5-204)  
Sec. 39-44. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application, together with the report and recommendation of the city clerk and police commissioner, if the city council shall find and determine that the applicant is a qualified person to operate a taxicab business in the city, that the vehicle or vehicles to be used are clean, in a good mechanical condition and safe for transportation of passengers for hire, and that the public convenience and necessity require the issuance of a license to the applicant, then the city council shall authorize the city clerk to issue a license to applicant upon the payment of the license fees and filing of policy of insurance; otherwise the application shall be denied. 
(b)  In making the above findings, the city council shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic, the moral character, experience and responsibility of the applicant, and the type and condition of the vehicle proposed to be used. 
(Code 1967, § 5-205)  
Sec. 39-45. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 5-206)  
Sec. 39-46. - Insurance required. 
No license shall be issued or continued under this division unless there is in full force and effect an insurance policy for each taxicab in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury to any one (1) person, and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injuries to more than one (1) person, and not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage in any one (1) accident. The copies of insurance policies shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The insurance policies shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. 
(Code 1967, § 5-207; Ord. No. 80-594, § 1, 4-8-03)  
Sec. 39-47. - Transfer. 
No license under this division shall be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent and approval of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 5-208)  
Sec. 39-48. - Expiration; additional vehicles; substitution. 
The license under this division shall be in effect for an annual period from January first to December thirty-first of the same year and there shall be no prorating of the fees if a license shall be issued or a vehicle added by the licensee during the annual period. If any licensee shall add an additional vehicle, such fact shall be immediately reported to the city clerk in writing, giving the name, motor number and/or serial number and seating capacity of such vehicle and the license fee paid thereon. If any licensee shall substitute another vehicle for one on which the annual license fee shall have been paid, such fact shall be immediately reported to the city clerk in writing, giving the make, motor number and/or serial number and seating capacity of the motor vehicle discontinued and the motor vehicle substituted therefor, but no additional fee shall be required to be paid on any such substitution. 
(Code 1967, § 5-206)  
Secs. 39-49—39-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 39-61. - Required. 
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be driven, and no taxicab licensed by the city shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1967, § 5-210)  
Sec. 39-62. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided by the city, and such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain information concerning the experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician of the city certifying that, in his or her opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him or her unsafe or an unsatisfactory driver. 
(Code 1967, § 5-211)  
Sec. 39-63. - Investigation; approval or denial. 
Upon receipt of any application for a driver's permit under this division, the city clerk shall refer the same to the police commissioner who shall make or cause to be made through the police department an investigation of the applicant, his or her good moral character as defined in section 18-8 and his or her motor vehicle violation and police record. Each applicant shall be required to present himself or herself at the police department in the city to give such information as may be required in such investigation and to show that applicant has a current vehicle chauffeur's license issued by the state and is competent to operate a taxicab. Upon completion of the investigation the police commissioner shall, upon consideration of the application, the facts disclosed by such investigation and the physician's certificate, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, no refund shall be made of the application fee but the applicant may request an opportunity to be heard by any license appeal board designated by the city council, and to offer evidence why his or her application should be granted. 
(Code 1967, § 5-212)  
Sec. 39-64. - Fee. 
The fee for a permit under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, §§ 5-211, 5-213)  
Sec. 39-65. - Issuance; display. 
Upon the approval of an application for a taxicab driver's permit, the police commissioner shall authorize and the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall bear the name, address, color, age, signature and a photograph of the applicant, which photograph shall be furnished to the city clerk by the applicant at the time of issuance of the permit. Every taxicab driver shall post his or her driver's permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while the driver is operating the taxicab. 
(Code 1967, § 5-213)  
Sec. 39-66. - Expiration. 
Every driver's permit issued pursuant to this division shall be in effect for an annual period from January first to December thirty-first of the same year and there shall be no prorating of any permit fee if the permit shall be granted during such annual period. 
(Code 1967, § 5-213)  
Secs. 39-67—39-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAILERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Mobile homes and trailers generally, Ch. 20. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 39-91. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Trailer means all trailers, except tractor trailers, truck trailers, farm wagons and equipment. 
Trailer renters means all persons deemed to be in the business of renting trailers, and shall be designated as a trailer renter, who shall receive in return, compensation or reward for supplying, furnishing, leasing or renting a trailer to another, in any manner, except by sale; or who shall offer, furnish, lease, rent or supply a trailer or trailers to others in return for articles purchased, or services rendered; or who shall, directly or indirectly, receive any remuneration, reward or return for furnishing a trailer to another other than by a bona fide sale. 
(Code 1967, § 3-202) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 39-92. - Insignia required. 
No licensee shall rent any trailer to any person unless the trailer shall display on both sides thereof the name and address of the licensee in letters and figures at least three (3) inches in height and not less than one (1) inch in width. 
(Code 1967, § 3-208)  
Sec. 39-93. - Statement required. 
Before any licensee shall furnish or rent a trailer to another, he or she shall obtain from the person renting the trailer a signed statement which shall state the name and address of the person owning the articles or goods to be moved in the trailer, the date of the removal, and the address of the place from which and to which the removal is to be made. It shall be the duty of the licensee to obtain the above required information on the statement, and the signature and address of the person making the statement, before the trailer is delivered to the person renting same. 
(Code 1967, § 3-209)  
Sec. 39-94. - False statement prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person securing or renting a trailer to make or sign any false statement, or to give any fictitious name or address, or to aid or abet the making or signing of a false statement, or the giving of any fictitious name or address. 
(Code 1967, § 3-210)  
Sec. 39-95. - Premises. 
Each business hereafter established shall be on a lot, the area of which shall be not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet, and which shall be used exclusively for the purpose of conducting a trailer rental business. The lot shall be maintained with a stable surface that will not retain water, treated so as to prevent the raising of dust or loose particles. Such surfacing may be constructed of crushed stone, slag, gravel, cinders, or any type of permanent surfacing with adequate drainage so as not to adversely affect any adjacent lot and street. The owner or operator of an area so used shall erect and maintain on such an area a permanent type building at least four hundred (400) square feet in area, for the purpose of servicing such equipment, and shall erect and maintain a barrier-type fence not less than four (4) feet in height, on the boundaries of such an area, with only such openings therein as may be necessary for ingress or egress. Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided and so arranged as to reflect light away from dwellings adjacent to the area. 
(Code 1967, § 3-211)  
Secs. 39-96—39-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 39-106. - Required. 
No person shall hold himself or herself out as a renter of trailers or shall conduct, operate or carry on the business of renting trailers, without first having obtained a licensed as a trailer renter as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-201)  
Sec. 39-107. - Application. 
Every person desiring to engage in the business of renting trailers, before holding himself or herself out as a trailer renter, shall make written application for a license to do so, to the city clerk, which application shall state the number and capacity (cubic feet) of each trailer that is proposed to be used in conducting the business, the name, address, telephone number of the applicant, and the period of time the applicant has been located at the address set forth in the application. No licensee shall operate such business under more than one (1) trade name. 
(Code 1967, § 3-204)  
Sec. 39-108. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-206, 3-207)  
Sec. 39-109. - Insurance required. 
Every applicant shall furnish satisfactory proof to the city clerk that the applicant does carry adequate public liability and property damage insurance up to an amount which shall not be less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence public liability and one hundred thousand dollars ($100, 000.00) property damage for each trailer. Each applicant shall furnish with his or her application a prepaid policy or certificate of liability insurance showing the issuance of the insurance hereinbefore required, which prepaid policy or certificate of liability insurance shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and no license shall be valid in the event of the cancellation of the insurance. Any insurance company issuing insurance as provided hereunder shall notify the city clerk ten (10) days prior to the cancellation of the insurance, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 3-205)  
Secs. 39-110—39-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOTORCYCLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 39-131. - Hours of operation. 
Businesses licensed under this article shall be operated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8.00 p.m. There shall be no rental or the returning of vehicles between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1606(g))  
Sec. 39-132. - Application to rent. 
All vehicles regulated by the provisions of this article may only be rented, leased or permitted to be used upon the filing with the licensee of a written application therefor which shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name, residence address, and age of applicant; 
(2)  Number and date of the applicant's valid drivers license; 
(3)  If the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age, acknowledgment in writing, signed by either parent of the applicant or the applicant's legal guardian, in the presence of and witnessed by the licensee or his or her duly authorized agent, to the effect that permission is granted for the applicant to use the vehicle and that such parent or guardian assumes full responsibility for all acts or actions of the applicant in the use of the vehicle so rented or leased; 
(4)  The registered motor number of the vehicle rented or leased, together with other identifying data. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1607(a))  
Sec. 39-133. - Records. 
Any person licensed under this article, or any employee thereof, shall keep a complete and accurate file of all applications received, contracts or agreements of rental, description of vehicle rented or leased, date and hour of its rental, name and address of the person to whom the vehicle is rented or leased, the parent or guardian's written approval of a minor's application and his or her agreement to be responsible for the action of the minor in the use of the vehicle, and all other data as may be required by the traffic safety committee, all of which shall be made available for inspection by the traffic safety committee. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-1606(a), 3-1607(h))  
Sec. 39-134. - Qualifications of lessees. 
No person shall rent a motorcycle under this article to persons: 
(1)  Under eighteen (18) years of age until receipt of acknowledgment in writing, signed by either parent of the applicant or the applicant's legal guardian, in the presence of and witnessed by the licensee or his or her duly authorized agent, to the effect that permission is granted for the applicant to use the vehicle and that such parent or guardian assumes full responsibility for all acts or actions of the applicant in the use of the vehicle so rented or leased; 
(2)  Who cannot show a valid motor vehicle operators license. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-1606(b), (d), 3-1607(b))  
Sec. 39-135. - Vehicle operation hand-out. 
The licensee shall provide each lessee of a vehicle regulated by the provisions of this article, before permitting the vehicle to leave the premises, with an operating regulation hand-out as provided by the traffic safety committee. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1607(f))  
Sec. 39-136. - Use of helmets required. 
Motorcycles shall be rented under this article only if the driver and his or her passenger are wearing safety helmets. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1606(e))  
Sec. 39-137. - Maintenance and care of vehicles. 
(a)  Licensees under this article shall maintain all vehicles in a safe manner and provide each with all equipment required by law. 
(b)  Licensees under this article shall have only the number of vehicles on the premises as provided for in the application. 
(c)  All vehicles when not in use shall be stored within a building structure. 
(d)  All repairs and maintenance work shall be performed within a building structure. 
(e)  Vehicle motors shall not be permitted to be running while on the premises, except for necessary use in connection with ingress and egress from the premises; or when necessary, in order to repair or maintain the vehicle, and then only when the vehicle is within a building structure. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-1606(f), (i), 3-1607(c), (d), (e))  
Sec. 39-138. - Sanitation and conduct of patrons on premises. 
(a)  Premises licensed under this article shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and the actions of the patrons shall be regulated and controlled so as to eliminate loud, boisterous or improper conduct upon the premises and the unnecessary emission of smoke, fumes, gases or noise from the operation of vehicles upon the premises. 
(b)  Unnecessary assembling of vehicles or drivers of vehicles upon the licensed premises shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1607(g), (i))  
Secs. 39-139—39-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 39-151. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of renting motorcycles without first obtaining a license from the city council as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1602)  
Sec. 39-152. - Application. 
Application for a license under this division shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk and shall contain the following: 
(1)  If an individual, the name and address of the individual; 
(2)  If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such corporation was organized, and if a foreign corporation, whether authorized to do business in the state; the names of the principal officers, directors and local representatives, their residences and business addresses; 
(4)  A plot plat of the premises to be used in the conduct of the business upon which shall be indicated the location and size of all building structures to be used thereon, and all vacant portions of the site together with means of ingress and egress; 
(5)  Provide a statement as to the number of vehicles to be rented or leased in the conduct of the business and the location of their storage (all vehicles are to be stored within a building structure when not in use), service facilities and location thereof, and number of employees to be engaged in the conduct of the business proposed to be licensed; 
(6)  Such other information which may be required by the city clerk in order to process the application. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1605)  
Sec. 39-153. - Qualifications. 
An applicant for a license under this division shall have attained eighteen (18) years of age and shall possess a license as provided for in Section 25 of Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan for the year 1949 (MCL 257.25). 
(Code 1967, § 3-1604)  
Sec. 39-154. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be as prescribed in section 18-18. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1608)  
Sec. 39-155. - Insurance required. 
Prior to issuance of a license under this division the applicant shall purchase a policy of insurance for every vehicle owned, rented or kept on the premises. The policy shall have a minimum coverage of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for only one (1) person injured and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for two (2) or more persons injured as the result of any one (1) occurrence or accident. 
(Code 1967, 3-1606(h))  
Sec. 39-156. - Tag. 
Persons licensed under this division shall attach a license tag provided by the city for each vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1606(c))  
Secs. 39-157—39-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SNOW PLOW OPERATORS 
 
Sec. 39-161. - License—Required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle within any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or public place of the city (unless it is contiguous to the person's, firms or corporation's property) for the purpose of moving, removing or plowing any snow or ice therefrom, without first having obtained a license as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 80-370, § 1, 1-13-89)  
Sec. 39-162. - Same—Application; contents. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license as required by section 39-161 shall file an application with the city clerk on a form as approved by the city clerk, which application shall contain the applicant's full name, address, and the number, make, model, license number, type and weight of vehicle which is to be used for the purposes as stated in section 39-161. The clerk shall refer the application to the director of public service who shall determine whether the type of equipment or vehicle and weight thereof would be detrimental or tend to be damaging to the public rights-of-way above mentioned in which the same is proposed to be used. Upon the favorable recommendation of the director of public service, or his designated agent, the city clerk shall issue a license upon payment of the fee and the filing of insurance in the amount provided for below. (Ord. No. 80-370, § 1, 1-13-89)  
Sec. 39-163. - Insurance requirements. 
Each applicant shall produce and file with the city clerk a certificate of an insurance carrier duly authorized to transact business in this state, certifying that it has insured the city in the minimum limits of liability with respect to bodily injury of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each person and fifty thousand dollars ($50, 000.00) for each occurrence, and in respect to property damage twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), which certificate shall contain a provision to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the city at least ten (10) days prior to cancellation of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 80-370, § 1, 1-13-89)  
Sec. 39-164. - License fee. 
The license fee shall be as prescribed in section 18-18(2) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-370, § 1, 1-13-89)  
Sec. 39-165. - License plate. 
For each such vehicle, vehicles or equipment for which a license fee has been paid, a license plate or decal shall be issued by the city clerk. Such license plate or decal shall have a number which shall correspond to the number assigned to such vehicle, vehicles or equipment by the city clerk. Such license plate or decal shall be affixed to such vehicle, vehicles or equipment in a position so as to be readily seen. 
(Ord. No. 80-370, § 1, 1-13-89)  
Sec. 39-166. - Safety equipment required. 
In addition to the equipment required by the Michigan Statutes, each such vehicle shall be equipped with a muffler approved by the director of public service and have attached to such vehicle lights which are mounted in a position as to be visible to any traffic and pedestrians, and any other safety devices as determined by the police commissioner, or his designated agent, to be necessary to prevent any possible accidents or property damage. Said lights and safety devices shall be on at all times during any snow plowing. 
(Ord. No. 80-370, § 1, 1-13-89)  
Sec. 39-167. - Expiration of license. 
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of April of each year. 
(Ord. No. 80-370, § 1, 1-13-89)  
Chapter 40 - VENDING MACHINES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a). 
Cross reference— Amusement machines, § 6-226 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Gambling for purposes of this chapter shall mean the acceptance or payment of anything of value contingent upon the result of a race, contest, happening of an event not known to be certain or a game in which winning depends upon fortuitous or accidental circumstances beyond the control of the player. 
Merchandise vending machine means any mechanical device which, upon insertion of a coin, token or similar object, returns the value in merchandise of the sum thus inserted, or renders a service for same including shuffleboards and electronic dart boards. 
Person shall include the following: 
(1)  Any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any such machine; and 
(2)  The person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and 
(3)  The person, firm, corporation or association having control over such machine. 
Redemption game means a single or multi-player mechanical, electronic or manual amusement device involving a game, the object of which is throwing, rolling, bowling, shooting, placing, propelling or stopping a ball or other object into, upon, or against a hole or other target. Redemption game does not include either of the following: 
(1)  Games such as roulette, beano, cards, dice, wheels of fortune, video poker, slot machines, or other games in which winning depends primarily upon fortuitous or accidental circumstances beyond the control of the player. 
(2)  A game that includes a mechanical or physical device which directly or indirectly impairs or thwarts the skill of the player. 
(Code 1967, § 3-506; Ord. No. 80-436, § 2, 8-10-93; Ord. No. 80-553, § 1, 3-28-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 40-2. - Electrical regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license under this chapter to operate any machine as defined in section 40-1 which has not been approved and/or listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory such as Underwriters Laboratory (U.L.) and/or Factory Mutual Research Corporation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to electrically connect food and beverage vending machines by the use of extension cords. 
(c)  All electrical connections made by the flexible cord that supplies the machine shall be of the three-wire grounding type. Vending machines shall be arranged so as not to overload any existing circuit that they may be attached to. 
(d)  For the installation of these vending machines that require the installation of an electrical circuit or the extending of a circuit, an electrical permit and inspection is required. 
(e)  The installation of electrical circuits shall be made by an electrical contractor and with an electrical permit secured from the city offices. 
(f)  All electrical installations shall be in compliance with the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1967, § 3-510(a), (b), (d)—(g)) 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 9-36 et seq.  
Sec. 40-3. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law. 
(b)  The determination of whether a device is a gambling device shall be based on application of the Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIV, entitled Gambling, MCL, 750.301 et seq., as amended, and all other applicable state and federal laws, as amended. 
(b)  Redemption game devices, as defined herein, that comply with all the following requirements are exempt from the prohibitions contained in subsection (a): 
(1)  The outcome of the game is determined through the application of an element of skill by the player. 
(2)  The award of the prize is based upon the player achieving the object of the game or otherwise upon the player's score. 
(3)  Prizes awarded are only non-cash prizes such as toys, novelties, coupons or other representations of value redeemable for non-cash prizes, toys or novelties. 
(4)  The wholesale value of a prize awarded for the successful single play of a game does not exceed three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75). 
(5)  The redemption value of coupons or other representations of value awarded for the successful single play of a game does not exceed fifteen (15) times the amount charged for a single play of the game or three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75), whichever is less. However, players may accumulate coupons or other representations of value for redemption for no-cash prizes not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) wholesale value. 
(Code 1967, § 3-510(c); Ord. No. 80-553, § 1, 3-28-00) 
Cross reference— Gambling generally, § 22-138. 
State Law reference— Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq.  
Sec. 40-4. - Tobacco products—Findings and purpose. 
The Warren City Council finds the U.S. Surgeon General and other medical authorities have linked the use of tobacco products to numerous and serious health problems, and state law prohibits the sale, giving or furnishing of tobacco products to minors. Yet, despite this prohibition, the availability of tobacco products to minors continues to be a major problem and tobacco product vending machines are often located in unattended and unmonitored areas allowing for the unlawful purchase of tobacco products by minors. Restricting tobacco product vending machines in the City of Warren to specified locations which are not generally accessible to minors will reduce the availability of tobacco products to minors and promote the public health, welfare and safety as a result. 
Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to restrict tobacco product vending machines in the City of Warren to specified locations which are not generally accessible to minors. 
(Ord. No. 80-404, § 1, 1-28-92)  
Sec. 40-5. - Same—Definitions. 
(a)  Tobacco product. Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or other personal use including, but not limited to, cigars, cigarettes, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco and snuff. 
(b)  Tobacco product vending machine. Any automated, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses any type of tobacco product. 
(Ord. No. 80-404, § 1, 1-28-92)  
Sec. 40-6. - Same—Restrictions on tobacco product vending machines. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or proprietor of any premises in the City of Warren to offer or sell tobacco products through a tobacco product vending machine except in the following specified locations: 
(a)  Premises where access by minors prohibited. A tobacco product vending machine may be placed or located wholly within the premises, or portions thereof, to which access by minors is expressly prohibited either by law or by policy of the owner of the premises. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial buildings. A tobacco product vending machine may be placed or located wholly within a commercial building or industrial plant, or a portion thereof, where the general public is prohibited from entering by appropriate signs where the tobacco product vending machine is intended strictly for the use of employees, and where minor employees are not usually admitted. 
(c)  Unattended and unmonitored areas. Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) above, no tobacco product vending machine shall be placed or located closer than twenty (20) feet to any entrance or exit, or within a restroom, coat room, outer waiting area, unmonitored hallway or any other area which is not constantly supervised or monitored during the hours the tobacco product vending machine is available for use, nor shall a tobacco product vending machine be placed or located in an area where it may be accessible to the public when the premises where it is located are closed. 
(Ord. No. 80-404, § 1, 1-28-92)  
Sec. 40-7. - Same—Enforcement. 
Compliance with this chapter shall be enforced by the mayor, the city building department, the Macomb County Sheriff's Department, police officers of the City of Warren, and other enforement officers as the mayor may designate. 
(Ord. No. 80-404, § 1, 1-28-92)  
Sec. 40-8. - Same—Severability. 
Sections 40-4 through 40-10 and each article, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, part, provision, sentence, word and portion thereof are hereby declared to be severable and if they or any of them are declared to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of these sections shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 80-404, § 1, 1-28-92)  
Sec. 40-9. - Same—Penalty. 
All violations of sections 40-4 through 40-10 shall be misdemeanors, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a sentence of not more than ninety (90) days of confinement to jail or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 80-404, § 1, 1-28-92)  
Sec. 40-10. - Same—Repeal. 
All regulatory provisions contained in other city ordinances, which are inconsistent with the provisions of sections 40-4 through 40-9, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 80-404, § 1, 1-28-92)  
Secs. 40-11—40-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 40-26. - Required. 
Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any merchandise and/or service vending machine, shall be required to obtain a license from the city as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 3-507(1))  
Sec. 40-27. - Application. 
Application for a license under this article shall be made to the city clerk on a form to be supplied for that purpose. The application for a merchandise or service vending machine license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth; 
(2)  Prior convictions of applicant, if any; 
(3)  Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that place; 
(4)  Description of machine to be covered by the license, mechanical features, name of manufacturer, serial number. 
(Code 1967, § 3-507(1), 3-508(1))  
Sec. 40-28. - Age requirement. 
No license shall be issued under this article to any applicant unless he or she shall be over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1967, § 3-508(2))  
Sec. 40-29. - Investigation; issuance. 
(a)  Application for a merchandise or service vending machine license shall be made out in duplicate, one (1) copy being referred to the police commissioner and the other copy to the director of buildings and safety engineering. 
(b)  The police commissioner shall ascertain if the vending machine applicant is a person of good moral character, as defined in section 18-8, by an investigation to determine if he or she was guilty of any criminal offense, and based on the investigation either approve or disapprove the application in writing, stating his or her reasons. 
(c)  The director of buildings and safety engineering shall inspect his or her files to see if the commercial establishment wherein the licensed machine is located complies with the city ordinances, has a valid certificate of occupancy, and based upon this investigation either approve or disapprove the application in writing, stating his or her reasons. 
(d)  No license issued under this article shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the police commissioner and the director of buildings and safety engineering. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-508(3), 3-509(2))  
Sec. 40-30. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this article shall be as prescribed in section 18-8. 
(Code 1967, § 3-509(1))  
Sec. 40-31. - Display. 
The license provided for in this article shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises where the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. 
(Code 1967, § 3-507(2))  
Sec. 40-32. - Transfer. 
(a)  A license under this article may be transferred from one (1) machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the city clerk to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one (1) machine shall be operated under one (1) license and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him or her. 
(b)  A license shall not be transferable from person to person, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in the license. However, if the licensee shall move his or her place of business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the city clerk, giving the street and number of the new location. The new location shall be approved by the police commissioner and the director of buildings and safety engineering in the same manner as provided for the original license. 
(Code 1967, § 3-507(3), (4))  
Sec. 40-33. - Expiration. 
A license issued under this article shall be valid for one (1) year, expiring annually on the thirty-first day of August. 
(Code 1967, § 3-508(4))  
Sec. 40-34. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of article II is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per infraction, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 80-527, § 27, 1-13-98)  
Chapter 41 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of department of public service relative to water and sewers, § 7.21; public utility services, Ch. 15. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; plumbing code, § 9-126 et seq.; garbage and rubbish, Ch. 16; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 20. nuisances, Ch. 21; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; subdivision regulations, Ch. 35. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 41-1. - Penalty. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section and section 41-169, is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(b)  In addition to section 41-169(b), the following violations of this chapter are a misdemeanor which shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation: 
(1)  Meters. Tampering with meter, breaking the seal of meter, removing or changing location of meter or interfering with reading of meter. 
(2)  Equipment. No unauthorized person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with or alter, any structure, property, appurtenance, or any other equipment which is part of the water system. 
(3)  Any violation of section 41-21(a). 
(4)  Failure to allow access for repair, maintenance or installation after reasonable notice. 
(5)  Turning water service on without authorization by the city after the service was discontinued or disconnected by the city. 
(6)  Use of fire hydrant without permission from authorized city department. 
(Ord. No. 80-714, § 1, 1-14-14)  
Secs. 41-2—41-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Water service for moved buildings, § 9-342; water service for wrecked buildings, § 9-416; use of drinking fountains and plumbing fixtures in parks, § 23-12; public improvements for water supply in subdivisions, § 35-103. 
 
Sec. 41-21. - Connections; permit required. 
(a)  No person shall tap any water main or distribution pipe of the waterworks system, or insert therein any corporation cock, stop cock or any other fixture or appliance, or alter or disturb any service pipe, corporation stop, curb stop, gate valve, hydrant, water meter or any other attachment being a part of the waterworks system and attached thereto. 
(b)  Before any service connection shall be made to any part of the waterworks system or any work performed upon old or new connections, a permit shall be obtained from the department of public service. Such permit shall be issued upon written application on forms obtainable from the water division. Applicants for water service shall furnish, lay and install all that portion of the service not provided by the city at their own expense, subject, however, to the supervision and inspection of the city inspector. 
(Code 1967, §§ 7-501(1), 7-502)  
Sec. 41-22. - Permit required for service pipe connections. 
No person shall divert the water from any main or distribution pipe into any service pipe without a permit from the department of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 7-505)  
Sec. 41-23. - Tapping fees. 
Upon filing an application for a permit to connect with any water main or distribution pipe of the waterworks system, there shall be paid such tapping fee as shall be prescribed by the regulations governing the waterworks system. Such fees shall include all the costs of tapping the main, installing the corporation cock, furnishing and laying the service pipe to the property line and installing stop cock and shutoff box; all such materials to be and remain the property of the city water system. 
(Code 1967, § 7-503)  
Sec. 41-24. - Restrictions on use. 
The owner or occupant of any building or premises entitled to the use of water from the system shall not supply water to any other person except upon written permission of the department of public service, nor shall he or she permit unnecessary waste of water. 
(Code 1967, § 504)  
Sec. 41-25. - Regulation of service pipes. 
All service pipes connecting with the distribution mains of the waterworks system, from the city main to the stop inside the building, shall be laid under the supervision of the department of public service and in accordance with the regulations governing the waterworks system. 
(Code 1967, § 7-506)  
Sec. 41-26. - Discontinuance of service for violations; cost of resumption. 
Any premises may be disconnected from the distribution pipes of the city waterworks system and the supply of water withheld from such premises upon violation by the owner or occupant of the premises of any provision of this article or of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This includes, but is not limited to, failure to allow inspection, meter reading, maintenance/repair, installation, and/or replacement of water meters upon reasonable notice by the city. Whenever the water is turned off from any premises because of any such violation, it shall not be turned on again until the owner or occupant has paid the department of public service prior to commencement of the work a fee to cover the cost of labor as determined by city council resolution. 
(Code 1967, § 7-507; Ord. No. 80-714, § 2, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 41-27. - City not liable for disruption of service. 
The city shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting off the water to make necessary repairs or connections or for any other cause. 
(Code 1967, § 7-508)  
Sec. 41-28. - Use of branch and stop cock for each user; supply to more than one lot. 
In all cases where water service is intended to supply more than one (1) shop, store or building, it shall be the duty of the person making the service connection, or causing the same to be made, to install a branch with a stop cock for each branch outside the line of the premises so to be supplied. The stop cock shall be suitably protected and marked as to be easily located. In no case shall one (1) service supply more than one (1) lot, unless occupied by a single building covering more than one (1) lot used for a single industry or enterprise. 
(Code 1967, § 7-509)  
Sec. 41-29. - Connections with street mains for fire prevention. 
The owner or occupant of any premises of any manufacturing establishment, lumber yard, warehouse, elevator, store, hotel, school or any public building desiring to install large pipes with hydrant and hose couplings to be used only in case of fire may make connection with the street main at his or her own expense upon application to the department of public service, and the applicant shall pay all charges as prescribed by the city council and the connection shall be made in accordance with the specifications of the department of public service. 
(Code 1967, § 7-510) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 41-30. - Access to premises by city employees. 
The inspector or any of his or her agents shall have power and authority at all reasonable hours to enter upon any premises where water is furnished from the city waterworks system, for the purpose of reading, installing, repairing and/or replacing water meters and/or the inspection of all pipes and fixtures connected with the waterworks system, and they shall have authority to require any defective pipes or fixtures to be repaired, removed or replaced where the same are not in compliance with the provisions of the regulations pertaining to the waterworks system. Any person refusing or neglecting to make such repairs when so ordered shall be deemed guilty of violation of this article and liable to prosecution therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 7-511; Ord. No. 80-714, § 3, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 41-31. - Water meters. 
(a)  "Water meter" or "meter." As used in this article, water meter or meter means the water meter and any equipment used for meter reading. 
(b)  The division of water supply shall install remote water meter reading devices on all buildings having a water line two (2) inches or smaller in diameter leading to the building. Except for the water meter replacement program associated with Meter Replacement Program, RFP W-7738, or determined by the water division superintendent, the meter reading devices shall be installed with the cost to the customer and shall remain the property of the division of water supply. Failure to allow installation of water meters equipped with automatic remote reading devices may result in discontinuance of water service. 
(c)  Water meter access/location. Water meters shall be placed in an accessible location and in a manner satisfactory to the water division superintendent. If the premises does not contain a basement or other suitable inside location, the meter may be installed at another location upon approval of the water division superintendent. The owner or occupant is prohibited from creating, allowing, or having any obstruction which would preclude access by the city to the water meter. Upon reasonable notice, the city shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the city employee or agent is unable to obtain access to the meter. 
(d)  Water meters shall be installed upon any premises supplied with water, and any damage to the water meter resulting from the failure of the owner, lessee or occupant to properly protect same shall be assessed against such owner, lessee or occupant. No person shall tamper with or remove the water meter, or interfere with the reading thereof. If any water meter shall fail to register properly, the water division shall estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly. Any failure attributed to the water meter itself will be replaced at no cost to the owner. 
(e)  Meter testing. An owner or occupant may require that the water meter be tested. If the water meter is found defective it shall be repaired or replaced at no cost to the owner or occupant. If an owner or occupant disputes the water bill, the water division superintendent or his/her designee may review the matter for a determination as to whether the water meter is defective. 
(f)  Upon filing an application for a permit for water service, there shall be paid such charge for a water meter as prescribed by the regulations governing the waterworks system. All water meters remain the property of the City of Warren Water and Sewer System. 
(Code 1967, §§ 7-511.1, 7-512; Ord. No. 80-340, § 42, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-714, § 4, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 41-32. - Emergency conditions. 
Under emergency conditions, as determined by the proper authorities and upon notification in a manner as prescribed by such authorities, sprinkling or other nonessential use of water may be banned entirely, and any service may be restricted if the public health, safety or general welfare is endangered. 
(Code 1967, § 7-513)  
Sec. 41-33. - Cross connections. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health, being R 325.431 to R 325.440 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the division of water supply to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(c)  The representative of the city division of water supply shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)  The division of water supply is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
(f)  This article does not supercede the state plumbing code and article IV of chapter 9, but is supplementary to them. 
(Code 1967, § 7-501(2)—(7))  
Secs. 41-34—41-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1992, amended the provisions of former Art. III, relative to sewers, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III derived from Ord. No. 80-398, § 1, adopted Nov. 26, 1991. 
Cross reference— Sewer service for moved buildings, § 9-343; sewer service for wrecked buildings, § 9-417; public improvements for sanitary sewers in subdivisions, § 35-102. 
 
Sec. 41-56. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article is intended to regulate and control the use of public sewers and the POTW by specifying requirements for permit issuance, inspections, connections to sewers, specifications for pipe quality, downspout regulations, waste materials discharged into the POTW, water and sewer rates, permit fees, sewage disposal rates and charges, late charges and penalties, discharge sampling, pretreatment and containment of harmful wastes, installation of sump pumps and building drains, and provides for the regulation of contributors to the POTW through the issuance of permits to significant industrial users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users of the POTW through monitoring, reporting and enforcement provisions, thereby allowing the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR part 403, as amended. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, are incompatible with the system, or which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system; 
(4)  To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of the POTW; 
(5)  To comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR part 403, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 1, 7-9-96)  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 41-57. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings described in this section unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
(2)  Alternative discharge limit: A limit set by the city in lieu of the promulgated national categorical pretreatment standards for integrated facilities in accordance with the combined waste stream formula, as set by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(3)  Applicable pretreatment standard: The standard that applies to a user. When there is a conflict between the categorical pretreatment standard and the local discharge limit, then the more stringent standard shall be the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(4)  Approval authority: The director of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Authorized representative of industrial use: An authorized representative of an industrial/commercial user may be: 
a.  A president, secretary, treasurer or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principle business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; 
b.  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
c.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production or operating facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
d.  The duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative of the individual is responsible for overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates or for environmental matters of the company. 
Authorization for this individual must be submitted to the city, in writing, by the individual designated in paragraph d. above. In addition, the duly authorized representative shall be designated by the industrial user on the user permit application. 
(5.5)  Best management practice (BMP): a practice or practices that prevent or reduce adverse effects of industrial water discharge, including, but not limited to, practices establishing: treatment requirements; operating, maintenance, and management procedures; controls on site runoff, spillage, and leaks; and controls on sludge or waste disposal, drainage, and material storage. 
(6)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/l). 
(7)  Building sanitary drain: That part of the horizontal piping of a sanitary system under the basement floor that receives sanitary waste from the plumbing system and conveys it to the building sewer which begins at a point five (5) feet outside the outer face of the building wall. 
(8)  Building sewer: The extension from the building sanitary drain to the sanitary sewer lead located in the public right-of-way or easement. 
(9)  Building storm drain: That part of the horizontal piping of a storm drainage system under the basement floor that receives the groundwater discharge from the footing drain tile and conveys it to the storm line. 
(10)  Bypass: The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
(11)  Categorical standards: The national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard as promulgated under authority of the Clean Water Act which specifies the quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged or introduced into the POTW by specific industrial dischargers. 
(12)  Chemical oxygen demand: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter in wastewater, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/l). 
(13)  City: City of Warren. 
(14)  Combined waste stream: The waste stream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewater, either regulated or unregulated, prior to or at the point of treatment. 
(15)  Combined waste stream formula: The combined waste stream formula found at 40 CFR 403.6(e) is the method which shall be used to calculate alternative pollutant limits at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewaters prior to treatment. 
(16)  Compatible pollutant: Pollutants that can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream and that do not contribute to operational upsets or interference of the POTW. This includes but is not limited to conventional pollutants. Specifically excluded are heavy metals and/or incompatible organic and inorganic pollutants. 
(17)  Composite sample: A series of individual samples of equal volume or of flow proportioned volume taken over a specified time period at specified intervals which are combined into one (1) sample or the equivalent. The arrangement of the sample series shall be tailored to the specific circumstances of the waste stream being tested and shall reasonably reflect the characteristics of the waste stream at the time of each sample. 
(18)  Control manhole: A sampling location which provides for effectively isolating the discharge or flow of an industrial/commercial user. 
(19)  Control authority: A POTW that has received industrial pretreatment program approval in accordance with requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.11. 
(20)  Cooling water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant is added is heat, shall be considered noncontact cooling water. The water, discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which heat and other pollutants have been added, shall be considered contact cooling water. 
(21)  Direct discharge: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly into the waters of the state. 
(22)  Domestic user: A source of waste emanating from a residence and resulting from the day to day activities usually carried on in a domicile. 
(23)  EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency, administrator or other duly authorized official. 
(24)  Equivalent limit: A mass per day limit or a concentration limit which is calculated to be equivalent to a federal categorical limit and applied as the local limit in place of the federal limit. 
(25)  Existing source: Any source which is not a new source as defined in subparagraph (45) of this section. 
(26)  Fats, oils or grease (FOG): Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods. 
(27)  Footing drain tile: That piping system at the outside base of the basement wall receiving groundwater from the yard area. 
(27.5)  Fundamentally different factor variance: A variance from the local discharge limits that is permitted because the facility is fundamentally different than those facilities that local discharge limits are based on. 
(28)  Grab sample: A sample which is collected in less than fifteen ( 15) minutes without regard to flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time, but which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the waste stream at the time of sampling. 
(29)  Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as, but not limited to, vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(30)  Incompatible pollutants: Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
(31)  Indirect discharge: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
(32)  Industrial pretreatment permit: Permit issued in accordance with Division 4 of this article. 
(33)  Industrial user: A source of discharge to the POTW which originates from, but is not limited to, facilities engaged in industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural products. Single and multiple family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics are specifically excluded. 
(34)  Industrial wastes: The solid, liquid, gaseous waste or form of energy or any combination thereof, resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, business or research process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources which is distinct from employee domestic waste or sanitary waste. 
(35)  Integrated facilities: Industrial facilities with combined waste streams. 
(36)  Interference: Discharge by a user which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW treatment processes or operations contributing to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345), or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of the Solid Waste Disposal Act) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
(37)  Laboratory determinations: Are methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, " Guidelines For Establishing Test Procedures For Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. Where these two (2) references are in disagreement, the methods given in 40 CFR 136 shall be followed. 
(38)  Matrix interference: Characteristics of the sample that interfere with the test method execution such that reliable data cannot be generated. 
(38.25)  Maximum allowable headworks loading: The total mass, including SAL allocations, of a pollutant that all users, septage receipts, along with POTW's safety factors may discharge without causing a pass through or interference. 
(38.75)  Maximum allowable industrial loading: The total mass, including SAL allocations, of a pollutant that all industrial users of a POTW may discharge without causing a pass through or interference. 
(39)  May or shall: Use of the word "may" is permissive whereas use of the word "shall" is mandatory. 
(40)  National categorical pretreatment standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act and applies to a specific category of users. 
(41)  National prohibitive discharge standard: Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
(42)  New source: 
a.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
1.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
2.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
3.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
b.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (45)c.1.ii., or (45)c.1.iii. of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
c.  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(2)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
(43)  Nondomestic waste: Solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial manufacturing, trade, or business process, or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
(44)  NPDES permit: National pollution discharge elimination system permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act for the discharge of wastewater into the surface waters of the state. 
(45)  Operation and maintenance: All work, materials, equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, including the cost of replacement. 
(46)  Organic chemicals: Compounds composed of carbon and hydrogen or their derivatives which are manmade or by-products of manmade or natural substances which include, but are not limited to, synthetic fibers, plastics, rubber medicinals, solvents, surface-active agents, pesticides and other agricultural chemicals, lubricating oil additives or other petroleum derivatives. 
(47)  Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
(48)  pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in gram equivalents per liter of solution on a scale of 0 to 14, with 7 being neutral. 
(49)  Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, oils, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, including industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into the water. 
(50)  Pollution: The introduction of pollutant(s) that can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of the water. 
(51)  POTW: Publicly owned treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act. The term includes any devices and systems used by or for the city in the storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. 
(52)  POTW treatment plant: That portion of POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
(52.5)  Practical quantitation level: As defined by the MDEQ's Mich. Admin. Code, R 325.10107(f), is the lowest concentration that can be reliably achieved by well-operated laboratories within specified limits of precision and accuracy during routine laboratory operating conditions. 
(53)  Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants. 
(54)  Pretreatment requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on a user. 
(55)  Pretreatment standards: Includes all national categorical pretreatment standards, the general and specific prohibitions specified in 40 CFR 403.5, all state standards and the prohibitions or limits specified in this article. 
(56)  Public sanitary sewer lead: That part of a sanitary system which receives sanitary waste from the building sewer at the public right-of-way or easement and conveys it to the public sanitary sewer. 
(57)  Public sewer: A sewer of any type controlled by a government entity. 
(58)  Replacement: The replacement in whole or in part of any equipment, appurtenances and accessories in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to insure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
(59)  Sanitary sewer: A pipe or system of pipes that convey wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions or other structures as a part of the wastewater collection system. 
(60)  Severe property damage: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which cannot reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(61)  Sewage or wastewater: Is a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
(62)  Significant change: Any change in the discharger's effluent which either causes the flow or concentration of the discharge to change by twenty (20) percent or more over those reported on the discharger's permit application or periodic compliance report, including the addition of any new wastewater constituent or new wastestreams. 
(63)  Significant industrial user: Any industrial user of the POTW who (1) is subject to the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR Ch. I, Subch. N; (2) discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) or contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or (3) is designated as such by the Control Authority as defined by 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(64)  Sludge: The accumulated solids separated from liquids during the treatment of wastewaters. 
(65)  Slug load: Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or non- customary batch discharge. 
(66)  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC): A classification pursuant to the standard industrial classification manual issued by the executive office of management and budget. 
(67)  Storm sewer: A sewer which carries storm and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than NPDES permitted discharges. 
(68)  Storm water: Includes storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff and drainage. 
(69)  Sump pump: A device approved by the superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant that is designed to receive, lift, and discharge flow from the building storm drain to a point outside the basement walls of the building. 
(70)  Superintendent: The superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant or his designated representative. 
(71)  Surcharge: A charge assessed against the user to cover the costs of investigating, pumping or treating discharges in violation of this article, or to cover the added costs of treating discharges which contain compatible pollutants in excess of the amount set forth in section 41-161. 
(72)  Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
(73)  Trade secret: The whole or any portion or phase of any secret manufacturing proprietary process or method not patented, which is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and the secrecy of which the owner has taken reasonable measure to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes. "Trade secret" shall not be construed, for purposes of these regulations, to include any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the treatment plant, the wastewater system tributary thereto, or the waters of the state. 
(74)  Toxic pollutant: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, Section 307(a), or other acts, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources or other acts. 
(75)  Upset: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with the effluent limits applicable to the user because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(76)  User: A user as defined in this article may be either: 
a.  Sanitary sewer user: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW; 
b.  Storm sewer user: Any person who contributes, causes or permits discharge to the storm sewer system either indirectly over the surface, or through an internal drainage system connected to the public storm sewer system. 
(77)  Wastewater: The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any incidental infiltration and inflow that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW. 
(78)  Wastewater treatment plant: The City of Warren Sewage Treatment Plant located at 32360 Warkop, Warren, Michigan. 
(79)  Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(80)  Waters of the state: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 2, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 80-597, §§ 1, 2, 7-22-03; Ord. No. 80-744, § 1, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-58. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BMP—Best Management Practice 
BOD—Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations 
COD—Chemical Oxygen Demand 
CWA—Clean Water Act 
EPA—Environmental Protection Agency 
FOG—Fats, Oils or Grease 
L—Liter 
mg—Milligrams 
mg/l—Milligrams per liter 
MDNR—Michigan Department of Natural Resources 
NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
O&M—Operation and Maintenance 
POTW—Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
PQL—Practical Quantitation Level 
RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SAL—Specific Alternative Limit 
SIC—Standard Industrial Classification 
SIU—Significant Industrial User 
SWDA—Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq. 
T.P.—Total Phosphorus 
TSS—Total Suspended Solids 
USC—United States Code 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 2, 6-14-16)  
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE 
 
Sec. 41-59. - Regulation. 
The rules and regulations established in or pursuant to this chapter are established for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent pollution of the environment, and to fulfill the obligations of the city with respect to all state and federal laws and all rules and regulations adopted in conformance thereto. The discharge into the system of any substance which exceeds the limitations contained herein, or in any manner fails to conform to the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of the code, subject to enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-60. - Illicit discharges. 
(a)  Sanitary sewers. Illicit discharges to any sanitary sewer include the prohibited discharges specified in section 41-74 of this article. Compliance with a permit shall not relieve the user of any liability relating to or from this discharge. 
(b)  Storm sewers. Illicit discharges to any storm sewer include any discharge that is not composed entirely of storm water, except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit, discharges resulting from firefighting activities and the following uncontaminated discharges: water line flushing, landscape irrigation run off, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, non-commercial car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, residential swimming pool discharges and other dechlorinated swimming pool discharges and street wash water. compliance with a permit shall not relieve the user of any liability relating to or from this discharge. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 3, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-61. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or similar purpose which is located in the city and has a public sanitary sewer lead located within two hundred (200) feet of the property line, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities, and to connect those facilities directly to the proper public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within ninety (90) days of official notice to connect. Every single house or structure shall have a separate connection with the sewer main unless an exception is approved by the director of public service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to construct any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage without the approval of the director of public service. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-62. - Use of publicly owned treatment system. 
Any person who complies with the standards, rules and regulations established in or pursuant to this chapter, shall be permitted to discharge into the POTW system provided there exists adequate sewer service available for connection. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-63. - Sewer connection permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any sewer connection, sanitary or storm, without first having obtained a sewer connection permit. 
(b)  Application for a sewer connection permit shall be made to the division of buildings and safety engineering. The sewer connection permit fee shall be collected in accordance with the charges set forth in the Plumbing Code found at Chapter 9, Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-64. - Sewer connection inspections. 
All connections to any city sewer shall be inspected by the division of engineering. Such connections shall only be made after procurement of an engineering inspection permit from the division of engineering. 
The division of engineering shall inspect all sewer connections and related work which takes place in the city right-of-way. The division of engineering shall also inspect the complete installation of any sanitary sewer lead which will serve two or more residences, any sewer which is larger than six (6) inches in diameter, or any sewer which is required to have an Michigan Department of Natural Resources permit pursuant to ACT 98 P.A. 1913, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-65. - Illegal sewer connections. 
It is prohibited to have any residential, commercial or industrial downspout leading to any sanitary sewer or to have any sanitary sewer line leading to any storm sewer. Any person who owns or possesses a building or structure which is in violation of this provision shall comply, forthwith, at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 4, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-66. - Trucked and hauled waste. 
Trucked and hauled waste shall not be discharged to the POTW except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 4, 7-9-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-497, § 4, adopted July 9, 1996, deleted former § 14-66, relative to discharges to the storm sewer, and renumbered former § 14-67 as § 14-66. The provisions of former § 14-66 derived from Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1992. Provisions regarding discharge into storm sewers are currently set out under § 41-140 et seq.  
Secs. 41-67—41-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM 
Part I. 
Regulations 
The purpose of this division is (a) the protection of the public health and safety; (b) the protection of the POTW and personnel; (c) the abatement and prevention of pollution; and (d) the POTW compliance with state and federal regulations. This purpose is accomplished through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92) 
 
Sec. 41-71. - Pretreatment required. 
All users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review. No construction is to commence until the plans have received approval of the superintendent. The review of such plans and operating procedures in no way relieves the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-72. - National categorical and state pretreatment standards. 
(a)  The national categorical pretreatment standards defined in 40 CFR, Chapter I Subpart N, Parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated into this article and made a part hereof. A list of federal categories is included following this section. 
(b)  State or local discharge limits shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements. 
(c)  When the limits of a federal categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass pollutant per unit of production, an equivalent mass per day or concentration based limit may be substituted as the superintendent deems appropriate for individual industrial user. 
Appendix 
Categorical Pretreatment Categories 
Aluminum Forming 	40 CFR 467 
Asbestos Manufacturing 	40 CFR 427 
Battery Manufacturing 	40 CFR 461 
Builder's Paper and Board Mills 	40 CFR 431 
Canned and Preserved Fruits and Vegetables 	40 CFR 407 
Canned and Preserved Seafood Processing 	40 CFR 408 
Carbon Black Manufacturing 	40 CFR 458 
Cement Manufacturing 	40 CFR 411 
Coal Mining 	40 CFR 434 
Coil Coating 	40 CFR 465 
Copper Forming 	40 CFR 468 
Dairy Products Processing 	40 CFR 405 
Electrical and Electronic Components I & II 	40 CFR 469 
Electroplating 	40 CFR 413 
Explosives Manufacturing 	40 CFR 457 
Feed lots 	40 CFR 412 
Ferroalloy Manufacturing 	40 CFR 424 
Fertilizer Manufacturing 	40 CFR 418 
Glass Manufacturing 	40 CFR 426 
Grain Mills 	40 CFR 406 
Gum and Wood Chemicals Manufacturing 	40 CFR 454 
Hospital 	40 CFR 460 
Ink Formulating 	40 CFR 447 
Inorganic Chemicals Manufacture (I & II) 	40 CFR 415 
Iron and Steel 	40 CFR 420 
Leather Tanning & Finishing 	40 CFR 425 
Meat Products 	40 CFR 432 
Metal Finishing 	40 CFR 433 
Metal Molding and Casting 	40 CFR 464 
Mineral Mining and Processing 	40 CFR 436 
Nonferrous Metals Forming 	40 CFR 471 
Nonferrous Metals Manufacturing I 	40 CFR 421 
Nonferrous Metals Manufacturing II 	40 CFR 421 
Ore Mining and Dressing 	40 CFR 440 
Organic Chemicals, Plastics, and Synthetic Fibers 	40 CFR 414 
and 416 
Paint Formulating 	40 CFR 446 
Paving and Roofing Materials 	40 CFR 443 
Pesticide Chemicals 	40 CFR 455 
Petroleum Refining 	40 CFR 419 
Pharmaceuticals 	40 CFR 439 
Phosphate Manufacturing 	40 CFR 422 
Photographic 	40 CFR 459 
Plastics Molding and Forming 	40 CFR 463 
Porcelain Enameling 	40 CFR 466 
Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard 	40 CFR 430 
Rubber Manufacturing 	40 CFR 428 
Soap and Detergent Manufacturing 	40 CFR 417 
Steam Electric 	40 CFR 423 
Sugar Processing 	40 CFR 409 
Textile Mills 	40 CFR 410 
Timber Products 	40 CFR 429 
 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-527, § 28, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 41-73. - Existing source and new source compliance. 
(a)  Existing sources: Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards by existing sources shall be achieved within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. Existing sources which become industrial users subject to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the definition of "new source," 40 CFR 403.3(k). 
(b)  New sources: Prior to discharging, all "new sources" as defined in Section 403.3(k) shall install, have in operating condition and start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards. Within ninety (90) days all "new sources" must comply with all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-74. - Prohibited contributions. 
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed to the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through. In addition, it shall be unlawful for users to discharge any of the substances listed below. These discharge prohibitions apply whether or not the user is subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute any of the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Examples of these materials are, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides; 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances or inert suspended solids which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, lime slurries and lime residues, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes, Fullers earth, or dissolved solids such as sodium chloride and sodium sulfate in unusual concentrations; 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 10.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the POTW; 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard; 
(5)  Any discharge resulting in toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
(8)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as ash residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process; 
(9)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit, the receiving water quality standards, or the national air quality emissions standards; 
(10)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
(11)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference (one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit at the influent) but in no case wastewater with a temperature which exceeds sixty-six (66) degrees Celsius (one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit) 
(12)  Any pollutants, (including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW; 
(13)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed applicable pretreatment standards; 
(14)  Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, noncontact cooling water; 
(15)  Any discharge from roof downspouts, surface drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-641, § 1, 11-14-06)  
Sec. 41-75. - Local discharge limits. 
(a)  Effluent limits. Unless, a written authorization from the city is obtained pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, an industrial user shall not discharge wastewater that exceeds the following concentrations: 
Arsenic 	0.33 mg/l 
Beryllium 	0.005 mg/l 
Cadmium 	0.29 mg/l 
Chromium (Total) 	7.0 mg/l 
Copper 	4.5 mg/l 
Lead 	0.6 mg/l 
Lithium 	0.83 mg/l 
Mercury 	See subsection (b) 
of this section 
Nickel 	4.1 mg/l 
Selenium 	0.21 mg/l 
Silver 	0.82 mg/l 
Thallium 	0.54 mg/l 
Zinc 	4.2 mg/l 
BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) 	2100.0 mg/l 
TSS (Total Suspended Solids) 	1450.0 mg/l 
Phosphorus 	75.0 mg/l 
Ammonia-N or Total K Kjeldahl (TKN)* 	200.0 mg/l 
 
* If significant organic nitrogen is or may be present, Ammonia-N may be expressed as Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN). 
(b)  Mercury limits. Any mercury discharge at detectable levels is a violation of this article. The mercury discharge level is calculated by EPA Method 245.1 or an EPA-approved equivalent. The PQL shall be no higher than 0.0002 mg/l, unless a higher quantification level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. 
(c)  Effluent limits in grab sample. Unless, a written authorization from the city is obtained pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, an industrial user shall not discharge wastewater that exceeds the following concentrations in any grab sample: 
Chromium (Hexavalent) 	0.5 mg/l 
Cyanide (Available) 	0.5 mg/l 
Cyanide (Total) 	1.3 mg/l 
Total Phenolics 	0.67 mg/l 
Petroleum Based Fats, Oil and Grease 	150.0 mg/l 
Total Fats, Oil and Grease 	900.0 [mg]/l 
 
(d)  New limits. If the superintendent determines that an industrial user is contributing or proposes to contribute any substances to the POTW in a quality, quantity, or location that the superintendent determines is reasonably likely to adversely affect the POTW or the receiving stream, the superintendent may develop and enforce effluent limits that are specifically applicable to that substance, industrial user, or both. 
(e)  Specific alternative limit permits. 
(1)  Authority to grant. Subject to the requirements and restrictions listed in this subsection (e), the superintendent, at his sole discretion, may grant a specific alternative limit (SAL) or multiple specific alternative limits to an industrial user in an industrial pretreatment permit that allows discharges to the POTW that are different than the effluent limits listed in (a) and (c) of this section (SAL permit). 
(2)  Constituent. The superintendent shall only grant SAL permits for BOD, TSS, Phosphorus, and Ammonia-N/ Total K Kjeldahl (TKN) 
(3)  Maximum allowable headworks and industrial loadings. In determining a SAL, the superintendent may allocate a share of the maximum allowable headworks loading and maximum allowable industrial loading for BOD, TSS, Phosphorus, and Ammonia-N among one or more industrial users in amounts and on terms and conditions the superintendent deems appropriate and are in accordance with SAL procedures approved by the MDEQ. 
a.  The POTW plant headworks loadings shall not exceed the following levels: 
BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) 	48,000 lb/day 
TSS (Total Suspended Solids) 	43,500 lb/day 
Phosphorus 	1,030 lb/day 
Ammonia-N 	4,500 lb/day 
 
b.  The POTW plant industrial loadings shall not exceed the following levels: 
BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) 	27,500 lb/day 
TSS (Total Suspended Solids) 	18,350 lb/day 
Phosphorus 	402 lb/day 
Ammonia-N 	1,510 lb/day 
 
(4)  Fundamentally different factor variance. The superintendent shall not grant a SAL that is less stringent than the effluent limits listed in (a) and (c) of this section, unless the industrial user qualifies for a fundamentally different factor variance that allows the user to exceed the applicable effluent limits. If the superintendent grants a variance, the SAL shall not exceed the limits provided in the variance. 
(5)  Acknowledgement and acceptance. Before the superintendent grants a SAL permit, the industrial user shall sign an acknowledgement and acceptance of both the provisions of this subsection (e) and the specific SAL permit conditions or provisions. 
(6)  Additional conditions or provisions. The superintendent may include in a SAL permit any conditions or provisions that comply with this article and any other applicable city, state, or federal laws or regulations. 
(7)  Compensatory charge. The superintendent may include in a SAL permit a provision requiring that the industrial user pay a compensatory charge to the city. 
(8)  No additional rights created. The SAL permit does not create any rights or future expectations beyond the limited scope of the express language of the SAL permit. 
(9)  Termination or modification. At any time after granting the SAL permit, the superintendent may terminate or modify it without the industrial user's consent. 
(10)  Violation. Any violation of a SAL permit provision is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-640, § 1, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 80-744, § 3, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-76. - Dilution of wastewater. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the national categorical pretreatment standards or any other pollutant specific standard developed by the city or state. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-77. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be maintained and cleaned regularly to prevent grease, oil or sand from entering the public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-78. - Spill containment requirements. 
Every nondomestic user that uses or stores liquid material or chemicals at its facility, shall provide a storage or containment area that is capable of containing the liquid material in the event of an accident. The containment area shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All liquid polluting material, except salt, shall be diked, curbed or otherwise structurally enclosed so as to contain not less than one hundred fifty (150) percent of the liquid polluting material stored or used unless a lesser containment area or alternative control measures are approved by the superintendent. The area shall be so constructed that no liquid polluting material can escape therefrom by gravity through the building sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly into any sewer system, surface or ground waters of this state unless approved by the superintendent. 
(2)  The storage tank and/or diked area shall be maintained not more than twenty (20) percent full at all times and ready for accidental spillage or breakage of the solution thereto. 
(3)  There shall be no connections between harmful concentrated chemical solutions and the sewer systems or surface drainage systems if a simple mechanical or human failure would result in a prohibited contamination. 
(4)  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review. No construction is to be commenced until the plans have been reviewed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92) 
Part II. Reporting Requirements  
Sec. 41-79. - Notice of discharge change. 
All users shall promptly notify the superintendent, in advance, of any significant change in the volume or character of the pollutants in their discharge. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-80. - Notice of slug load and problem discharges. 
(a)  In the event of a discharge that is reasonably likely to adversely affect the POTW, including, but not limited to, a slug load, the industrial user shall immediately notify the POTW contact person by telephone of the discharge and potential problem. The industrial user shall comply with all notice and reporting requirements set forth in section 41-81 for operating upsets. 
(b)  On request of the superintendent, the industrial user shall submit a slug load discharge control plan as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi). 
(c)  An industrial user shall immediately notify the POTW of any changes at its facility that may affect the potential for a slug load discharge. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 4, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-81. - Operating upsets. 
(a)  Immediate notice. In the case of an operating upset, the industrial user shall immediately notify the POTW contact person by telephone of the incident. The notification shall include all of the following: the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration level, volume, and corrective action taken. 
(b)  Five-day report. Within five (5) days after an operating upset, the industrial user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing all of the following: the cause of the discharge, the duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, the measures taken in response to the discharge, the impact of the discharge on the user's compliance status, and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent any future recurrence. 
(c)  Employee notice . An industrial user shall notify all appropriate employees of the required operating upset notification procedures. Additionally, in a prominent place at the industrial facility, the industrial user shall permanently post the name and telephone number of the contact person at the POTW in case of an operating upset or other problematic discharge. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 5, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-82. - Residual records. 
When required by the city, the user shall submit a record of all residuals generated, stored and hauled including copies of manifests where the material hauled is a hazardous waste. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-83. - Discharge information required. 
Any nondomestic user discharging water to the sewer or other watercourse, including industrial waste discharged to the sanitary sewer, shall upon request, submit to the superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant, the following information in units and terms appropriate for evaluation: 
(1)  Name, address and location of building. 
(2)  SIC number according to the most recent revision of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in section 41-75 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and methods detailed in 40 CFR part 136 and the amendments thereto. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(7)  The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any applicable pretreatment requirement, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the user to meet applicable pretreatment requirements. 
(8)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance are necessary to meet the pretreatment requirements, a schedule by which the user will provide for such additional pretreatment shall be submitted. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment requirement. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(i)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. 
(ii)  No increment referred to in subsection (a)(9)a. shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(iii)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent including, as a minimum whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
(9)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(10)  Type and amount of raw materials processed and chemicals used, average and maximum per day. 
(11)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(12)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the POTW and the need for pretreatment. 
(13)  The disclosure form shall be signed by the authorized representative of the user and a qualified engineer. The city will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data furnished and may require additional information. Within ninety (90) days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city shall notify the user of the acceptance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-84. - Facility and pretreatment information. 
Upon request of the superintendent, the user shall submit the following information: 
(a)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans detailed to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation. 
(b)  Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures. The city will review such plans and respond with approval or suggested modifications to the user within ninety (90) days following plan submittal. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-85. - Certification. 
All industrial user reports, including but not limited to: categorical pretreatment baseline reports, periodic compliance reports, categorical pretreatment deadline reports, and categorical process statements, shall include a certification statement as set forth below and signed by the authorized representative of the industrial user: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for known violations. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-86. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data regarding a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of a report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses that are either related to this article, the NPDES permit, or the pretreatment program; provided, that the information shall be treated as confidential by the government agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be nonconfidential by the government agency. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(d)  In accordance with 40 CFR 403.14(b) all effluent data shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-87. - Records retention. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, an industrial user shall retain, for a period of three (3) years, all records including books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and any summaries relating to monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis, including BMP documentation made by or on behalf of a user in connection with its discharge. 
(b)  An industrial user shall retain all records that pertain to matters that are the subject of enforcement action, litigation, or administrative adjustment until all enforcement activities, periods of limitation, and appeals periods have expired. On request, an industrial user shall provide all such records to representatives of the EPA, state, or POTW for inspection and copying purposes. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 6, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-88. - Falsifying information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained under this article or in any permit, or to falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-89. - Notification of hazardous waste discharge. 
(a)  All users shall, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(p), provide a one time notification for each listed or characteristic hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261 discharged to the POTW. If a pollutant is already being reported to the POTW as part of a periodic compliance report, the pollutant is not subject to this reporting requirement. Further, users who discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms (kg) of hazardous wastes during a calendar month are exempt from the notification requirements set forth herein unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 40 CFR 261.33(e). The written notification shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the hazardous waste(s), the hazardous waste number as identified in 40 CFR 261 and the type of discharge. 
(2)  Certification that a program is in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of the wastes generated to the degree economically practicable. 
(3)  All users who discharge more than one hundred (100) kilograms (kg) of hazardous waste in a calendar month, shall also submit the following additional information: 
(i)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of hazardous waste constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month. 
(ii)  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. 
(b)  In the event that a substantial change in volume or character of a user's discharge occurs, the user is required to provide further notification in accordance with the requirements set forth in 40 CIR 403.12(p). 
(c)  In the event new regulations are adopted under 40 CIR sections 260—261 which identify additional characteristics of hazardous waste or lists additional substances as a hazardous waste, all users discharging such substance shall comply with the notification requirements of this section within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the regulations. 
(d)  Notification as required in this section shall be provided in writing to the following hazardous waste authorities: 
Director, Waste Management Division 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency- 
Region 5 
230 South Dearborn Street 
Chicago, Illinois 60604 
Chief, Technical Services Section 
Waste Management Division 
Division of Natural Resources 
Box 30028 
Lansing, Michigan 48909 
Director, Industrial Pretreatment Program 
Warren Wastewater Treatment Plant 
32360 Warkop Avenue 
Warren, Michigan 48093 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Secs. 41-90—41-92. - Reserved. 
Part III. 
Monitoring and Inspection  
Sec. 41-93. - Authority of inspectors. 
Authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted ready access at all reasonable times to enter any user's premises for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, documentation, records examination and copying, sampling and testing in connection with the performance of their duties and the administration of this article. Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with security personnel so that upon presentation of proper identification, personnel from the city, state department of natural resources and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-94. - Non-routine inspections. 
Under circumstances where an inspection of a nondomestic facility is necessary to investigate a problem discharge, authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted ready access to enter any user's premises for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-95. - Safety rules of user. 
While on the property of the user, the inspectors shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-96. - Other inspections. 
Inspections performed by state or federal representatives shall not relieve a user from inspection by city representatives and inspection by the city shall not relieve any user from compliance with lawful inspection by state and federal representatives. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-97. - Monitoring equipment; removal of samples and data. 
The city, through its authorized representatives shall have the right to set up monitoring equipment on the user's premises as needed for sampling and flow measurement, to take and remove samples of wastewater and pollutants from the user's discharge, and to make copies of other data and material inspected during an entry upon the user's property. If the city requests that the user make photocopies of documents, the city shall give the user at least twenty-four (24) hours notice to comply with such request, however, this notice requirement does not affect the right of the city during an inspection to immediately copy data or other materials. Upon the written request of the user, split samples will be provided. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-98. - Access refused. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any user to refuse an authorized representative of the city access to its premises; or to refuse to allow the representative to obtain, take, or remove samples; or to refuse access to records pertinent to this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-99. - Authority to require submission of samples. 
The city may require any user to submit one or more representative samples of it's wastewater discharged or proposed to be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-100. - Monitoring activities; control manhole; flow meter. 
(a)  The city may require, at the user's expense, the user to provide a control manhole and/or flow metering equipment to facilitate inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The control manhole shall be located on the user's premises unless otherwise allowed under the provisions herein. At the expense of the user, the sampling facility and all sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition. Following notice to provide a control manhole and/or flow metering equipment, the user shall submit to the city, plans and specifications which shall comply with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written approval from the city of the plans and specifications. 
(b)  When the user demonstrates that the location of a control manhole on the user's premises is impractical or will cause undue hardship on the user, the city may allow the control manhole to be constructed on a public street or sidewalk area, provided the location meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The sampling manhole will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles; 
(2)  There is ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling flow measurement and preparation of samples for analysis; and 
(3)  It will not create an obstruction or other hazard in the public way. 
(c)  If the city has not required the user to provide a control manhole, the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected shall be designated the access point or control manhole for the user. 
(d)  The city, in its discretion, may monitor a users discharge through an available control manhole or by utilizing a downstream manhole, whichever the circumstances warrant. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-101. - Self-monitoring. 
(a)  The city may require any user to perform self-monitoring of the wastewater discharge. Any required self-monitoring program may include designation of the sampling location, frequency of sampling, number of samples, types of samples, type of analysis required, standards for testing and increased reporting schedules. 
(b)  Industrial users who conduct self-monitoring shall notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of a violation of any applicable discharge limit. The user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results to the city within thirty (30) days, unless the city notifies the user that it will perform the repeat sample and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-102. - Testing and analysis. 
(a)  Sampling methods. The industrial user or its designee shall carry out sampling by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents on the POTW and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The superintendent will determine the type of sample to be taken depending on the specific analysis to be performed. The industrial user or its designee shall perform all sampling and analysis in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, standard methods, or an alternative method as approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  Facilities. 
(1)  The industrial user or its designee shall properly operate, keep clean, and maintain in good working order its wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities. 
(2)  The industrial user's failure to keep its monitoring and flow measurement facilities in good working order is not grounds for claiming that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  Samples. 
(1)  The industrial user or its designee shall ensures wastewater samples are representative of the industrial user's discharge. 
(2)  Composite samples. For composite samples, the industrial user or its designee shall use a flow-proportional sampling technique, unless an alternative time-based or grab-based sampling technique is approved by the superintendent. An industrial user seeking an alternative sampling technique shall submit a written request and demonstrate that the alternative sampling technique will be representative of the discharge. The superintendent may only grant the use of an alternative sampling technique if the basis for granting the alternative sampling technique is documented in the city's file for that user. 
(3)  Grab samples. 
a.  The industrial user or its designee shall use grab samples for assessing oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds compliance. 
b.  For compliance reports, except ninety-day compliance reports and baseline monitoring reports, the industrial user or its designee shall use a minimum of four (4) daily grab samples for oil and grease, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds. If historical sampling data is available, the superintendent may authorize a lower number of samples. 
c.  For ninety-day compliance and baseline monitoring reports, the industrial user or its designee may composite multiple grab samples prior to analysis, if they comply with all of the following: 
i.  They are collected during a twenty-four-hour period; 
ii.  They are composited using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance; 
iii.  For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides they are composited in the field or the laboratory; 
iv.  For volatile organics and oil and grease they are composited only in the laboratory; and 
v.  For other pollutants, they are composited as authorized by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 7, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-103. - Surcharge. 
There shall be a surcharge assessed to nondomestic users in order to cover the added costs of investigating, pumping or treating discharges in violation of this article, or to cover the added costs of treating discharges which contain compatible pollutants in excess of the amounts set forth in section 41-161. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-104. - Cost Recovery. 
In addition to service charges, the user shall be responsible for any additional costs incurred by the POTW due to the user's discharge or incurred by the POTW due to a violation of this article. Recoverable costs include, but are not limited to, expenses incurred due to additional monitoring, investigating, pumping or treating of discharges; damage or loss to the POTW; fines and penalties incurred by the city as a result of any user discharging in violation of this article. The user shall be notified of all charges assessed pursuant to this provision. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Secs. 41-105—41-109. - Reserved. 
Part IV. 
Noncompliance  
Sec. 41-110. - Prohibited bypass. 
It shall be unlawful for any user to intentionally bypass any portion of the treatment facility by discharging in violation of applicable effluent limits. Enforcement action shall be taken against a user for a bypass unless; 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, however, if adequate back up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment down time or preventative maintenance this exception shall not apply; and 
(3)  The user complies with the notice requirements set forth in section 41-112(a). 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-111. - Allowable bypass. 
A user may be allowed to bypass the treatment facility only under the following conditions: 
(1)  The user complies with the notice requirements set forth in section 41-112(b); 
(2)  The bypass does not violate any pretreatment requirements; and 
(3)  The bypass is necessary for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-112. - Bypass notice. 
(a)  Unanticipated bypass in violation of applicable pretreatment requirements. In the case of an unanticipated bypass violating applicable pretreatment limits, the user shall notify the POTW by telephone immediately upon knowledge of the bypass. A written report shall then be submitted within five (5) days thereof. The written report shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; the steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written report requirement if a sufficient oral report was received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(b)  Anticipated bypass. If a user knows in advance of the need to bypass within applicable pretreatment limits, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if possible, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-113. - Significant noncompliance. 
An industrial user shall not be in significant noncompliance with the pretreatment regulations. An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violations meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  The industrial user has chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits occur when sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit: average or instantaneous limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  The industrial user has technical review criteria violations. Technical review criteria violations occur when thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for any pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit: average or instantaneous limit times the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  The industrial user violated any other pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum, longer-term average, or instantaneous limit) that the POTW determined caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, pass through, or endangered the health of the POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  The industrial user discharged a pollutant that caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment; or resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, the industrial user did not meet a compliance schedule date or a compliance schedule milestone for starting construction, completing construction, attaining final compliance, or any other date contained in an order; 
(6)  Within thirty (30) days after the due date, the industrial user did not provide required reports including all of the following: baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  The industrial user did not accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  The violation or violations adversely affected the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program as determined by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 8, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-114. - Annual publication. 
The name of those users who are found to be in significant noncompliance as defined in section 41-113, during the period since the previous publication, shall be published annually in the local daily newspaper with the largest circulation. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Secs. 41-115—41-120. - Reserved. 
Part V. 
Industrial Pretreatment Permits  
Sec. 41-121. - Permit required. 
All significant industrial users and any other user as required by the superintendent, shall obtain an industrial pretreatment permit from the superintendent in order to discharge into the POTW. Obtaining an industrial pretreatment permit does not relieve a permittee of any obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, or local law. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-122. - Permit not required. 
Upon a finding that a noncategorical user has no reasonable potential for adversely effecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority (POTW) may at any time, upon its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a noncategorical industrial user or POTW and with the consent of the approval authority, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user to which the provisions of this article apply. Such determinations will be submitted to the approval authority and, unless objected to, shall become effective ninety (90) days from the date of submittal to the approval authority. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-123. - Permit application. 
All users required to obtain a permit shall make application on a form provided by the superintendent submitting the following information within sixty (60) days from receipt of notice to file application: 
(1)  Name, address and location of facility; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the user is a corporation, partnership, proprietorship or other type of entity and the name of the person(s) responsible for the discharge by the user; 
(3)  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code of both the industry and any processes for which federal categorical standards have been promulgated; 
(4)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state or local standards. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as amended; 
(5)  Time and duration of discharges; 
(6)  Average daily and instantaneous peak discharge flow rates in gallons per day, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations. All flows shall be measured unless verifiable techniques are approved by the superintendent. 
(7)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans detailed to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; 
(8)  Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures; 
(9)  A description of the activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility which are or could be discharged to the POTW; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process(s) and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed on the average and maximum per day; 
(12)  Number and title of all employees, hours of operation, and actual or proposed hours of operation of the pretreatment system; 
(13)  A list of all environmental control permits held by or for the user; 
(14)  Nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials in the discharge which are limited by city, state or federal pretreatment standards, together with a statement whether or not compliance is being achieved with the pretreatment standards on a consistent basis and if not, whether operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is necessary for the user to comply with the applicable pretreatment standards; 
(15)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance is necessary to comply with the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall provide a compliance time schedule indicating the shortest time period necessary to achieve compliance. The completion date in the schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(i)  All compliance time schedules shall contain progress increments providing dates for the commencement and completion of major events necessary to achieve compliance, including but not limited to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction and commencing operation of the system. 
(ii)  Under no circumstances shall the city allow a time increment for any step directed toward compliance to exceed nine (9) months and no compliance period shall exceed a total of eighteen (18) months. 
(iii)  The user shall submit, within fourteen (14) days of the scheduled date for each progress increment, a progress report to the city stating whether or not it has complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and the steps being taken to return to the compliance time schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between submittal of progress reports to the city. 
(16)  Any other information required to be submitted by the superintendent. 
(17)  All permit applications shall be signed by an authorized representative and certified as required in section 41-85. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-124. - Permit conditions. 
(a)  Industrial pretreatment permits shall include all of the following conditions: 
(1)  A statement of duration; 
(2)  A statement of nontransferability; 
(3)  Effluent limits for the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(4)  Sampling, reporting notification, and recordkeeping requirements; and 
(5)  A statement that a violation of pretreatment standards and requirements may result in applicable civil and criminal penalties, as described in division 5 of this article. 
(b)  Additionally, if the superintendent determines it is necessary, industrial pretreatment permits may include any of the following conditions: 
(1)  A schedule of fees and charges; 
(2)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge, requirements for flow regulation and equalization, or both; 
(3)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(4)  Requirements for installations and operation of discharge flow monitors; 
(5)  Compliance schedules; 
(6)  Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge reports, or both; 
(7)  Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the superintendent; 
(8)  Requirements for allowing the city or its agent to access any plant records; 
(9)  Requirements for notifying the city or its agent of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituent introduced into the POTW; 
(10)  Requirements for notifying the city or its agent of accidental discharges, as required in section 41-80; 
(11)  Requirements for notifying the city or its agent of slug discharges; 
(12)  Requirements for controlling slug discharge; 
(13)  Requirements for BMPs; and 
(14)  Other conditions to ensure compliance with this division. 
(c)  Within fifteen (15) days of receiving a permit issued pursuant to section 41-121, a SIU may request reconsideration of the conditions contained in the permit. The SIU shall submit the request for consideration in writing and state the grounds supporting the request for reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 9, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-125. - Permit modifications. 
(a)  The superintendent shall have the authority to amend any permit issued hereunder in order to: 
(1)  Assure compliance by the POTW with applicable laws, regulations, and the POTW NPDES permit; 
(2)  Account for substantial changes in discharges by the user; 
(3)  Account for new information concerning the pollutants discharged by the user; 
(4)  Reflect changes in federal or state laws and regulations or in City ordinances; 
(5)  In the event there are operational changes at the POTW that require revision of the permit; or 
(6)  Modify or terminate any special agreement provision contained in a permit. 
(7)  Changes in monitoring locations; 
(8)  Correction of typographical errors; or 
(9)  Incorporation of enforcement actions. 
(b)  The user shall be informed of any changes in the permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change, unless a shorter time is necessary to meet applicable law or to protect human health or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-126. - Permit term. 
All industrial pretreatment user permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five (5) years. The user shall apply for a permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-127. - Permit transfer. 
Industrial pretreatment permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and location. Industrial pretreatment permits are not transferable to another user or location without prior written approval of the superintendent. The superintendent may approve a permit transfer for the duration of the permit period under the following conditions: 
(1)  The transferee makes application to the superintendent for permit transfer at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of transfer and acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit; and 
(2)  The permittee has not violated any provision of the user permit or this article during the six-5 month period preceding the date of transfer; and 
(3)  As of the date of transfer, there are no unpaid charges or fees due to the city from the permittee related to the use of the POTW; and 
(4)  No significant change will be made to the operation, discharge, facilities and activities of the transferee and the application for the industrial pretreatment permit remains accurate for the transferee. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-128. - Interim permit. 
Interim permits may be issued by the superintendent for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The terms and conditions of the permit shall be established by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-129. - Permit fees. 
Users shall pay an industrial pretreatment permit fee to the city to reimburse the city for its cost of processing the application, issuing the permit, administering the permit, and processing renewal applications. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-130. - Revocation of industrial pretreatment permit. 
(a)  The city may revoke the industrial pretreatment permit during its term or deny renewal to any user who is found to have violated any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The violation of any permit condition; 
(2)  The violation of any provision of this article; 
(3)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(4)  Failure to report significant changes in its operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(5)  Failure to fully disclose all relevant facts or misrepresent any material fact; 
(6)  Refusal to provide reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; 
(7)  Endangerment of human health or environment that can only be abated by revocation of the permit; 
(8)  The change in any condition which requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the discharge. Upon revocation of its permit, the user shall terminate its discharge to the POTW. 
(b)  Upon revocation of its permit, the user shall terminate its discharge to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-131. - Baseline monitoring reports for permittees and users subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  All existing industrial users subject to the categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the superintendent within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or one hundred (100) days after the final administrative decision made upon a categorical determination submitted under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, containing the following information: 
(1)  The name, and address of the facility including the name of the operator and all owners. 
(2)  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  A description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operations carried out, including a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  The amount of measured average and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW, for both the regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to use the combined waste stream formula provided in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process as required by 40 CFR 403.12 (b)(5). 
(6)  The results of sampling and analysis which identify the nature (or mass where required) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Procedures for sampling and analysis shall meet the requirements set forth at 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5)(iii) and (iv). 
(7)  Attach a statement signed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified representative stating whether the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards. 
(8)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance are necessary to comply with applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the user will provide the necessary changes. The completion date in the schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(9)  When required by the city, the user shall submit a categorical process statement certifying whether or not a categorical process is performed at the user's facility and identifying all categorical processes which are performed. All categorical process statements must be certified as required in section 41-85 on certification. 
(b)  All "new sources" and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit a report to the superintendent, within 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, containing the following information: 
(1)  The name, and address of the facility including the name of the operator and all owners. 
(2)  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  A description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operations carried out, including a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  An estimate of the amount of average and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW, for both the regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to use the combined waste stream formula provided in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Identify, by estimation if necessary, the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process as required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) (5). 
(6)  The results of sampling and analysis which identify the nature (or mass where required) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Procedures for sampling and analysis shall meet the requirements set forth at 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5)(iii) and (iv). 
(7)  The method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(8)  When required by the city, the user shall submit a categorical process statement certifying whether or not a categorical process is performed at the user's facility and identifying all categorical processes which are performed. All categorical process statements must be certified as required in section 41-85 on certification. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-132. - Permittee initial compliance reports. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in case of a "new Source," following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, or in the case of noncategorical industrial users, any industrial user subject to the pretreatment standards or local requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the following information: 
(1)  The amount of measured average and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW, for both the regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to use the combined waste stream formula provided in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(2)  Identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process as required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) (5). 
(3)  Attach a statement signed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified representative stating whether the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards. 
(b)  For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established according to 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users, this report shall include the user's actual production during the sampling period. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Sec. 41-133. - Permittee periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  Every June and December, a permittee or SIU shall submit a compliance report to the superintendent that indicates all of the following: 
(1)  The nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent that are limited by the categorical pretreatment standards or local requirements; 
(2)  A record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows of the reporting period for the discharge. Upon request of the POTW, the user shall provide more detailed reporting of flow; and 
(3)  All monitoring results of any permitted wastewater constituents analyzed in accordance with approved 40 CFR 136 test methods. 
(b)  The reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and done in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR part 136. The POTW may require the user to submit periodic compliance reports more frequently than bi-annually. Further, the months that the periodic compliance reports are due may be altered at the discretion of the superintendent in consideration of local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other factors. 
(c)  If this division requires an industrial user to comply with a BMP, the industrial user shall submit documentation necessary for the superintendent to determine compliance with the requirement. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-744, § 10, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-134. - Significant industrial user submittal. 
All industries meeting the definition of significant industrial user, subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards or as otherwise required by the city, must submit the following information: 
(1)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans detailed to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation. 
(2)  Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures. The city will review such plans and respond with approval or suggested modifications to the user within ninety (90) days following plan submittal. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92)  
Secs. 41-135—41-139. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - STORM SEWERS 
 
Sec. 41-140. - Discharge into storm sewers. 
(a)  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged only to storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the state department of natural resources. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may only be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet pursuant to a valid NPDES permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause or allow any illicit discharge, dumping or disposing of materials other than natural precipitation, to discharge any sewage, industrial or commercial waste, or other fluid into any public storm sewer, drain or any sewer, drain or pipe connected with or emptying into any public storm sewer, except the following discharges: water line flushing, landscape irrigation run off, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, non-commercial car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, residential swimming pool discharges and other dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water. 
(c)  No person shall connect or attach any downspout, pipe or drain or cause such a connection to any public storm sewer without first having obtained permission from the director of public service. Application for such connection shall be made in writing to the director of public service and shall state the location of the connection; the name and address of the owner and occupant of the premises; and shall be accompanied by sufficient plans and specifications as to enable the director of public service to determine whether the connection is done in accordance with standard practices and will not contribute any pollutants to the public storm sewers nor endanger the health, safety and welfare of pedestrians and others using public streets, alleys and other places. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-141. - Use of Best Management Practices. 
All users shall implement Best Management Practices as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 to minimize the contribution of pollutants to the public storm sewers to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-142. - Industrial storm water discharge. 
For purposes of enforcement of this division the director of public service or his designated representative shall have the authority to implement and manage an industrial storm water program regulating the quantity and quality of industrial storm water discharges. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-143. - Notice of NPDES permits. 
Any person who holds a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit shall provide a copy of the permit to the director of public service or his designated representative within sixty (60) calendar days of the adoption of this Ordinance or if the permit is issued after the adoption of this Ordinance, within sixty (60) days of issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-144. - Notification of spills, illicit discharges and dumping. 
(a)  Immediate notice. In the event that a user or other person becomes aware of a spill, illicit discharge to the storm sewer or the dumping of prohibited material, the user or person shall immediately telephone and notify the city through the director of public service or his designated representative of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of material discharged, concentration level, volume and corrective action taken. 
(b)  Five day report. Within five (5) days following a spill, illicit discharge or knowledge of a dump, a storm sewer user shall submit to the director of public service a detailed written report describing the cause of the spill, illicit discharge or dump, the measures taken to contain and clean up the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent any future recurrence. 
(c)  Employee notice. All industrial storm sewer users shall notify all employees of the notification procedures required in the event of a spill, illicit discharge or knowledge of a dump. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place stating the name and telephone number of the director of public service or his designated representative in the event of a spill, illicit discharge or knowledge of a dump. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-145. - Authority of inspectors. 
For the administration of this article, authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted ready access to a user's premises at any time a storm sewer user is in operation or has storm water discharge for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, documentation, records examination and copying, sampling and testing. Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with security personnel so that upon presentation of proper identification, personnel from the city, state department of natural resources and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-146. - Non-routine inspections. 
Under circumstances where an inspection of a non-domestic facility is necessary to investigate a problem discharge, spill or suspected dumping, authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted ready access to enter any user's premises for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-147. - Other inspections. 
Inspections performed by state or federal representatives shall not relieve a user from inspection by city representatives, and inspection by the city shall not relieve any user from compliance with lawful inspection by state and federal representatives. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-148. - Monitoring equipment; removal of samples, data. 
The city, through its authorized representative, shall have the right to set up monitoring equipment on the user's premises as needed for sampling and flow measurement to take and remove samples of storm water and pollutants from the user's discharge, and to make copies of other data and material inspected during an entry upon the user's property. If the city requests that the user make photocopies of documents, the city shall give the user at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to comply with such request, however, this notice requirement does not affect the right of the city during an inspection to immediately copy data or other materials. Upon the written request of the user, split samples will be provided. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-149. - Access refused. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any user to refuse an authorized representative of the city access to its premises; or to refuse to allow the representative to obtain, take, or remove samples; or to refuse access to records pertinent to this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-150. - Authority to require facility inspections, reports, discharge information and submission of samples. 
The city may require any user to perform facility inspections, discharge monitoring, submission of discharge information reports or submission of one or more representative samples of its storm water discharge. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-151. - Monitoring facilities; control manhole; flow meter. 
(a)  The city may require, at the user's expense, the user to provide a control manhole and/or flow metering equipment to facilitate inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the storm sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The control manhole shall be located on the user's premises unless otherwise allowed under the provisions herein. At the expense of the user, the sampling facility and all sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition. Following notice to provide a control manhole and/or flow metering equipment, the user shall submit to the city, plans and specifications which shall comply with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. The plans must be approved by the engineering division and any other division or department specified in the notice and all alternate permits shall be obtained. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written approval from the city of the plans and specifications. 
(b)  When the user demonstrates that the location of a control manhole on the user's premises is impractical or will cause undue hardship on the user, the city may allow the control manhole to be constructed on a public street or sidewalk area, provided the location meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The sampling manhole will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles; 
(2)  There is ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling flow measurement and preparation of samples for analysis; and 
(3)  It will not create an obstruction or other hazard in the public way. 
(c)  If the city has not required the user to provide a control manhole, the nearest downstream manhole in the public storm sewer to which the user's premises is connected shall be designated the access point or control manhole for the user. 
(d)  The city, in its discretion, may monitor a users discharge through an available control manhole or by utilizing a downstream manhole, whichever the circumstances warrant. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-152. - Self-monitoring. 
(a)  The city may require any user to perform self-monitoring of the storm water discharge. Any required self-monitoring program may include designation of the sampling location, frequency of sampling, number of samples, types of samples, type of analysis required, standards for testing and increased reporting schedules. 
(b)  Industrial users who conduct self-monitoring shall notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of a violation of any applicable discharge limit. The user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results to the city within thirty (30) days, unless the city notifies the user that it will perform the repeat sample and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-153. - Enforcement. 
The director of public service shall have the authority to implement the enforcement provisions enumerated in Division 5 of Article III, Chapter 41, against any storm sewer user in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 80-527, § 28, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 41-154. - Cost recovery. 
The user shall be responsible for any costs incurred by the city or damage to the sewer system due to the user's discharge in violation of this article. Recoverable costs include, but are not limited to, expenses incurred due to additional monitoring, analysis investigating, pumping or treating of discharges; containment, isolation, cleanup and disposal; damage or loss to the sewer system; fines and penalties incurred by the city as a result of any user discharging in violation of this article. The user shall be notified of all charges assessed pursuant to this provision. 
(Ord. No. 80-497, § 7, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-155. - Post-construction storm water runoff.[4] 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements and standards for discharging and treating storm water runoff in the City of Warren that comply with the Federal National Pollutant Discharge System (NPDES) storm water regulations, administered by the State of Michigan, pursuant to MCL 324.3103, for all new development or redevelopment projects. The City of Warren holds a State of Michigan issued jurisdictional general permit for discharges from a city municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The permit, incorporating state and federal rules and regulations, requires the city to manage post-construction storm water runoff from new development and redevelopment projects throughout the City of Warren. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Responsible party is the legal or equitable owner(s) of the property; or person(s) or entities with legal or equitable rights to develop the property. 
(2)  Post-construction storm water runoff is the storm water that flows from a project site after completion of a development or redevelopment project. 
(3)  The project site is any area on the development or redevelopment project where there is earth disturbance. 
(4)  The minimum treatment volume is the first inch of the post-construction storm water runoff. The minimum treatment volume is calculated by the formula listed in the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) Post-Construction Storm Water Runoff Controls Program Compliance Assistance Document, as amended (SWCAD). 
(5)  Water quality treatment performance standard is removal of a minimum of eighty (80) percent of total suspended solids (TSS) as compared with uncontrolled runoff; or limiting TSS discharge concentrations to no more than eighty (80) milligrams per liter. 
(6)  Channel protection performance standard is maintaining post-construction storm water runoff and peak flow rate at or below the existing level for all storms up to the two-year, twenty-four-hour event. 
(7)  Existing level is the runoff volume and peak flow rate from the land use immediately preceding the development or redevelopment project. 
(8)  Earth disturbance is any activity which removes ground cover, changes the slope or contours of the land, or exposes the soil surface to the actions of wind and rain. It includes, but is not limited to, excavation, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative roots. 
(9)  A development or redevelopment project is a construction project involving a public or private property where there is either: 
(i)  An earth disturbance of one (1) acre or more; or 
(ii)  an earth disturbance of less than one (1) acre, but that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one (1) acre or more. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  This section applies to all development or redevelopment projects where post-construction storm water runoff flows into a MS4. 
(d)  Macomb County Public Works Office's Procedures and Design Standards for Storm Water Management (PDSSM). 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided, for purposes of this Section, all measurements or calculations are determined by the methods and definitions provided in the most recent version of the PDSSM; 
(e)  Requirements. Unless the City of Warren Engineering Division provides the responsible party a written exemption, the responsible party shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Before beginning construction, apply for and receive a construction permit from the City of Warren. 
(2)  The permit application shall include a site-specific tentative storm water management plan that complies with the storm water criteria, source controls, site controls, and storm water management practices listed in the most recent version of the PDSSM, including but not limited to all of the following: 
(i)  Post-development, site-specific structural and vegetative best management practices (BMPs) designed, installed, and maintained to: treat the minimum treatment volume to the water quality treatment performance standard; and achieve the channel protection performance standard; and 
(ii)  If the TSS concentrations in the minimum treatment volume do not exceed eighty (80) milligrams per liter, the responsible party shall provide site-specific documentation attesting to the TSS concentrations; 
(3)  Develop or redevelop in accordance to the approved storm water tentative management plan. 
(4)  After development or redevelopment, submit and receive approval for the final operation and maintenance plan that ensures maximum design performance. 
(5)  Develop and maintain the property in conformity with the final operation and maintenance plan including annual storm water maintenance reports. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Final operation and maintenance plan compliance. To ensure final operation and maintenance plan compliance, the City of Warren may do any one (1) or more of the following: 
(i)  Have the city engineer stop construction on a project until the responsible party provides adequate assurances that the requirements of this section will be implemented; 
(ii)  Access the property for intermittent inspections by the building, engineering, waste water treatment, or other city department; 
(iii)  Require the responsible party to connect to the public storm sewer system; 
(iv)  Perform any necessary BMP maintenance or corrective actions that the responsible party neglects to perform; or 
(v)  Impose any other requirements necessary. 
(2)  Cost reimbursement. The City of Warren may require the responsible party to reimburse the city for costs associated with ensuring compliance with this section. 
(3)  Penalty. 
(i)  A violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation; and/or costs; assessments; and damages and expenses, as provided by MCL 600.8727(3). 
(ii)  A judge or magistrate may also order: 
a.  Corrective action to remedy the violation; 
b.  Reimbursement to the city for documented enforcement costs; and 
c.  Any other appropriate legal or equitable action. 
(Ord. No. 80-734, § 1, 11-24-15; Ord. No. 80-752, § 1, 2-28-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal civil infraction imposition of costs § 1-17. 
 
Secs. 41-156—41-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 41-161. - Notification of violation. 
Upon discovery of a violation of these ordinances or a wastewater permit issued hereunder, the superintendent may serve a written notice of violation upon the user. The superintendent may require the user to submit an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of the cause of the violation. Submission of an explanation or plan shall not relieve the user of any liability for prior or subsequent violations. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-162. - Administrative order of compliance. 
Upon discovery of a violation of these ordinances or a wastewater permit issued hereunder, the superintendent shall have the authority to issue an order of compliance upon the user directing the user to implement additional self-monitoring; additional management practices; operational techniques; install devices or other related appurtenances; or implement other requirements that may be necessary and appropriate to achieve compliance. Failure to comply with an order of compliance shall be grounds for termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-163. - Cease and desist order. 
Upon discovery of a violation or the continuance of a violation of these ordinances or a wastewater permit issued hereunder, the superintendent shall have the authority to issue a cease and desist order directing the user to cease all violations of this ordinance and comply forthwith. The cease and desist order may also require the user to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be necessary to properly respond to the violation including but not limited to halting operations and terminating discharge. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-164. - Emergency suspension of service. 
(a)  In order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or substantial harm to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment, the superintendent shall have the authority to suspend the wastewater treatment service or the user's wastewater permit. Upon the emergency suspension of service, the superintendent shall immediately notify the user of such suspension. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater service or the wastewater permit, shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent shall take steps necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or individuals, including immediate severance of the sewer connection. Unless termination proceedings have been instituted, once the danger has passed the superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its discharge. 
(c)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater service or the wastewater permit, shall submit to the superintendent, within fifteen (15) days, a detailed written report describing the cause of the harmful discharge, the duration of noncompliance including exact dates and times, the measures taken in response to the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent any future recurrence. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-165. - Termination of sewer use service. 
In the event that a user violates or continues to violate the provisions of this article, an order or a permit issued hereunder, the superintendent shall have the authority to direct the termination of the user's sewer use. Service will recommence only at the user's expense and after the user has demonstrated its ability to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-166. - Termination of water service. 
In the event that a user violates or continues to violate the provisions of this article, an order or a permit issued hereunder, the superintendent shall have the authority to direct the termination of the water service to the user. Service will recommence only at the user's expense and after the user has demonstrated its ability to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-167. - Public nuisance. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as limiting in any manner the powers of the health officer, and if any unsanitary conditions exist, the same is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96) 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 41-168. - Declaratory and equitable actions. 
If any person discharges waste into the POTW in violation of the provisions of this article, the city may institute an action in the appropriate court seeking declaratory and/or injunctive relief as required. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 41-169. - Penalty. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of chapter 41, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), is a municipal civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(b)  The following violations of this chapter are a misdemeanor which shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs and other sanctions for each violation: 
(1)  Any person who at the time of a violation knew or should have known that a pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this sewer use ordinance, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under the ordinance; 
(2)  Any person who intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this sewer use ordinance, or in any other correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the POTW regarding matters regulated by this sewer use ordinance; or 
(3)  Any person who intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this sewer use ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 80-527, § 28, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 41-170. - Hearings. 
(a)  Any user subject to termination of water or sewer service, revocation or nonrenewal of an industrial pretreatment permit, or enforcement action under the penalty provision of this article may, within ten (10) days of receipt of notification of the proposed action, request a hearing before the enforcement officer to demonstrate its ability to comply with the provisions of this article and otherwise establish why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(b)  The user and all witnesses shall be given thirty (30) days' notice of the scheduled hearing date. The hearing shall be conducted by the enforcement officer. Further, all testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. Based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the enforcement officer shall provide a recommendation of action to the superintendent. The superintendent shall then take steps necessary to implement the enforcement officer's recommendation of action. 
(Ord. No. 80-417, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 80-497, § 6, 7-9-96)  
Secs. 41-171—41-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 41-181. - Schedule. 
Charges for service rendered by the water and sewer system shall be assessed against each lot or parcel of land served in accordance with the following rate schedule: 
(1)  Water rate schedule : 
a.  In each month for which there is water service availability, the consumption rate for water service shall be $4.021 per one hundred (100) cubic feet of metered usage. 
b.  In addition to the above, there shall be a monthly water service charge as follows: 
5/8" meter ..... $0.84 
3/4" meter ..... 1.68 
1" meter ..... 3.36 
1 1/2" meter ..... 8.40 
2" meter ..... 21.00 
3" meter ..... 37.80 
4" meter ..... 75.60 
6" meter ..... 142.80 
8" meter ..... 252.00 
10" meter ..... 420.00 
12" meter ..... 840.00 
c.  If a larger meter is required to service any premises, the city council shall fix the service charge as to such premises, which shall be commensurate with the foregoing. 
d.  The minimum monthly water charge (meter and water charges) to each premise for metered water shall be as follows: 
5/8" meter ..... $8.88 
3/4" meter ..... 9.72 
1" meter ..... 11.40 
1 1/2" meter ..... 48.61 
2" meter ..... 61.21 
3" meter ..... 78.01 
4" meter ..... 115.81 
6" meter ..... 183.01 
8" meter ..... 292.21 
10" meter ..... 460.21 
12" meter ..... 880.21 
e.  Reserved. 
f.  Hydrant rental to be paid by the city at the rate of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year, per hydrant. This revenue will be used for a fire hydrant maintenance and replacement program. It is expected that, in addition to hydrant maintenance, thirty (30) hydrants can be replaced per year. 
(2)  Sewage disposal charges based on water consumption : 
a.  In each month for which there is sewage disposal service availability, the consumption rate for sewage disposal services shall be $3.108 per one hundred (100) cubic feet and the consumption rate for sanitary sewer improvements and maintenance shall be $0.674 per one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
b.  In addition to the above, there shall be a monthly sewer service charge as follows: 
5/8" meter ..... $2.03 
3/4" meter ..... 4.06 
1" meter ..... 8.12 
1 1/2" meter ..... 20.30 
2" meter ..... 50.75 
3" meter ..... 91.35 
4" meter ..... 182.70 
6" meter ..... 345.10 
8" meter ..... 609.00 
10" meter ..... 1,015.00 
12" meter ..... 2,030.00 
c.  The minimum monthly sewer charge (meter and sewer charges) to each premise for metered water consumption for sewage disposal and sanitary sewer improvements and maintenance shall be as follows: 
5/8" meter ..... $9.59 
3/4" meter ..... 11.62 
1" meter ..... 15.68 
1 1/2" meter ..... 58.12 
2" meter ..... 88.57 
3" meter ..... 129.17 
4" meter ..... 220.52 
6" meter ..... 382.92 
8" meter ..... 646.82 
10" meter ..... 1,052.82 
12" meter ..... 2,067.82 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  As provided in section 41-70 to cover the added costs of treating the wastes which have pollutants in excess of the amount allowable by law, there shall be a surcharge for industrial users, per user billing period as follows: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): $0.2493 per pound in excess of three hundred (300) mg/liter; 
Suspended solids (SS): $0.3089 per pound in excess of three hundred fifty (350) mg/liter; 
Phosphorus (P): $2.3932 per pound in excess of twenty-five (25) mg/liter; 
Ammonia (NH3 = N): $0.4607 per pound in excess of twenty-five (25) mg/liter; 
In accordance with the city national pollutant discharger elimination system permit, which requires the city to establish an industrial pretreatment program and so that the costs be allocated proportionately to the users affected, there shall be an additional charge, per user billing period, as follows: 
Wastewater pretreatment charge: One hundred ninety-five dollars ($195.00) per sample; 
Wastewater pretreatment charge: Eighty-five dollars ($85.00) per analysis; 
Nondomestic user commodity charge: $0.4297 per one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
f.  For the inspection of cross-connections to safeguard public health and safety there shall be a surcharge for industrial users, per billing period, as follows: 
Nondomestic user cross-connection inspection charge: $0.1003 per one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
g.  The rates established here are to meet operations and shall not be excessive or produce profit over and above the requirements of the system or as required by law. 
(3)  Isolation of wholesale water costs, union contract wages and fringe benefits. The purpose of this section is to permit the automatic adjustment of retail rates to residential, commercial and industrial customers for changes in operating costs that are outside the direct control of the water and sewer system. 
a.  Wholesale water costs - the consumption-based retail water rate shall be adjusted to reflect changes in the wholesale cost of water purchases implemented by the City of Detroit during the current fiscal year. 
1.  Water purchase expense in the original adopted operating budget is calculated as the estimated water purchase volume times the wholesale rate in effect at the time of budget adoption. 
2.  When the City of Detroit Board of Water Commissioners approves a change in wholesale rate to be charged to the city, water purchase expense shall be recalculated as the actual year-to-date wholesale purchase cost plus estimated purchase volumes for the balance of the fiscal year times the revised wholesale rates. 
3.  The revised water purchase expense as determined above shall be compared to the original approved water and sewer system budget for water purchases. If the revised cost exceeds the original budget cost the resulting shortage shall be recoverable from retail customers through an increase in the water consumption rate for balance of the current fiscal year. If the revised cost is less than the original budget cost the surplus shall be rebated to retail customers through a decrease in the water consumption rate for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
The adjustment to the water consumption rate shall be determined by dividing the anticipated cost change by the projected sales volume for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  These adjustments of water and sewer rates shall occur by operation of this ordinance under authority granted under sections 6.1 of the city charter, as if specifically adopted by city council. 
f.  Any changes in rates shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation with the city. Supporting schedules shall be filed with the city clerk for public inspection and transmitted to the city council for information and review. 
g.  Nothing in this section shall, in any way, limit the power of the city council to adjust water and sewer rates by resolution or ordinance amendment independent of the operation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80-306, § 1(7-538), 5-14-85; Ord. No. 80-313, § 1, 1-28-86; Ord. No. 80-332, § 1, 12-23-86; Ord. No. 80-340, § 46, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-350, § 1, 12-22-87; Ord. No. 80-368, § 1, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 80-378, § 1, 12-26-89; Ord. No. 80-384, § 1, 12-26-90; Ord. No. 80-398, § 2, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 80-399, § 1, 12-26-91; Ord. No. 80-425, § 1, 12-22-92; Ord. No. 80-446, § 1, 12-28-93; Ord. No. 80-473, § 1, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 80-492, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 80-497, § 8, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 80-504, § 1, 12-26-96; Ord. No. 80-526, § 1, 12-23-97; Ord. No. 80-541, § 1, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 80-548, § 1, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 80-564, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 80-576, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-587, § 1, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 80-592, § 1, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 80-602, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 80-616, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 80-623, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 80-646, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 80-675, § 1, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 80-682, § 1, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 80-691, § 1, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 80-695, § 1, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 80-708, § 1, 12-18-12; Ord. No. 80-713, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 80-726, § 1, 12-16-14; Ord. No. 80-740, § 1, 5-10-16; Ord. No. 80-755, § 1, 5-9-17; Ord. No. 80-763, § 1, 5-8-18; Ord. No. 80-776 , § 1, 5-14-19)  
Sec. 41-181.1. - Administrative fees. 
(a)  Final water bill : 
(1)  An administrative fee, as determined by resolution of city council, shall be charged for all final water bill requests conducted and/or processed by the water division. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 80-742, § 1, 6-14-16)  
Sec. 41-182. - Late payment; penalty. 
(a)  Bills not paid on or before the last net payment date as indicated on the face of the bill are subject to a three (3) percent penalty charge applied to the total unpaid balance. 
(b)  If any bill for water or sewage disposal or any other service performed by the water and sewer system on the premises shall not be paid within thirty (30) days after same becomes due, then both water and sewage services may be discontinued to the premises until such bill shall be paid or arrangements for payment has been made together with the penalty and a service charge as determined by city council resolution and a deposit equal to the last unpaid bill. The director of public services shall be the only individual authorized to make arrangements for payment other than payment in full including all penalties, service charges and required deposits. The director of public services is the only individual authorized to discontinue services or make adjustments to water and sewer system bills. 
(c)  Payments for water and/or sewer services that are rendered by check, draft, negotiated order or instrument, credit card, electronic transmittal, or by any other means, and are returned, rejected or dishonored for insufficient funds, closed accounts or for any other reason, shall be replaced by a cash payment tendered by the customer together with a service charge as determined by city council resolution, in addition to any other penalties or sums incurred under this article. 
(d)  Section 15.4(c) of the City of Warren City Charter provides that, under certain circumstances, unpaid utility charges may be liened against the premises to which utility services were furnished, spread on the tax roll and collected in the same manner as city taxes. To unpaid utility charges spread on the tax roll, the city will add a transfer fee equal to seventeen (17) percent of the unpaid utility charges. 
(e)  Under Michigan State Law (MCL 123.165), the City Charter provision referenced above creating a lien on the premises shall not apply if: 
(1)  A lease of the premises has been legally executed and filed with the water division which contains a provision that the lessor shall not be liable for payment of water or sewage system bills accruing subsequent to compliance with the requirements contained in Section 5 of the Collection of Water Charges Act, Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939, MCL 123.165; and 
(2)  An affidavit is filed with the water division attesting to the execution of a lease containing the provision required by section 5 of the Collection of Water Charges Act, Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939; MCL 123.165; and 
(3)  The affidavit contains notice of the expiration date of the lease; and 
(4)  The affidavit contains a provision whereby the lessor agrees to provide twenty (20) days' notice of any cancellation, changes in or termination of the lease; and 
(5)  A security deposit in an amount sufficient to protect the system from loss in the event that lessees in the lease agreement fail to make timely usage payments. The amount required shall be determined in the sole discretion of the water division administration. 
(6)  All lessors seeking relief from the imposition of a lien must comply with each of the requirements set forth in this section regardless of the term of the lease. 
(7)  The water division shall keep a log of each affidavit and lease received including the date received, the expiration date of the lease, the amount of deposit received and name of lessee. A service fee may be charged, as approved by city council, for maintaining and processing the landlord tenant agreements. 
(f)  At its option, and in addition to the remedies set forth above, the city may bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any water or sewage service charge which is thirty (30) days delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 80-306, § 1(7-538), 5-14-85; Ord. No. 80-313, § 1, 1-28-86; Ord. No. 80-332, § 1, 12-23-86; Ord. No. 80-340, § 46, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 80-350, § 1, 12-22-87; Ord. No. 80-368, § 1, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 80-378, § 1, 12-26-89; Ord. No. 80-384, § 1, 12-26-90; Ord. No. 80-398, § 2, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 80-399, § 1, 12-26-91; Ord. No. 80-425, § 1, 12-22-92; Ord. No. 80-446, § 1, 12-28-93; Ord. No. 80-473, § 1, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 80-492, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 80-497, § 8, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 80-504, § 1, 12-26-96; Ord. No. 80-526, § 1, 12-23-97; Ord. No. 80-541, § 1, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 80-548, § 1, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 80-564, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 80-576, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 80-587, § 1, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 80-592, § 1, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 80-602, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 80-616, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 80-623, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 80-646, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 80-675, § 1, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 80-682, § 1, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 80-691, § 1, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 80-714, § 5, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 80-725, § 1, 12-16-14)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
TITLE 
An ordinance regulating and restricting the height and size of buildings; the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density of population; the location and use of buildings and land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries of such districts; defining certain terms used herein; providing for enforcement and administration and imposing penalties for the violation of this ordinance. 
PREAMBLE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the public acts of the State of Michigan in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Warren by protecting and conserving the character, and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding the land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate light, air, and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools[,] recreation and other public requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan; now therefore: 
ENACTING CLAUSE 
THE CITY OF WARREN ORDAINS: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein as adopted is the zoning ordinance of the city, Ordinance Number 30, adopted on July 21, 1960. Amendments have been inserted and are indicated by history notes in parentheses following the amended sections or subsections. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. The word "section" has been added before those catchlines which are missing the word "sections." Other changes made for clarity are enclosed by brackets [ ]. 
Charter reference— Zoning authority, § 3.1(b)(2)(h); planning department, planning commission, § 7.22. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance pertaining to zoning saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; mobile homes and trailers, Ch. 20; signs, Ch. 31; soil removal, dumping and regrading, Ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 34; subdivision regulations, Ch. 35; fences generally, App. A, § 4.70 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE 
 
Section 1.01 - [Title.] 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren, and will be referred to herein as "This Ordinance."  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS[2] 
For the purpose of this Ordinance certain terms and words are herewith defined: 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number; the word "building" includes the word "structure", and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
 
Section 2.01 - Alley. 
A way open to public travel intended for secondary access to premises and not less than eighteen (18) feet wide, but not more than thirty (30) feet wide.  
Section 2.02 - Basement. 
That portion of a building which is wholly or partly below the average grade of the ground level adjoining the building when the height from the grade up to the first floor tier of floor beams or joists is less than the height from the grade level down to the floor, provided, however, that if the height from the grade level to the first tier of floor beams or joists is five (5) feet or more, such basement shall be considered a story.  
Section 2.03 - Boarding or rooming house. 
A boarding or rooming house shall be construed to mean any dwelling occupied in any such manner that certain rooms in excess of those used by members of the immediate family and occupied as a home or family unit, are leased or rented to persons outside of the family, without any attempt to provide therein or therewith cooking or kitchen accommodations.  
Section 2.04 - Building department. 
References throughout this ordinance to the Building Department shall mean the Division of Building and Safety Engineering, and the Director of Public Service or any of his duly appointed representatives, including the Building Director or any of his subordinate officers or employees. 
(Ord. No. 30-994, § 1, 12-13-11)  
Section 2.05 - Building. 
Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof, and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal, chattel or property of any kind. This shall include tents, awnings, or vehicles situated on private property and used for purposes of a building.  
Section 2.06 - Building-principal. 
A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.  
Section 2.07 - Building-accessory. 
A subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use.  
Section 2.08 - Building line. 
The front line of the building or the legally established line which determines the location of the building with respect to the street line.  
Section 2.09 - Carport. 
A partially open shelter or structure for housing of vehicles. Such structures shall comply with all yard requirements applicable to garages.  
Section 2.10 - Court. 
A court is an open unoccupied space other than a yard, and bounded on at least two sides by a building. A COURT extending to the front lot line or front yard, or to a rear lot line or rear yard is an OUTER COURT. Any other court is an INNER COURT.  
Section 2.11 - District. 
Any section of the incorporated parts of the City of Warren for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform.  
Section 2.12 - Dwelling unit. 
A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one (1) family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities.  
Section 2.13 - Dwelling, one-family. 
A building designed for and occupied by one (1) family, and so designated and arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations and sanitary facilities for one (1) family only.  
Section 2.14 - Dwelling, two-family. 
A building designed for and occupied by two (2) families, and so designated and arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations and sanitary facilities for each of the two (2) families only.  
Section 2.15 - Dwelling, multiple-family. 
A building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other and having separate cooking and kitchen accommodations and sanitary facilities.  
Section 2.16 - Efficiency apartment. 
A dwelling unit consisting of not more than two (2) rooms in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.  
Section 2.17 - Essential services. 
The phrase "essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication, steam, or water transmissions or distribution systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith (but not including buildings) reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions for the public health, safety or general welfare.  
Section 2.18 - Family. 
A family is any number of persons living together in a dwelling comprising a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and related by blood, marriage, adoption, domestic partnership. A family shall include not more than three (3) persons not so related occupying a dwelling and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. With the exceptions of domestic employees and of any individual with a disability as defined in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. 
(Ord. No. 30-1036, § 1, 4-24-18)  
Section 2.19 - Farm. 
A farm is a platted or unplatted parcel of land not less than three (3) acres.  
Section 2.20 - Floor area. 
Floor area shall mean the total gross floor area, as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, but not including the following spaces: crawl spaces, unfinished and non-habitable portions of the basement and attics, garages and open porches, balconies and terraces.  
Section 2.21 - Garage-community. 
A community garage is a structure, or a series of structures, for the storage of motor vehicles, having no public shop or services in connection therewith, and separated into compartments or sections with separate vehicular entrances, for the use of two or more owners or occupants of property in the vicinity. 
All such garages intended to accommodate more than four (4) vehicles shall first receive the approval of the Board of Appeals.  
Section 2.22 - Garage-private. 
A private garage is a structure for the storage of not more than a number of vehicles as may be required in connection with the permitted use of the principal building.  
Section 2.23 - Garage-public. 
A public garage is a structure, other than a private or community garage, for the storage, care, repair or refinishing of motor vehicles, except that a structure or room used solely for the display and sale of such vehicles in which they are not operated under their own power, and in connection with which there is no repair, maintenance, or refinishing service or storage of vehicles other than those displayed, shall not be considered a garage for the purpose of this Ordinance.  
Section 2.24 - Gasoline service station. 
A gasoline service station is a building or structure designed or used for the retail sale or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles, but not including space for facilities for storage, repair, bumping, painting and refinishing.  
Section 2.25 - Grade. 
The elevation of the curb at the midpoint of the front of the lot or tract, as established by the Director of Public Service.  
Section 2.26 - Greenbelt. 
(a)  An eight (8) foot greenbelt shall be a solid planting strip composed of evergreen trees spaced not more than twenty (20) feet apart and not less than one (1) row of evergreen shrubs, spaced not more than five (5) feet apart and which are at least five (5) feet or more in height after one (1) full growing season after planting, and which shall be planted and maintained in a healthy growing condition by either the occupant or owner of the property. 
(b)  A twenty (20) foot greenbelt shall be a planting strip composed of two (2) rows of evergreen trees, spaced alternately at not more than twenty (20) feet apart and not less than three (3) rows of evergreen shrubs, spaced at not more than eight (8) feet apart and which are at least five (5) feet or more in height after one (1) full growing season after planting, and which shrubs will eventually grow to a height of not less than twelve (12) feet at maturity, and which shall be planted and maintained in a healthy growing condition by either the occupant or owner of the property. 
A decorative masonry wall, not more than six (6) feet in height and not less than eight (8) inches in thickness may be substituted for either of the above greenbelts, upon approval of the Planning Director, and shall be maintained in an attractive condition and structurally sound. 
(c)  The occupant or owner shall maintain greenbelt in an attractive well-trimmed condition at all times, and free from litter, refuse and weeds. 
(Ord. No. 30-227, § 1, 11-22-66; Ord. No. 30-998, § 1, 7-9-13)  
Section 2.27 - Group housing. 
A residential development involving the ultimate construction of two (2) family dwellings or multiple-family or combination of multiple and two (2) or one (1) family dwellings, on a lot, parcel or tract of land, or on a combination of lots under one ownership.  
Section 2.28 - Height of buildings. 
The vertical distance from the ground level adjoining the building to the highest point on the roof surface in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line for mansard roofs, to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.  
Section 2.29 - Home occupation. 
Any occupation or profession carried on only by a member of a family, residing on the premises, in connection with which there is used no sign other than one (1) non-illuminated name plate attached to the building entrance which is not more than one (1) square foot in area; provided that: 
(a)  No commodity is sold upon the premises; 
(b)  No person is regularly employed for commercial purposes other than a member of the immediate family, residing on the same premises; 
(c)  No mechanical equipment is used except such as is normally used for domestic or household purposes, but this shall not include the office of a veterinarian; 
(d)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area is to be used for home occupation.  
Section 2.30 - Hotel. 
A building containing twenty-five (25) or more apartments, each composed of bedroom, bathroom, and closet space, but without cooking facilities, with the exception of the units occupied by the management staff, the apartment units being used for the accommodation of transient guests and no cooking being permitted therein, and containing a public dining room for the accommodation of at least twenty-five (25) guests, and a general kitchen.  
Section 2.31 - Kennel. 
A kennel shall be considered a lot or premises at which three (3) or more dogs are kept either permanently or temporarily.  
Section 2.32 - Lot. 
A parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions by descriptions as in a subdivision or on a record survey map or by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease, or separate use and undivided by any street and occupied by, or designated to be developed for, one (1) building or principal use and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to such building, use or development include such open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged or required by this ordinance for such building, use or development. 
(Ord. No. 30-726, § 1, 9-23-86)  
Section 2.33 - Lot-corner. 
A corner lot is a lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full length upon a street.  
Section 2.34 - Lot—Double frontage. 
Double frontage lot is a parcel of land which extends from one street to another street.  
Section 2.35 - Lot-interior. 
An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot.  
Section 2.36 - Lot line—Front. 
The line abutting a street. On a corner lot the shorter street line shall be considered the front lot line. Where new street lines are established by Ordinance on the Master Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Warren, such lines shall be the front lot line.  
Section 2.37 - Lot line—Rear. 
The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be that assumed line parallel to the front lot line not less than ten (10) feet long, lying most distant from the front line and wholly within the lot.  
Section 2.38 - Lot line-side. 
A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior lot line.  
Section 2.39 - Lot depth. 
The perpendicular distance between the front and rear lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.  
Section 2.40 - Lot width. 
The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the two points where the building line, or setback, intersects the side lot lines.  
Section 2.41 - Lot of record. 
A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown in a recorded plat on file with the County Register of Deeds, or any parcel which has been created in accordance with the provisions of the Plat Act [MCL 560.101 et seq.], and which has been assigned a parcel number by the Land File Division of the Macomb County Treasurer's Office and the description for which is on file with the City Assessor's Office. 
(Ord. No. 30-726, § 2, 9-23-86)  
Section 2.42 - Mobile home park. 
A mobile home or trailer coach park refers to any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which three (3) or more occupied mobile homes or trailer coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home or trailer coach park.  
Section 2.43 - Motel or motor court. 
A motel or motor court is a business comprising of a series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units for the overnight accommodation of transient guests, each unit containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space, but no kitchen or cooking facilities, with the exception of units for use of the manager and/or caretaker.  
Section 2.44 - Occupied mobile home. 
An occupied mobile home or trailer coach refers to any mobile home or trailer coach located on a site within the mobile home park when such mobile home is connected to any park facility such as a sewerage collection system, water or electrical distribution system.  
Section 2.45 - Outlot. 
An outlot is a parcel of land which must be designated on a recorded plat as an outlot before it may be legally considered as such.  
Section 2.46 - Parking space. 
An area surfaced by use of either bituminous, oil aggregate, stabilized gravel or equivalent, enclosed or unenclosed, not less than nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long, except as regulated by Section 4.32 (i) of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-457, § 2, 2-12-74)  
Section 2.47 - Public utility. 
Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing to the public, under municipal regulations, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water.  
Section 2.48 - Soil. 
The word soil as used herein shall be topsoil, subsoil, sand[,] gravel, muck or any other type of natural earthy material.  
Section 2.49 - Story. 
That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there should be no floor above, then the space between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next above. 
A basement shall be considered a story if the distance from the building grade line to the ceiling is equal to or greater than the distance from the building grade line to the floor or if its ceiling is over five (5) feet above the average established grade, or if it is used for business purposes by other than a janitor or domestic servant in the same building. 
(Ord. No. 30-127, § 1, 7-14-64; Ord. No. 30-131, § 1, 7-14-64)  
Section 2.50 - Story-half. 
A half story is an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the usable floor area of which does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the floor area of the story immediately below it, and not used, or designed, arranged or intended to be used, in whole or in part, as an independent housekeeping unit or dwelling. 
Tri-level and quad-level buildings shall be considered one and one-half (1½) stories if the lower floor area is considered a story as in Section 2.49. 
Bi-level shall be considered two (2) stories, if one of the lower floor areas is considered a story as in Section 2.49.  
Section 2.51 - Street. 
A street is any thoroughfare or way, other than public alley, dedicated to the use of the public and open to public travel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard, drive, lane, circle, place, court, terrace, or any similar designation, or a private street open to restricted travel at least thirty (30) feet in width.  
Section 2.52 - Structure. 
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.  
Section 2.53 - Tourist home. 
A dwelling furnishing over-night sleeping quarters to transient guests, containing not more than three (3) guest bedrooms.  
Section 2.54 - Trailer coach or mobile home. 
A vehicle with or without its own motive power, equipped for or used for living purposes and mounted on wheels or designed to be so mounted and transported.  
Section 2.55 - Utility room. 
A utility room, or space, is a room or space located other than in the basement, specifically designed and constructed to house any home utilities such as the heating unit and laundry facilities.  
Section 2.56 - Use. 
The purpose for which land or buildings thereon are designed, arranged, or intended to be occupied or used, or for which they are occupied or maintained.  
Section 2.57 - Use-accessory. 
A use normally incidental to, and subordinate to, the principal use of the premises.  
Section 2.58 - Yard-front. 
A front yard is an open space extending the full width of an interior lot and/or full length of all sides bordering upon a street or streets of a corner lot and of a uniform depth measured horizontally at right angles to the street lot line, unoccupied from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.  
Section 2.59 - Yard-rear. 
A year [rear] yard is an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.  
Section 2.60 - Yard-side. 
A side yard is an open space, extending from the front yard to the year [rear] yard, and of a uniform width measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.  
Section 2.61 - Outdoor retail sales. 
The display and sale of products and services on a lot outside of a building including products and services that are displayed year round and those such as Christmas trees and flowers that are displayed and sold on a temporary or seasonal basis, excluding garages sales that are otherwise regulated in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-283, § 1, 6-25-68; Ord. No. 30-835, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 30-858, § 1, 2-13-96)  
Section 2.62 - Driveways. 
A driveway shall be hardsurfaced access connecting such parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 30-457, § 3, 2-12-74)  
Section 2.63 - Coin-operated amusement machine and/or device establishments. 
Coin-operated amusement machine and/or device establishments shall be defined as a place of business that has in operation an excess of five (5) coin-operated machines and/or devices. 
(Ord. No. 30-462, § 1(2.63), 7-9-74)  
Section 2.64 - Coin-operated amusement machine and/or device. 
A coin-operated amusement machine and/or device means a ski-ball machine, air-hockey machine, motion picture machine, shuffleboard, miniature pool table, or any other similar machine, instrument, or contrivance which may be operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin, or under normal use is designed to have a coin; however, in lieu of said coin, the proprietor charges a flat rate to use said device. 
(Ord. No. 30-462, § 1(2.64), 7-9-74)  
Section 2.65 - Senior citizen housing. 
A residential building containing eight (8) or more dwelling units specially designed for the use and occupancy of any person married or single, who is sixty-two (62) years of age or over. Such building shall not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or injury, other than for emergency first-aid care. Such building shall be: 
(1)  Owned by the City of Warren and administered by the Warren Housing Commission in accordance with Warren Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Section 10-41, et seq.; or, 
(2)  Constructed with the assistance of mortgage financing or other financial assistance insured by or procured through or with the assistance of municipal, State or Federal governmental agencies, and is constructed and maintained on a non-profit basis by a charitable organization which is organized pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan's General Corporation Act (P.A. 1931 No. 327) [3]. 
(Ord. No. 30-469, § 1, 9-24-74) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— This act has been repealed. Refer now to the Business Corporation Act, P.A. 284 of 1972 (MCL 450.1101 et seq.). 
 
Section 2.66 - Medical clinic. 
Medical Clinic shall mean any facility providing physical or mental health service or medical or surgical care of the sick or injured but shall not include in-patient or overnight accommodations. Medical clinic includes health center, health clinic, and doctors' offices. 
(Ord. No. 30-538, § 1, 6-14-77)  
Section 2.67 - Shopping center. 
A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit related in location, size, and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves; it provides on site parking in definite relationship to the types of sizes of stores. 
(Ord. No. 30-538, § 2, 6-14-77)  
Section 2.68 - Special land use. 
Special land use is a use of land for an activity which, under usual circumstances, would be detrimental to other land uses permitted within the same district but which is permitted because of circumstances unique to the location of the particular use and which use can be permitted conditionally without jeopardy to uses permitted within such district. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 1, 4-12-83)  
Section 2.69 - Special land use permit. 
An authorization by the City Council or Planning Commission specified herein to use a parcel of land and/or structure for a special land use. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 2, 4-12-83)  
Section 2.70 - Class C liquor license establishment. 
A Class C Liquor establishment shall mean any place licensed by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission to sell at retail beer, wine, and spirits for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 30-659, § 1, 4-26-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 436.2t.  
Section 2.71 - Tavern. 
Tavern shall mean any place licensed by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission to sell retail beer and wine for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. No. 30-659, § 2, 4-26-83)  
Section 2.72 - Garage sale. 
The sale of used tangible household personal belongings to the householder and conducted on an individual lot used as a one-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling. 
The items offered for sale shall be limited to personal property that is usual to a residence and commonly used in a family. 
A garage sale is not for the sale, display, or trading of articles of commerce obtained either new or used for the purpose of sale or resale nor for the sale, display or trading of goods manufactured or processed either on or off the lot for the purpose of sale or resale. The manner of regulation for garage sales as defined herein shall be found in Section 4.42 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-680, § 1, 6-26-84)  
Sections 2.73—2.75 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 30-859, adopted March 26, 1996, repealed §§ 2.73—2.75 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 2.73—2.75 pertained to the location of on-premises signs, off-premises signs and billboards and derived from §§ 1—3 of Ord. No. 30-722, adopted Aug. 26, 1986.  
Section 2.76 - Pawnbroker. 
Any person, corporation or member, or members of a copartnership or firm, who loans money on deposit, or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, is hereby defined to be a pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 30-805, § 1, 12-26-91)  
Section 2.77 - Secondhand dealers. 
Any person, corporation or member or members of a corporation or firm who primarily engage in the retail sale of used merchandise, antiques, and secondhand goods; such as, clothing, shoes, furniture, books, rare manuscripts, musical instruments, office furniture, phonographs and phonograph records, store fixtures and equipment. Excluded from this definition are dealers primarily engaged in selling used motor vehicles, trailers, boats, mobile homes, automobile parts and accessories, scrap and waste dealers. 
(Ord. No. 30-805, § 1, 12-26-91)  
Section 2.78 - Child care center or day care center. 
A child care or day care center is a facility, other than a private residence, licensed by the State of Michigan to receive one (1) or more preschool or school-age children for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. Child care center or day care center includes a facility that provides care for more than two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, before- or after-school program, or drop-in center. Child care center or day care center does not include any of the following: 
(i)  A Sunday school, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are attending for not more than three (3) hours per day for an indefinite period or for not more than eight (8) hours per day for a period not to exceed four (4) weeks during a twelve-month period. 
(ii)  A facility operated by a religious organization where children are in the religious organization's care for not more than three (3) hours while persons responsible for the children are attending religious services. 
(iii)  A program that is primarily supervised, school-age-child-focused training in a specific subject, including, but not limited to, dancing, drama, music, or religion. This exclusion applies only to the time a child is involved in supervised, school-age child-focused training. 
(iv)  A program that is primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities for school-age children sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby group, including, but not limited to, youth clubs, scouting, and school-age recreational or supplementary education programs. This exclusion applies only to the time the school-age child is engaged in the group athletic or social activities and if the school-age child can come and go at will. 
(v)  A state licensed family child care home or a state licensed group child care home. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 1, 2-22-11)  
Section 2.79 - Family child care home. 
Family child care home is a private home licensed by the State of Michigan to receive one (1) to six (6) minor children for care and supervision for compensation, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related by blood, marriage, or adoption to an adult member of the family residing in the home. Family child care home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. A family child care home does not include an individual providing babysitting services for another individual which is exempt from licensing requirements under MCL 722.111. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 2, 2-22-11)  
Section 2.80 - Group child care home. 
Group child care home is a private home licensed by the State of Michigan to receive more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children for care and supervision, for compensation, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related by blood, marriage, or adoption to an adult member of the family residing in the home. Group child care home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 3, 2-22-11)  
Section 2.81 - Antenna. 
Any device utilized for the purpose of sending or receiving electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to, microwave, cellular telephone, radio, television, personal communication services or other communications. Citizen radio, short wave, amateur radio, residential TV or satellite TV antennas and towers are excluded from the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 30-857, § 1, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 30-881, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Section 2.82 - Antenna tower. 
Any structure which is utilized to support an antenna or antennas, as defined in section 2.81, above the ground or above an existing structure. Antenna towers include, but are not limited to, monopoles, tripods, wood poles, roof mounting brackets, chimney brackets, multiple leg tower structures, signs and self supporting and guy wired towers. 
(Ord. No. 30-857, § 1, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 30-881, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Section 2.83 - Seasonal use. 
A temporary use permitted and regulated pursuant to this ordinance for a limited period of time conducted every year at the same time of year, such as, but not limited to, the sale of Easter flowers and Christmas trees. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 2, 2-13-96)  
Section 2.84 - Temporary. 
Temporary shall mean for the duration of a limited time period as specified in the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 2, 2-13-96)  
Section 2.85 - Temporary use. 
A use permitted and regulated pursuant to this Ordinance for periods of time that are limited in duration as specified by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 2, 2-13-96)  
Section 2.86 - Temporary, seasonal or special structure. 
A non-permanent structure used in conjunction with the seasonal sale or temporary event pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 2, 2-13-96)  
Section 2.87 - Condominium Act. 
Act 59 of 1978, as amended; MCL 559.101 et seq. as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 1, 4-9-96)  
Section 2.88 - [Condominium project, condominium subdivision plan, master deed, common elements, etc.] 
Condominium project, condominium subdivision plan, master deed, common elements, and other words and phrases relating to condominiums shall be defined pursuant to Sections 3 to 10 of the Condominium Act, Act 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.103 to 110), (except as otherwise defined and used in Article IVB). 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 1, 4-9-96)  
Section 2.89 - Single family site condominium. 
All allocation or division of land permitted under the State of Michigan Condominium Act, Act 59 of 1978 as amended, which permits single family detached housing pursuant to a master deed. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 1, 4-9-96)  
Section 2.90 - Condominium unit. 
Condominium unit means that portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use as described in the master deed. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 2.91 - Estate sale. 
The sale of used personal property belonging to the occupants of a residential dwelling and conducted on the residential lot to liquidate an estate. The sale shall be conducted by the owner, occupant or agent thereof and shall include viewing time. 
(Ord. No. 30-875, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 2.92. - Used car lot. 
Any property used for the sale, offer for sale, exchange, display, consignment or storage of any passenger motor vehicles, including RV trailers, golf carts, motorcycles, motorized scooter, and other motorized vehicle powered by gas, electricity or battery, that are used, secondhand, previously owned or used, whether or not refurbished, including property used in combination with other uses not stated in this provision. Used car lot excludes automotive manufacturers and new car dealerships, unless the property of the automotive manufacturer and new car dealership is used in combination with a used car lot or used car sales. 
(Ord. No. 30-1001, § 3, 8-27-13)  
Section 2.93 - Medical marihuana facility. 
An indoor facility located in a permissible industrial area which is used by no more than a total combination of seven (7) registered primary caregivers or registered qualifying patients to store, grow, cultivate or process medical marihuana, and the total combined occupation of all such caregivers or patients does not exceed the aggregate of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. The facility would be used by the registered primary caregivers and registered qualifying patients occupying the facility, who are authorized to grow marihuana plants in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., as amended, and use the facility exclusively for: 
(a)  Storing, growing, cultivating, or processing marihuana into a usable form; 
(b)  Registered primary caregivers to legally transfer marihuana to their registered qualifying patient; or 
(c)  Storing, growing, cultivating, and processing marihuana into a usable form and the legal transfer of the marihuana from registered primary caregivers to their registered qualifying patient, as long as the transfer of marihuana occurs in a room separate from the storage, growth, cultivation, or processing. 
(Ord. No. 30-1020, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Section 2.94 - Registered qualifying patient or patient. 
A person who possesses a valid Michigan Department of Community Health (MDCH) registry patient identification card as provided for in MCL 333.26426(a)—(f), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-1020, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Section 2.95 - Registered primary caregiver or primary caregiver. 
A person who possesses a valid Michigan Department of Community Health (MDCH) registry caregiver identification card as provided for in MCL 333.26426(a)—(f), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-1020, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Section 2.96 - Debilitating medical condition. 
A medical condition as defined by MCL 333.26423(b), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-1020, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Section 2.97 - School. 
The buildings, grounds, or facilities, or any portion thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of public or private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational instruction to students at or below the twelfth grade level. 
(Ord. No. 30-1020, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Section 2.98 - Recreational facility. 
Any public building or field used for the primary purpose of sports or recreation. 
(Ord. No. 30-1020, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Section 2.99 - Library. 
A facility in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials or items, such as, but not limited to, books, computers, recordings, or videotapes, are kept for the use by or loaning to patrons of the facility, but are not normally offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 30-1020, § 1, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 30-1027, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Section 2.100 - Health club or fitness center. 
A facility primarily used for body conditioning and physical exercise, and which involves multiple activities and facilities, including but not limited to weight training, aerobic and related exercise classes, jogging, swimming pools, whirlpool, sauna, steam room, and may include courts for racquet sports occupying a limited area of the facility, generally in the range of less than 10 percent of the building, and may include accessory uses, such as showers, locker rooms, tanning salons and health food sales or fitness screenings, provided they are only in support of the primary uses. A health club or fitness center does not include rehabilitation services provided by licensed health care providers. 
(Ord. No. 30-1027, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Section 2.101 - Gym or personal fitness center. 
An indoor commercial establishment or use where physical exercise or training is conducted on an individual basis, with or without the option for having one-to-one instruction with a personal trainer, using exercise equipment or open floor space, and may have accessory uses provided they are in support of the primary use, but shall not include court sports facilities, swimming pools, and spectator seating for sports. 
(Ord. No. 30-1027, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Section 2.102 - Recreational center—Indoor. 
An indoor facility, with our without seating for spectators, providing accommodations for individual, organized, or franchised sports, including, but not limited to, basketball, ice hockey, soccer, tennis, volleyball, racquetball, batting cages, water parks, fun ranges, or handball. The facility may also provide other regular organized or franchised events, health and fitness club facilities, swimming pool, snack bar, restaurant, retail sales of related sport, health or fitness items, and other support facilities, as accessory uses. 
(Ord. No. 30-1027, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Section 2.103 - Arena recreational center. 
An indoor recreational center with main and accessory structures that have a combined maximum gross area of floor space that exceeds 20,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-1027, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Section 2.104 - Recreational center—Outdoor. 
A commercial business establishment that conducts outside of a building, on a permanent or seasonal basis, in open or partially enclosed or screen facilities, activities designed for participant uses, such as driving ranges, miniature golf, swimming pools, tennis courts, outdoor racquet sports, motorized cart and motorcycle or car tracks, motorized model airplanes, water parks, firing ranges or amusements, such as carnival rides, amusement games, trampolines, or inflatable play equipment or approved as a temporary use. 
(Ord. No. 30-1027, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS 
 
Section 3.01 - Zoning districts. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance the City of Warren is hereby divided into districts to be known as the following: 
1.  R-1-A Districts—One-Family Residential Districts. 
2.  R-1-B Districts—One-Family Residential Districts. 
3.  R-1-C Districts—One-Family Residential Districts. 
4.  R-1-P Districts—One-Family Residential Parking Districts. 
5.  R-2 Districts—Two-Family Residential Districts. 
6.  R-3 Districts—Multiple-Family Residential Districts. 
7.  R-4 Districts—Mobile Home Districts. 
8.  PB Districts—Professional Business Districts. 
9.  C-1 Districts—Local Business Districts. 
10.  C-2 Districts—General Business Districts. 
11.  C-3 Districts—Wholesale and Intensive Business Districts. 
12.  P Districts—Parking Districts. 
13.  M-1, M-2, M-3 and M-4 Districts—Industrial Districts. 
14.  R-5 Districts—High-Rise Apartment Districts. 
15.  "O" Districts—Office Districts. 
16.  "S" Districts—Special Service Districts. 
17.  City Center District—Specially Designated Overlying District. 
18.  Village Historic District—Specially Designated Historic District. 
[19.  R-3-A Districts—Senior Citizen Congregate Living.]  
Section 3.02 - Zoning map. 
The areas comprising these zoning districts and the boundaries of said districts as shown upon the map attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance, being designated as the Zoning Map of the City of Warren, with all proper notations, references and other information shown thereon.  
Section 3.03 - District boundaries. 
The boundaries of zoning districts, as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance, unless otherwise shown, are lot or tract lines or the center lines of streets, roads, or alleys, or the extension thereof, railroad right-of-way lines and the corporate limits of the City of Warren.  
Section 3.04 - Interpretation of boundaries. 
Questions concerning district boundary lines as shown on the Zoning Map shall be decided by the Zoning Board of Appeals after recommendation by the Planning Commission.  
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 4.01 - Compliance with all laws; uses not expressly permitted are prohibited; illegal operation of a business is a misdemeanor. 
(a)  A building or land shall only be used, altered, constructed or reconstructed if it complies with: 
(1)  All applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances, including appendix A, zoning; and 
(2)  All other applicable laws. 
(b)  Uses not expressly permitted within a specified zoning district are prohibited in that district. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, a person operating a business in violation of any applicable law is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 30-990, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 30-1020, § 2, 4-12-16) 
Editor's note— The Legislative Record Documents submitted to City council and made part of the official legislative record on February 22, 2011, in support of the amendment to section 4.01 which demonstrate the deleterious secondary effects of medical marijuana enterprises, businesses, facilities or similar uses are on file with the City Clerk.  
Section 4.02 - Scope. 
Except as hereafter provided, no building shall be erected or altered to exceed in height the limit established for the district in which such building is located. No building shall be erected, nor shall an existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the regulations hereby established for the district in which such building is located.  
Section 4.03 - Buildings under construction. 
Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued and the construction of the whole or a part of which has been started, or for which a contract or contracts have been entered into pursuant to a building permit issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, may be completed and used in accordance with the plans and applications on which said building permit was granted. 
Any such permit for a use which would become non-conforming by virtue of the passage of this Ordinance or amendment thereto shall not be renewed if construction, pursuant to the issuance of such permit, has not commenced within one year from the date of issuance.  
Section 4.04 - Lots: Use for yards, courts, etc. 
No portion of a lot and other similar uses used in complying with the provisions of this Ordinance for yards, courts, lot area per family or percentage of lot occupancy in connection with an existing or proposed building or structure, including tents and trailer coaches, shall again be used as part of the lot required in connection with any other building or structure existing or intended to exist at the same time.  
Section 4.05 - Building grades. 
Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. A building grade line (sometimes referred to as the finish line) shall mean the elevation of the ground adjoining the building on all four sides. A first floor elevation shall mean the height which the first floor extends above building grade. A sloping earth grade shall be maintained and established from the center of the front line to the finish grade line at the building front and from the rear wall of the buildings to the rear lot line. The height of the finish grade line of any dwelling shall not be less than twelve (12) inches nor more than eighteen (18) inches above the curb or crown of the abutting street measured from the center of the front of the building. 
When a new building is being constructed on a vacant lot between two existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade shall be referred to in determining the grade around the new building and the yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to prevent run-off of surface water flowing onto the adjacent properties. Grades shall be approved by the Building Inspector. 
No person, firm or corporation shall alter an established surface drainage grade to the extent that normal surface drainage is materially obstructed or retarded.  
Section 4.06 - Yard—Use. 
No part of any required yard, except a rear or side yard shall be used for any detached garage or any accessory building other than a garage or use, or for the storage of vehicles. Any portion of a lot in front of the front building line shall be used for ornamental purposes only and nothing shall be placed thereon except trees, shrubs, or items of similar nature.  
Section 4.07 - Lot limitation. 
No more than one (1) principal building shall be placed on a lot with the exception of those uses, which in accordance with this ordinance, the planning commission has approved the location of one (1) or more principal buildings provided the land area allocated to each building is equal to or greater than the lot area required for the district and the building and land complies with all other requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 30-726, § 3, 9-23-86)  
Section 4.08 - Yards—Alley. 
Wherever there is a public alley at the rear of a lot upon which the lot abuts for the full width, measurements of the depth of any abutting rear yard, required under this Ordinance, may be made to the center line of such, alley.  
Section 4.09 - Corner visibility. 
Within any required front or corner side yard on any corner lot, no wall, fence, sign, hedge, shrub, or other obstruction to visibility shall be permitted between the heights of two and one-half (2½) feet and ten (10) feet above the existing street grade within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting there at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the street lines or their extension.  
Section 4.10 - Water supply—Sewers. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued under the terms of this Ordinance before all wells are drilled and tested in accordance with requirements of State Health Department, and all well water is to be tested by the Macomb County Health Department. 
(b)  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered and used for an outside toilet of any type whatsoever, unless located and erected in conformance with the laws of the State of Michigan and the rules and regulations of the Michigan Department of Health and Macomb County Health Department. 
(c)  Where an approved public sewer is available all new buildings shall be connected to such public sewerage system at the time of construction. When an approved public sewer becomes available, existing dwellings and habitable buildings shall be connected to same at such time as may be deemed necessary by the Macomb County Health Department or the City of Warren Building Department.  
Section 4.11 - Waste, garbage, and rubbish. 
No garbage, sewage, filth, refuse or other obnoxious matter shall be kept in open containers or piled on the open ground. No business or industrial use shall permit waste materials, cans, cartons, and other similar materials, to be scattered over open ground. All waste materials must be periodically disposed of at least once in each thirty (30) day period.  
Section 4.12 - Waste receptacles. 
The occupant or occupants of every building where waste accumulates, and in case of a semidetached or terrace building, the owner, lessee or agent, shall cause to be provided, and the City may provide, for said building, kept clean and in place, proper receptacles for said wastes, either stationary or portable. No occupant, whether owner, lessee or agent, shall permit the storing or accumulation of rubbish or waste, or permit it to be kept in open yards or lots, unless placed in any accessory building. In no case shall such receptacles be stored in any front yard. Receptacles may be stored on the side or rear yard so long as they are out of sight, covered or partially shielded from view of the general public. 
For garbage, compost and recycling containers shall be portable, constructed of durable plastic or substantial metal construction for use with automated commercial collection systems with hinged lids, clearly color coded/marked as to its use; "compost," "garbage" or recycling" so maintained as to be water tight, and vermin resistant and may be of 32—96 gallon capacity. Garbage receptacles shall be adequate in size and number to hold one week's accumulation. Portable receptacles shall have handles or bails and a tight fitting cover. 
(Ord. No. 30-1050 , § 1, 9-10-19)  
Section 4.13 - Storage, dumping of waste, junk, garbage, and other similar materials. 
The use of land for the storage or collection or accumulation of used lumber, and other used materials, or for the dumping or disposal of broken concrete, scrap iron, junk, garbage, rubbish or other refuse or of ashes, slag or other industrial wastes or by-products shall not be permitted in any district, except as specifically specified in Section 17.02(t) of this Ordinance and under a Temporary Certificate from the Building Department, after approval of the Board of Appeals after the recommendation of the Planning Commission which may be issued in appropriate cases upon the filing of an application accompanied by a suitable agreement and bond that such dumping or disposal will not pollute the waters of the City or cause stagnant water to collect, or leave the surface of the land, at the expiration date of such permits, in an unstable condition or unfit for the growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the district in which such dumping occurs. 
The dumping of dirt or sand excavated from the earth is permitted in any district provided the grade has been established and approved by the Director of Public Service, and further that the surface of such material is graded within sixty (60) days in a manner preventing the collection of stagnant water and which leaves the ground surface in a condition suitable for the growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the district. 
No land within the City, regardless of zoning district, shall be used for dumping, burying or otherwise disposing of any toxic substances. For purposes of this Ordinance, toxic substance means any material in concentrations which, alone or in combination presents a significant threat to the health, safety or welfare of human life or which has the capacity to produce injury or illness through ingestion, inhalation, or absorption through the body surface. 
(Ord. No. 30-601, § 1, 9-25-79)  
Section 4.14 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 30-859, adopted March 26, 1996, repealed § 4.14 in its entirety. Formerly, §§ 4.14 pertained to billboards and signs located in certain districts and derived from § 4 of Ord. No. 30-722, adopted Aug. 26, 1986.  
Section 4.15 - Minimum lot width for two or more families. 
No two (2) family or multiple family residence shall be built on a lot having a width at the front line of less than sixty (60) feet and not fronting upon a public street.  
Section 4.16 - Motor vehicles. 
No motor vehicles, as defined in Chapter 37 "Traffic and Motor Vehicles" section 37-47, shall be stored on any residential lot, in any residential district, or on any parcel of land used but not zoned for residential purposes unless it shall be in operating condition and properly and currently licensed or located inside a permanent structure in sound condition. No motor vehicle in excess of one (1) ton capacity shall be stored on any residential lot, in any residential district or on any parcel of land used for residential purposes regardless of zoning district, unless it is a permitted use pursuant to Article V-A of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-819, § 1, 10-13-92; Ord. No. 30-821, § 1, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 30-860, § 3, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 3, 3-11-97)  
Section 4.17 - Non-conforming uses: 
(a)  Non-Conforming Use-Continuance. Any lawful non-conforming use consisting of a building or land usage existing at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued, except as herein prohibited or restricted, provided that the building or use thereof shall not be structurally changed, altered or enlarged, unless such altered or enlarged building or use shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located. No non-conforming use if changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located shall be resumed or changed back to a non-conforming use. Failure to continue to use any land, building or structure, or part thereof, which use is a non-conforming use under this Ordinance, for a period of one (1) year or more shall be held to be conclusive proof of an intention to legally abandon any such non-conforming use. 
(b)  Non-Conforming Use-Restoration. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the restoration, repairing, or rebuilding of any non-conforming building or structure damaged to the extent of sixty (60) percent or less of its valuation by fire, explosion, act of God, or any act of the public enemy, subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, or shall prevent the continuance of the use of such building or part thereof, as such use existed at the time of such impairment of such building or part thereof. 
(c)  Non-Conforming Use-Repair. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the repair, reinforcement or reconstruction of a non-conforming building, structure, or part thereof existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, rendered necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation, provided the cost of such work shall not exceed thirty (30) percent or [of] the valuation of such building or structure at the time such work is done nor shall any provision of this Ordinance prevent compliance with the provisions of any Building Code in effect in this City or the Housing Law of Michigan relative to the maintenance of buildings or structures. 
(d)  Non-Conforming Use-Exceptions. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the alteration, improvement, or rehabilitation of a no-conforming building or structure existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, provided the same does not involve any increase in height, area, bulk, or change or use. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoration of any building or wall declared unsafe by the Building Department. 
(e)  Non-Conforming Use-Removal. In accordance with Act No. 207, Public Acts of Michigan 1921 [MCL 125.581 et seq.], as amended by Section 3a of Act No. 272 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1947 [MCL 125.583a], the City Council may acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, private property for the removal of non-conforming uses and structures; provided, the property shall not be used for public housing. The City Council may in its discretion provide that the cost and expense of acquiring such private property be paid from general funds, or the cost and expense or any portion thereof be assessed to a special district. The elimination of such non-conforming uses and structures in a zoned district as herein provided is hereby declared to be for a public purpose and for a public use. The City Council shall have the authority to institute and prosecute proceedings for the condemnation of non-conforming uses and structures under the power of eminent domain in accordance with the laws of the State of Michigan and the provisions of the City Charter relative to condemnation. 
(Ord. No. 30-124, § 1, 6-9-64)  
Section 4.18 - Attached garage buildings. 
(a)  On interior lots when a garage building is attached to and made structurally a part of the principal building on the lot, the following minimum side yard requirements shall apply: 
R-1-A Two (2) side yards each having a width of not less than ten (10) feet and the combined widths of both side yards not less than twenty (20) feet provided that such principal building on adjoining lots shall be not less than twenty (20) feet apart. 
R-1-B Two (2) side yards each having a width of not less than six (6) feet and the combined widths of both side yards not less than fifteen (15) feet, provided that such buildings on adjoining lots shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet apart. 
R-1-C Two (2) side yards each having a width of not less than five (5) feet and the combined widths of both side yards not less than thirteen (13) feet, provided that such principal buildings shall be not less than thirteen (13) feet apart. 
On lots less than sixty (60) feet in width, which were of record on the date of adoption of this Ordinance, or on lots in a proposed subdivision which has received the approval of the City Council as to lot and street layout at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, a minimum side yard of five (5) feet and a minimum combined width of both side yards of ten (10) feet shall be permitted, provided such principal buildings shall be not less than ten (10) feet apart, and provided the overhang shall not exceed twelve (12) inches, not including gutter.  
Section 4.19 - Detached garage buildings. 
(a)  All detached garages located in side and rear yards and within ten (10) feet of the rear wall of any principal building shall comply with all yard requirements applicable to the principal structure in the district. In no event shall such garages locate closer than five (5) feet from any side lot lines. 
(b)  Detached garages shall not exceed one (1) story or ten (10) feet in height to the eaves, and shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the area of any rear yard, and shall not be nearer than two (2) feet to the side lot line, provided, however, that where there are existing accessory buildings or garages on the same or adjacent lot, such accessory buildings or garages shall not be constructed closer than four (4) feet to such existing accessory building. 
Garages on corner lots which face a side street shall not be constructed closer than twenty (20) feet from the side street lot line; garages which face the front street and are attached to and become a part of the principal building, shall not be constructed closer than twenty (20) feet from the side street lot line; garages which face the front street and are attached to and become a part of the principal building, shall not be constructed closer than twenty (20) feet from the side street lot line or closer to the side lot line than the location of the principal building thereon, whichever is greater.  
Section 4.20 - Detached accessory buildings. 
(a)  All detached accessory buildings shall not exceed one (1) story or ten (10) feet in height measured to the eaves and shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard. Such buildings shall conform to, and shall not project beyond, the existing side building lines of the principal building on the lot and shall be one (1) foot from the edge of any easement. The construction of all such accessory structures shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  That a building permit be obtained as required by Section 22.02 of this ordinance, and that the building be of masonry, wood or metal construction. 
2.  That the building be fixed to a permanent foundation of the type required for detached garages in the Building Code. 
3.  That the accessory building be placed against any other accessory structure, such as a detached garage, that may exist in the yard. Only one (1) detached accessory structure shall be permitted in the yard. 
4.  That no flammable substance be stored in an accessory building unless it is located at least ten (10) feet from any residence. 
5.  That all accessory structures, excluding garages, will not exceed a total of 120 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-278, § 1, 5-14-68; Ord. No. 30-300, § 1, 11-26-68)  
Section 4.21 - Combination business and dwelling structures. 
When a dwelling occupies a space above a business use, such dwelling unit shall provide a minimum floor area of six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet, exclusive of stairways and utility room space; and not less than fifty-five hundred (5,500) square feet of usable lot area in addition to the required lot area for the business and its required off-street parking.  
Section 4.22 - Overhangs. 
In the construction of a building closer than twelve (12) feet from another building, the following shall apply: 
1.  When the overhang is twelve (12) inches or less, not including the gutter, the measurements shall be taken from the outside wall of the building. 
2.  When the overhang exceeds twelve (12) inches, not including the gutter, the measurements to the adjacent building shall be taken from the edge of the overhang to the closest point of the adjacent building. 
3.  When both buildings have an overhang exceeding twelve (12) inches, not including the gutter, the measurements shall be taken from the outer edge of both overhangs at their closest point.  
Section 4.23 - Double-frontage lots. 
On double-frontage lots a front yard, as prescribed for the district as herein established, shall be provided on both streets.  
Section 4.24 - Front yard exceptions. 
When the majority of the buildings have been built in a block at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, no building hereafter erected or altered shall project beyond the minimum building lines thus established, provided, that no residential building shall be required by this Ordinance to set back more than forty (40) feet; and provided further, that this regulation shall not be interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot facing an intersection street.  
Section 4.24-A - Front yards along thoroughfares. 
The minimum front yard set back required in each residential district of this Ordinance shall be increased five (5) feet for all lots facing on a thoroughfare, as defined in the City of Warren Thoroughfare Plan.  
Section 4.25 - Yard encroachments. 
Outside stairways, fire escapes, fire towers, porches, platforms, balconies, boiler flues and other projections shall be considered as part of the building and not as part of the yards or courts or unoccupied spaces, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to one (1) fireplace or one (1) chimney projecting not more than sixteen (16) inches into side yard space, and not more than eight (8) feet in length, nor to platforms, terraces, or steps below the first floor level. Side yards shall be measured from the exterior wall of any principal building to the side property line, except as hereinafter specified. Measurement of the front yard shall be taken from the foremost portion of the building, porch, garage or overhang. Covered porches shall be regarded as part of the main building.  
Section 4.26 - Size of residential dwellings. 
(a)  Minimum size of new single-family dwellings. Any proposed new single-family dwelling, whether built alone, in a subdivision or a site condominium development, shall be no less than the average square foot floor area of the existing dwellings located within a three-hundred-foot radius of the proposed site or subdivision. The three-hundred-foot radius shall be measured from the boundary of the site or subdivision. However, in no event shall a new single-family dwelling have a square foot floor area which is less than the minimum dimensions set forth in Schedule A. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings in existence on the effective date of this amendment which were constructed smaller than the minimum requirements set forth herein, may be continued or increased in size without meeting the minimum requirements herein. 
(c)  Floor area measurements are based upon distance between exterior surface of enclosing walls and between centerlines of common partition walls for each living unit. 
SCHEDULE A. MINIMUM SQUARE FOOT FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS

FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS 
Zone 	1 

Story 

Finished 	1½ 

Story 

Finished 	2 

Story 

Finished 
			1st 

Floor 

Area 	2nd 

Floor 

Area 	Total 	1st 

Floor 

Area 	2nd 

Floor 

Area 	Total 
R-1-A 	With Basement 	1500 	1260 	500 	1760 	900 	900 	1800 
	Without Basement 	1620 	1380 	500 	1880 	1000 	1000 	2000 
R-1-B 	With Basement 	1200 	940 	400 	1340 	750 	750 	1500 
	Without Basement 	1320 	1060 	400 	1460 	850 	850 	1700 
R-1-C 	With Basement 	1080 	800 	400 	1200 	650 	650 	1300 
	Without Basement 	1200 	900 	400 	1300 	750 	750 	1500 
R-1-C 	Lots less than 60 feet in width which were in existence on July 21, 1960: 							
	With Basement 	880 	800 	300 	1100 	650 	650 	1300 
	Without Basement 	980 	900 	300 	1200 	750 	750 	1500 
R-2 	With Basement 	800 per unit 	720 	300 	1020 per unit 	600 	600 	1200 per unit 
	Without Basement 	920 per unit 	840 	300 	1140 per unit 	700 	700 	1400 per unit 
	First floor and second floor individual units shall use one story requirements for each unit. 
R-3 		650 per unit 						
	Senior Citizen Unit 	500 per unit 						
R-3A 	Congregate living 	350 per unit 						
R-5 		650 per unit 						
	Senior Citizen Unit 	500 per unit 						
 
Every principal building within a multiple-family development shall be provided with a full basement as defined in Section 2.02 of this ordinance, except high rise apartment residential buildings. 
(Ord. No. 30-469, § 4, 9-24-74; Ord. No. 30-500, § 5, 1-27-76; Ord. No. 30-534, § 3, 4-12-77; Ord. No. 30-931, § 1, 11-13-01)  
Section 4.27 - Size of hotel, motel and motor court rooms. 
In every hotel, motel or motor court hereafter erected, each unit in addition to the manager's or caretaker's unit, shall have one (1) room with not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area, a bathroom of not less than thirty-five (35) square feet and a closet of not less than eight (8) square feet.  
Section 4.28 - Privacy. 
In every dwelling hereafter erected, access to every living room and to every bedroom shall be had without passing through a bedroom or through a room containing a water-closet. Access to waterclosets must be possible from all bedrooms without passing through another bedroom or room used as a bedroom. This provision does not apply to any sleeping porch, sun-parlor or any other enclosed outside porch entered by way of a bedroom.  
Section 4.29 - Substandard basement or garage dwelling; detached garage; conversion of attached garage to living space. 
(a)  All substandard basement dwellings, or garage dwellings, which have been heretofore erected or occupied, are hereby declared to be unlawful dwellings and shall be vacated within a period of two (2) years or otherwise altered so as to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. Hardship cases may be appealed for not more than one (1) one-year extension to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(b)  Detached garages shall not be converted to living space. 
(c)  The expansion of a residential dwelling to add living space is encouraged to be in the nature of a first or a second story addition of living space pursuant to the State Construction Code. However, in those situations where the applicant demonstrates a practical difficulty in adding on living space, an attached garage may be converted to living space in conformity with the following regulations: 
1.  The conversion from garage to living space shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building regulations, zoning regulations and construction codes. 
2.  The garage door must be removed and the exterior finished with materials that architecturally match the existing structure. 
3.  A new garage or storage shed shall be built provided that the dimensions of all existing structures together with the proposed new garage or storage shed will not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the lot. 
4.  It must be demonstrated that there will be at least two (2) off-street parking spaces provided after the garage conversion. 
5.  There shall be one (1) driveway and approach provided. The driveway and approach shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in width at the property line. 
6.  Any new driveway installed shall be set back three (3) feet from the residential structure and three (3) feet from the property line. The three (3) foot setback from the property line may be waived by the building department upon demonstration that drainage is installed according to engineering standards. 
7.  Any converted living space abutting an existing driveway shall be protected with a continuous curb constructed of concrete measuring eight (8) inches in height. The area from the building wall to the front edge of the exposed curb shall be a minimum of five (5) feet and shall be filled with hard surfacing or may be modified upon approval of the building department with decorative materials. 
8.  After conversion, the former garage area shall be utilized as an integral part of the existing single dwelling and not as a separate use. 
(Ord. No. 30-988, § 1, 7-27-10)  
Section 4.30 - Essential services. 
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances, it being the intention thereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this Ordinance.  
Section 4.31 - Loading space. 
On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse goods display, department store, wholesale store, market hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys. Such space unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten by twenty-five (10' x 25') feet or two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area, with clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having as asphaltic or portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface. 
One (1) such space shall be provided for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of building floor use or land use for above mentioned purposes.  
Section 4.32 - Off-street parking requirements. 
In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage or parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be provided and maintained as herein prescribed. 
(a)  Loading spaces as required in Section 4.31 shall not be construed as supplying off-street parking space. 
(b)  When units of measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (½) shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one (1) parking space. 
(c)  Whenever a use requiring off-street parking is increased in floor area, and such use is located in a building existing on or before the effective date of this Ordinance, additional parking space for the additional floor space shall be provided and maintained in amount hereafter specified for that use. 
(d)  Repealed as per Ordinance No. 30-294. The effect of this amendment is to require the computation of off-street parking spaces based upon total gross floor area as defined in Section 2.20 of Article II, Definitions of said Ordinance No. 30. 
(e)  Off-street parking facilities for one, two or multi-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building they are intended to serve. 
The location of required off-street parking facilities for other than one, two or multi-family dwellings shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the building they are intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the off-street parking facilities and the nearest point of the building, provided the property on which the building is located shall not prohibit an industry which employs five hundred (500) or more employees from the supplying [of] off-street parking at a reasonable distance, greater than three hundred (300) feet from the building, in which said employees are employed, upon approval of the Planning Commission, and provided such parking lot is owned by the owner of the property on which the industrial plant is located. 
(f)  In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements of off-street parking facilities for a use which is so mentioned and said use is similar shall apply. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided collectively, such facilities shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the table. 
(h)  The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto and additions to existing building as specified above shall be determined in accordance with the following table, and the space, so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use. 
Use 	Required Parking Space 
 (1) One and two family dwellings 	One (1) parking space for each family unit. 
 (2) Multiple dwellings and efficiency apartments. 	Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit. Where community or recreation type building has been included within the site plan there shall be provided one off-street parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area for said building. 
 (2B) All multiple dwellings and efficiency apartments in R-5 zones. 	See Section 10A.02(e) and 10A.03(a). 
 (3) Tourist Homes or Motels. 	One (1) parking space for each guest or sleeping room or suite in a tourist cabin or motel, plus one additional space for the owner or manager if resident on the premises. 
 (4) Convalescent homes and homes for the aged or similar uses. 	One (1) parking space for each three (3) patient beds; plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting doctor; plus one (1) space for each four (4) employees, including nurses. Loading and unloading space for ambulances and the like shall not be included herein. 
 (5) Orphanage or similar use. 	One (1) parking space for each ten (10) beds. 
 (6) Hotels. 	One (1) parking space for each three (3) guest rooms, plus one (1) additional space for each five (5) employees. 
 (7) Private Clubs, Fraternities, boarding and lodging business. 	One (1) parking space for each two (2) guest bedrooms. 
 (8) Community centers, libraries, museums, post offices, civic clubs, etc. 	Provide about each building an improved area other than the front yard which shall be sufficient in size to provide adequate facilities for parking as approved by the Planning Commission. 
 (9) Theaters and Auditoriums (other than incidental to schools). 	One (1) parking space per seat for first fifty (50) seats and one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats for all seats over fifty (50) seats. 
 (10) Elementary and Junior High Schools. 	One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees (including teachers and administrators), plus sufficient off-street space for the safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 
 (11) High Schools and Colleges 	One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees (including teachers and administrators) and one (1) for each ten (10) students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. 
 (12) Dance halls, pool and billiard rooms, assembly halls and exhibition halls without fixed seats. 	One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area used for dancing or assembly. 
 (13) Stadiums and sports arenas. 	One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats. 
 (14) Bowling Alleys. 	Six (6) parking spaces for each alley; plus one (1) space for each one (1) employee. 
 (15) Churches. 	One (1) for each three (3) seats in the main unit of worship. Where individual seats are not provided, each (20) inches of bench shall be considered as one (1) seat. 
 (16) Mortuaries or funeral homes. 	One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space in the slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms. 
 (17) Establishment for sale and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, food or refreshments. 	One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area, plus one (1) parking space for each four (4) employees. 
 (18) Medical or dental clinics. 	One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area and one (1) parking space for each examining room, dental chair or similar use area. In no event shall there be less than three (3) spaces per doctor plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees. 
 (19) Banks, business or professional offices. 	A. Three (3) stories maximum. One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
B. Three and one-half (3½) stories minimum. Calculated as follows: Gross floor area of building (out-to-out dimensions of building) multiplied by the factor 80% and that result divided by two hundred (200), which result will give parking requirement. 
 (20) Furniture and appliance stores, personal service shops (not including beauty parlors and barber shops), household equipment or furniture repair shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, hardware stores, motor vehicle sales, wholesale stores and machinery sales. 	One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
 (21) Beauty parlors and Barber shops. 	Two (2) parking spaces for each beauty and/or barber shop chair. 
 (22) All retail stores, martial arts and yoga studios, except as otherwise specified herein. 	One (1) parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space. 
 (23) Industrial establishments, including manufacturing, research and testing laboratories, creameries, bottling works, printing and engraving shops, warehouse and storage buildings. 	Provide upon land owned by such establishment about each industrial building, buildings or use, other than the front yard, or driveways which shall be sufficient in size to provide adequate facilities for the parking of automobiles and other motor vehicles used by the firm or employees or persons doing business therein, such space shall not be less than one (1)parking space for each four (4) employees, computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons to be employed at any one period during the day or night, and in no case shall the area allotted to off-street parking be less than one hundred (100) per cent of the total floor area. 
 (24) Amusement Machines 	One (1) parking space shall be provided for each amusement machine (as defined in Section 3-501, Code of Ordinances), in addition to the parking requirements for the commercial use in which the amusement machine is located. 
 (25) Senior Citizen Housing 	One (1) parking space per dwelling unit. 
 (26) Hospitals and Sanitoriums. 	Three (3) spaces per bed for all hospitals (including psychiatric, medical, both private and public), except if hospital has ambulatory out-patient service and/or educational training programs, then four (4) spaces per bed. 
 (27) Sexually oriented businesses 	One (1) parking space for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet of net floor area, as defined in Section 6-77 of the Warren Code of Ordinances. 
 
(i)  All spaces that abut a continuous curb required in accordance with Section 16.07 of this Ordinance or a common property line shall be laid out in the following dimensions, including off-street maneuvering lanes: 
Type 	Width 	Length 	Length of 
Maneuvering 
Lane 
90° 	9' 	22'* 	22' 
60° 	9' 	20'* 	20' 
45° 	9' 	19'* 	17' 
Parallel 	12'* 	20' 	15' one-way 
			20' two-way 
 
All spaces that abut a common property line where a continuous curb is not required shall provide one protective bumper curb per parking space. Said bumper curb shall be placed no closer than five feet from the property line. 
All spaces that do not abut a continuous curb required in accordance with Section 16.07 or a common property line shall be laid out in the following dimensions: 
Type 	Width 	Length 	Length of 
Maneuvering 
Lane 
90° 	9' 	20'* 	22' 
60° 	9' 	18'* 	20' 
45° 	9' 	17'* 	17' 
Parallel 	10'* 	20' 	15' one-way 
			20' two-way 
 
*Measured from the front of the stall on a perpendicular line. 
(j)  All requests and applications for building permits for structures or uses other than one and two-family dwellings requiring off-street parking shall be accompanied by plans identifying the parking stalls, their widths and lengths, maneuvering area, and points of ingress and egress. 
(k)  All off-street parking areas shall be provided with adequate ingress and egress, shall be hard surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material (base may be stabilized gravel or equivalent), shall be maintained in a usable dustproof condition, shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water, provide protective bumper curbs as per Sections 4.32 (i) and 16.07, and shall otherwise comply with Section 2.46 and 16.05 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-287, § 3, 8-13-68; Ord. No.30-294, § 1, 9-24-68; Ord. No. 30-367, § 1, 4-13-71; Ord. No. 30-444, § 1, 8-14-73; Ord. No. 30-457, § 4, 2-12-74; Ord. No. 30-462, § 2, 7-9-74; Ord. No. 30-485, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-75; Ord. No. 30-489, §§ 1, 2, 7-22-75; Ord. No. 30-500, § 4, 1-27-76; Ord. No. 30-559, § 2, 5-9-78; Ord. No. 30-627, § 1, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 30-657, § 3, 4-12-83; Ord. No. 30-1002, § 2, 10-22-13; Ord. No. 30-1005, § 1, 7-9-14)  
Section 4.33 - Curb cuts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break out or remove any curb along or to construct a curb return or driveway approach in the right-of-way of a public street, way or alley except as authorized by the Director of Public Service of the City of Warren.  
Section 4.34 - [Parking as adjunct use.] 
In all districts where off-street parking facilities are permitted uses as an adjunct to business and such facilities provide a service to the patrons or customers patronizing such businesses, such off-street parking lots shall be established and maintained as prescribed by Article XVI.  
Section 4.35 - Circuses, fairs, carnivals and similar uses. 
Permit circuses, fairs, carnivals and similar uses in any District after approval by the Board of Appeals under the following conditions: 
(1)  When engaged in by schools, churches, fraternal societies and similar non-profit organizations as an accessory use for the sole purpose of raising money for the financial support of such institutions in pursuit of their natural functions; provided, that such uses are confined to the land and buildings normally used and occupied by such institutions. 
(2)  A permit is obtained from the City of Warren Police Department. 
(3)  Such use and occupancy is not disturbing to the public peace and tranquility. 
(4)  Such use and occupancy will not create undue traffic hazard and congestion. 
(5)  Permits for such uses shall be valid for a total of sixteen (16) consecutive or nonconsecutive days; however, the permit expires thirty (30) days from the date of issue. 
(Ord. No. 30-868, § 1, 9-24-96)  
Section 4.36 - Building set backs on major streets and highways. 
(a)  No building or structure shall be erected or constructed within the area set down by the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
(b)  All set backs, where required, shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way established by the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan.  
Section 4.37 - Municipal parking lots. 
The City Council, in consultation with the Planning Commission, shall make studies of various areas in the City of Warren for the purposes of determining areas in which there is need for the establishment of off-street parking facilities to be provided by the City of Warren and to be financed wholly or in part by a special assessment district or shall include recommendations of the site, location and other pertinent features of the proposed off-street parking facilities and the area they should be intended to serve. 
Wherever, pursuant to this procedure, the City Council shall establish off-street parking facilities by means of a special assessment district, or by any other means the City Council may determine, upon completion and acceptance of such off-street parking facilities by the City Council, all existing buildings and uses and all buildings erected or uses established thereafter within the special assessment district, or districts, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for privately supplied off-street parking facilities.  
Section 4.38 - [Non-residential driveways, etc.] 
The location of all driveways, entrances and/or exits to non-residential properties shall first be approved by the City of Warren Traffic Engineer.  
Section 4.39 - Property maintenance. 
Every parcel of property including buildings vacant or occupied, and every part thereof, shall be kept clean and shall be kept free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or other matter in or on the same, or in the yards, courts, passages, area of alleys connected therewith or belonging to the same. The owner of every dwelling shall be responsible for keeping the entire building free from vermin. The owner shall also be responsible for complying with the provisions of this section except that the tenants shall be responsible for the cleanliness of those parts of the premises which they occupy and control. Any hazardous places that are necessary during construction must be fenced or boarded up. Property owners and/or occupants shall be held responsible for the condition, cleanliness and maintenance of the areas between their lot lines and the adjoining street and curbs, where existing.  
Section 4.40 - Railroad spurs. 
The extension of all railroad spur lines and railroad sidings shall be approved by the City Council. All plans to cross streets and highways shall first receive the approval of the City Engineer and Police Department Traffic Division.  
Section 4.41 - [Property between lot line and curb.] 
No owner or person in control of any property adjacent to property located between the lot line or sidewalk and the curb of the street or traveled portion of the street shall allow, permit, or maintain any stones or rocks except as confined within curbed planters or boxed areas not exceeding three (3) feet in length by three (3) feet in width; provided, however, that the City Council can, if in its discretion it determines that the property will be improved, grant the property owner the right to place a planter or boxed area which exceeds three (3) feet in length and three (3) feet in width. 
Said area between the lot line or sidewalk and the curb of the street or traveled portion of the highway shall be maintained with grass, sod or artificial turf in all residential areas. This same area if in commercial or industrial zones or abutting property used in such a manner, on paved streets shall be maintained with grass, sod or artificial turf, except that a strip of concrete not to exceed three (3) feet in width may be constructed immediately adjacent to the curb and decorative shrubbery not exceeding three (3) feet in height may be permitted. At the direction of or with the specific permission of the City Council, the said area if ten (10) feet or less between the sidewalk and curb on paved streets in commercial or industrial zones or abutting property used in such a manner may be entirely of concrete constructed to a minimum depth of four (4) inches provided a permit is obtained from the Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering as provided in Section 9-101 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 30-325, § 1, 2-10-70)  
Section 4.42 - Garage sales. 
Garage sales as defined in Section 2.72 may be permitted as provided below: 
A.  Location —Garage sales may be located in any zoning district provided that the activity is conducted solely on one (1) lot containing a one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling or on any one (1) lot containing any use permitted or approved in any residential district. 
B.  Display of Items —The items offered for sale shall not be displayed in the front yard setback of any lot. In no instance however shall any items or articles in connection with a garage sale be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from a public sidewalk. 
C.  House of Operation —A garage sale may be held only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on those days indicated on the license as issued by the City Clerk. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for the licensee to maintain hours either prior to 9:00 a.m. or subsequent to 9:00 p.m. on any day for visits by the general public to purchase, shop for trade, or deliver goods or articles in connection with any garage sale as regulated herein. 
D.  Duration of Sale —A garage sale as provided for herein shall be limited to a period of time not to exceed four (4) consecutive days. Any garage sale must be concluded by 9:00 p.m. of the fourth consecutive day as indicated on the license issued by the City Clerk. At the conclusion of any garage sale, the sale or display or trading of any goods or articles shall be prohibited. 
E.  License Required— In order to conduct a garage sale as described herein any owner, tenant, lessee or occupant shall receive a license from the City Clerk. The license for any garage sale shall be issued and recorded based on the City of Warren permanent parcel index number as assigned by the Land File Division of the Macomb County Treasurer's Office pursuant to P.A. 101 of 1965 (MCL 211.252). Said license shall not be issued until the Clerk certifies the application is in accordance with Section 4.42(D) above and that the required fee [is] paid in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council. In no case, however, shall the Clerk issue a license for garage sale purposes to any lot bearing the same parcel number more than twice during any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 30-680, § 2, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 30-852, § 1, 3-28-95)  
Section 4.43 - Standard method of measurement. 
To determine compliance with the locational criteria referred to in this ordinance, the following standardized method for measurement shall apply: 
a)  All measurements shall be based on the connection of two (2) reference points by a horizontal straight line on the site plan prepared pursuant to the "Definitions and Specifications for Required Plans" that are part of the "City of Warren Planning Commission Rules of Procedure Standards and Policies" as amended. 
b)  The first reference point shall be found in the following manner: 
If the proposed use is to be located within a building containing no other use(s), then the measurement shall be taken from a point on an outside wall of the building. 
If the proposed use is to be located within a building that contains other use(s), then the measurement shall be taken from a point on the outer perimeter of a wall or area defined for the proposed use within the building. 
c)  The second reference point shall be found by locating the point nearest to the first reference point containing any of the following: 
1)  When the measurement involves the distance to a given zoning district, the point is found on the given zoning district line. 
2)  When the measurement involves the distance to an existing use as described herein, the second reference point is established in the following manner: 
i)  If the existing use is located within a building containing no other use(s), then the measurement shall be taken from a point on an outside wall of the building. 
ii)  If the existing use is to be located within a building that contains other use(s) than the proposed uses as described herein then the second reference point shall be found on the outer perimeter of a wall or area defined for the existing use within the building. 
3)  When the measurement involves the distance to an existing school then the second reference point is the property line of the school site closest to the first reference point.  
Section 4.44 - Outdoor retail sales; purpose.[4] 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the use of land for outdoor retail sales both permanent and temporary. However, it is recognized that outdoor retail sales if not regulated properly may be unduly distracting to motorists; may over burden the use of property; may result in congestion, may cause a hazard to pedestrians; and may cause on-site circulation problems. Outdoor retail sales are an additional use of land and the land must be able to accommodate the additional use before it will be approved. An outdoor retail use will not be approved if it will result in a distraction to motorists, will result in insufficient parking, will be located in the required set back; will interfere with the existing on-site circulation; will interfere with off-site traffic movement; will reduce pedestrian safety; will interfere with or otherwise have a deleterious effect upon the use and enjoyment of the abutting properties. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, adopted Feb. 13, 1996, amended former §§ 4.44—4.47, to read as herein set out in §§ 4.44—4.56. The provisions of former §§ 4.44—4.47 pertained to outdoor retail sales and derived from Ord. No. 30-835, § 3, adopted Feb. 22, 1994. 
 
Section 4.45 - Outdoor retail sales; scope. 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall govern the use of all property for outdoor retail sales, both permanent and temporary. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.46 - Permanent outdoor retail sales. 
Permanent outdoor retail sales may be permitted in conjunction with a permanent building in C-1, C-2, C-3, N-1 and N-2 zoning districts. The division of buildings and safety engineering shall issue a permanent outdoor retail sales permit upon compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  The goods, items or articles sold or activities conducted as part of any outdoor retail sale in a C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2 zoning district must be consistent with the zoning district where the parcel is located. 
b.  The applicant must receive site plan approval from the Planning Commission pursuant to section 22.16, however, any application that does not comply with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall not receive site plan approval, unless the appropriate variance is obtained. The applicant shall obtain any variance needed from the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to petitioning for site plan approval. 
c.  The petitioner must obtain a certificate of occupancy. 
d.  The petitioner must comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the general Code of Ordinances to the extent they are not inconsistent herewith, and applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.47 - Temporary outdoor retail and Christmas tree sales in residential districts. 
Temporary outdoor retail and Christmas tree sales are prohibited in residential districts, however, based on the parcel's ability to accommodate the additional use and upon demonstrated compliance with sections 4.48 to 4.54, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant approval for one temporary outdoor retail sale per calendar year. The temporary outdoor retail sale is a commercial use, therefore, the petitioner shall also comply with all requirements contained in Article XIII, Local Business Districts. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.48 - Temporary outdoor retail sales in commercial and industrial districts. 
Temporary outdoor retail sales may be permitted in conjunction with a permanent building in C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. The Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering shall issue a non-transferable temporary outdoor retail sales permit upon compliance with all the following requirements: 
a.  One (1) temporary outdoor retail sale may be conducted per parcel for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days in a calendar year. 
b.  The goods, items or articles sold or activities conducted as part of any outdoor retail sale in a C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2 zoning district must be consistent with the zoning district where the parcel is located, and in the case of residential sites, the goods, items or articles sold or activities conducted must be consistent with C-1 Zoning Districts. 
c.  Petitioner shall submit proof of a valid certificate of occupancy prior to the issuance of an outdoor retail sales permit. 
d.  The petitioner must receive site plan approval from the planning commission pursuant to section 22.16. however, any application that does not comply with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall not receive site plan approval, unless the appropriate variance is obtained. The applicant shall obtain any variance needed from the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to petitioning for site plan approval. 
e.  The petitioner shall comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance, the general Code of Ordinances to the extent they are not inconsistent herewith, and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.49 - Seasonal outdoor retail sales site plan approval. 
An applicant is not required to obtain site plan approval every year for a seasonal sale once the applicant has obtained site plan approval from the planning commission pursuant to section 22.16 of the Zoning Ordinance provided that there is not any on-site change or change in the proposed use. If there is an on-site change or change in the proposed use the applicant must obtain site plan approval as provided in section 22.16 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.50 - Temporary outdoor retail sales application. 
An application shall be filed with the division of buildings and safety engineering for a temporary outdoor retail sales permit. Written verification of ownership of the parcel in question shall be provided with the application, including notarized permission of the property owner for the intended use. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount established by resolution adopted by the city council. The petitioner shall seek site plan approval from the planning commission and any variances that may be needed from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 30-945, § 3, 4-27-04)  
Section 4.51 - Variances in conjunction with an outdoor retail sales permit. 
Upon a finding of unnecessary hardship and pursuant to the standards set forth in Article XX of this Ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals for the City of Warren may grant a temporary variance in conjunction with a temporary outdoor retail sales permit. Any temporary variance granted in conjunction with an outdoor retail sales permit shall automatically expire upon the expiration of the temporary outdoor retail sales permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.52 - Standards for temporary outdoor retail sales approval. 
The buildings and safety engineering division shall evaluate all temporary outdoor retail sales applications for conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. The division shall deny any application for a temporary outdoor retail sales permit which does not comply with all provisions of this Ordinance or does not comply with the following requirements: 
a)  The proposed site must have a minimum twenty-six-foot driveway or a separate ingress and egress to the site; and 
b)  The proposed sale must not cause a distraction to motorists travelling on an adjacent roadway; and 
c)  The proposed sale must not be located within any required setback of the applicable zoning district; and 
d)  No sales activity or display of merchandise shall be permitted in the area designated for required off-street parking for the existing or temporary use; and 
e)  The proposed sale must not interfere with the existing on-site circulation; and 
f)  The proposed sale must not interfere with off-site traffic movement including the public street that provides access to the lot in question; and 
g)  The proposed sale will not interfere with or otherwise have a deleterious effect upon the use and enjoyment of the abutting properties; and 
h)  The applicant has complied with all licensing or permitting requirements of the Code of Ordinances or other laws of the State of Michigan; and 
i)  The goods, items or articles sold or activities conducted as part of the proposed outdoor retail sale in a C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2 zoning district must be consistent with the zoning district where the parcel is located, and in the case of residential sites, the goods, items or articles sold or activities conducted must be consistent with C-1 Zoning Districts. 
j)  Due to the volume of traffic generated by these temporary retail sales, a proposed sale in residential districts must provide a minimum of eight (8) hardsurfaced parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.53 - Regulations for all outdoor retail sales. 
All outdoor retail sales, whether permanent or temporary, shall comply with the following regulations: 
a)  A copy of the approved site plan and permit shall be displayed on site at all times for the duration of the permitted sale. 
b)  The location of all sales activity and the display of all merchandise shall be maintained in the area specified on the approved plan. 
c)  No sales activity or display of merchandise shall be permitted in the public right-of-way or any required setback. 
d)  The proposed activity shall be located so as to ensure safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
e)  The hours of operation shall be limited to hours consistent with the parent parcel unless otherwise approved and indicated on the approved site plan. 
f)  The period of operation of the proposed use shall be limited to dates specified on the approved plan or in the permit. The duration of all temporary uses shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days in any calendar year. 
g)  All electrical service shall comply with applicable city codes, ordinances or other regulations and any permits required shall be obtained by the applicant. 
h)  Sanitary facilities shall be provided in the permanent building the sale is being operated in conjunction with and shall comply with all applicable city codes, ordinances and regulations. 
i)  Any temporary structures including display tables or fixtures to be used as part of the proposed sales area shall be erected in a safe manner in accordance with any applicable city codes, ordinances or regulations. Camping trailers, portable sanitary facilities and temporary living quarters are prohibited. 
j)  The property shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition and cleaned immediately after the close of each business day. 
k)  Signage for the temporary use shall be noted on the approved plan. The sign shall be limited to a double-faced or back to back sign no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet and shall be set back not less than the established setback or parking line whichever is less. For double-faced or back to back signs, the allowable sign surface area shall be calculated by using the area of only one side of the sign, provided that the front and back of the sign are separated by no more than three (3) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.54 - Cash bond required for temporary outdoor retail sales. 
Clean up required for temporary outdoor retail sales. Final cleanup of temporary outdoor retail sales shall be the responsibility of the applicant within forty-eight (48) hours of the expiration of the approved permit or cessation of said use whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 30-945, § 1, 4-27-04)  
Section 4.55 - Sidewalk sales. 
Sidewalk sales where the retail sale of goods, items and articles normally sold in conjunction with a permanent business that has been issued a certificate of occupancy to operate such business, may be conducted for a period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days per calendar year without obtaining an outdoor retail sales permit or filing a clean up bond. Any sale conducted in excess of ten (10) consecutive days per calendar year shall require planning commission approval pursuant to section 4.46. All sidewalk sales shall be confined to the private sidewalk area, shall not intrude upon the required off-street parking and shall be limited to the hours of operation consistent with the permanent business. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.56 - Permit revocation and denial. 
Any permit issued for a temporary outdoor retail or Christmas tree sale may be denied or revoked by the city, pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 18-12 of the Code of Ordinances, at any time for any of the following reasons: 
a)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the application for permit; 
b)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the operation of the business; 
c)  Any violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of sections 4.44 to 4.55 or any ordinance of the city related to the operation of the business; 
d)  Conducting the business in violation of any law, conducting the business in such a manner to constitute a breach of peace or constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 3, 2-13-96)  
Section 4.57 - Regulation of antennas and antenna towers; purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is [to] ensure that antennas and antenna towers are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to buildings, structures and other land uses; to limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities; to retain the integrity, character and aesthetic quality of neighborhoods; to facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for antennas and antenna towers; to collect and maintain public information about antennas and antenna towers and to allow for the efficient planning for the location of these facilities; to minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence; to promote the timely removal of facilities upon the discontinuance of use; to minimize the adverse impacts of tall towers having low architectural and aesthetic appeal; to minimize the negative visual impact of antennas and antenna towers on residential areas, community facilities and landmarks, historic sites, natural beauty areas, and public rights of way; and to promote the use of as few structures as reasonably feasible. 
(Ord. No. 30-857, § 2, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.58 - Exemptions. 
(a)  Citizen radio, short wave radio, amateur radio, residential TV or satellite TV antennas and towers are exempt from the provisions of sections 4.59 through 4.66 of this appendix. 
(b)  Roof antennas and towers which are twelve (12) feet or less above the highest point on a building or roof are also exempt from the provisions of sections 4.59 through 4.66 of this appendix. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.59 - Permitted zoning districts. 
Antennas and antenna towers are permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3 or SS districts upon approval as a special land use pursuant to section 14.02. Antenna and/or antenna towers are a permitted use in M-1, M-2, M-3 and M-4 zoning districts as regulated herein. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.60 - Height of antenna towers. 
In all permitted districts, antenna towers, antennas or other structural projections shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in height as measured from the average ground elevation of the site. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.61 - Setbacks. 
(1)  No antenna or antenna tower shall be located closer than four hundred fifty (450) feet from any residential use, residential district, health care, day care or educational institution. The distance shall be measured from the base of the tower or supporting structure to the property line of the residence or residential district boundary line. 
(2)  Antenna towers shall comply with the setback standards for a structure in the zoning district for the parcel. 
(3)  A freestanding antenna tower (i.e. not mounted on a roof) shall not be located in any front yard. 
(4)  All accessory structures must meet the minimum setback standards for accessory structures in the zoning district for the parcel and shall not be inhabited, used for vehicle storage or used for outdoor storage of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.62 - Fence; landscaping required. 
All antenna towers shall be screened from entry by a six (6) foot high fence to prevent unauthorized persons from access to the tower. Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. The petitioner shall submit a detailed landscaping plan with the application for site plan approval. The proposed landscaping shall provide a buffer for the site and a screen for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.63 - Lighting and color of antenna tower. 
Antenna tower lighting shall conform to all F.A.A. rules and regulations and shall be designed to minimize the glare or other impact on adjoining properties. All antenna towers shall be finished in an unobtrusive, neutral color. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.64 - Site plan approval. 
Upon submitting an application for site plan approval of an antenna or antenna tower, the Petitioner shall also provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of the Petitioner and of the owner of the property. 
(2)  A location map of all antennas and antenna towers which the Petitioner has currently erected in the City of Warren and shall include a master plan for any future antenna locations known to the Petitioner. This requirement is for planning purposes only and shall not limit the Petitioner to the sites indicated on the map. 
(3)  An affidavit of the total watts of effective radiated power of the proposed antenna. 
(4)  An affidavit verifying that the proposed site and proposed antenna(s) complies with all Federal Communication Commission rules and guidelines; and all federal, state and local laws. In the event any antenna is found to exceed the applicable F.C.C. standard, site plan approval shall be immediately revoke. 
(5)  A statement as to whether an environmental assessment was required by the Federal Communications Commission and a copy of the environmental assessment if one was required. 
(6)  The antenna, antenna tower and all supporting equipment shall not block areas which will hamper firefighting equipment and maintenance of electrical lines. 
(7)  If the proposed antenna location is on a new tower, the Petitioner shall submit an affidavit attesting that there is no suitable space available on any existing tower in the desired area. 
(8)  An affidavit of the proposed height of the tower and a statement verifying a "safe fall" zone for the tower or antenna. The statement, together with any and all attachments, shall be certified and sealed by a licensed engineer or architect. Manufacturers specifications of a "safe fall" zone must be submitted. No inhabited building shall be located within the safe fall zone area. 
(9)  A statement verifying that the tower or antenna will withstand wind speeds and ice loads as required by the BOCA Building Code. The statement, together with any and all attachments, shall be certified and sealed by a licensed engineer or architect. Manufacturers specifications must be submitted. 
(10)  The system shall be certified by a licensed engineer to verify that the signal(s) being transmitted will not interfere with the ability of surrounding uses to receive signals from different radio, television, telephone or other electronic equipment. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.65 - Co-location. 
To prevent the proliferation and congestion of antenna towers, it is encouraged for any new antenna to be co-located on an existing antenna tower, provided there is technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the desired area pursuant to the following regulations: 
(1)  The maximum number of co-locations on any tower is limited to four (4) unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the structure can safely accommodate additional co-locations and the radio frequency emissions will continue to comply with federal regulations. 
(2)  All co-locations on existing towers shall be subject to the setback requirements contained in section 4.61. 
(3)  Any proposed antenna addition to an existing tower shall receive site plan approval pursuant to section 22.16 of this appendix. 
(4)  In cases where special land use approval has already been granted for an existing tower, there is no further special land use approval required for co-location. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.66 - Use of public property. 
Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the City Council, properly zoned property owned by the City of Warren, excluding street rights-of-way, may be used for antenna and antenna tower purposes upon the execution of a valid lease approved by the City Attorney. After receiving approval to place an antenna or antenna tower on City property, the Petitioner must proceed to obtain all required approvals as required by the Ordinances of the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.67 - Monitoring of antenna radio frequency emissions. 
Each telecommunications provider with antennas located within the City shall provide the City with a semi-annual report disclosing the radio frequency emissions of each antenna site. The City shall require an annual inspection of the radio frequency emissions of each antenna site to ensure that the site complies with the requirements of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The City shall charge the provider a fee for the cost of the annual inspection. 
(Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Section 4.68 - Antenna and antenna tower removal. 
(1)  In the event an antenna has not been used for a period of 180 days or more, as evidenced by the cessation of transmission and/or reception of radio signals, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to secure removal of the unused antenna within thirty (30) days of discontinuance. 
(2)  In the event all antennas located on a tower have not been used for a period of 180 days or more, as evidenced by the cessation of transmission and/or reception of radio signals, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to secure the removal of the unused antenna within sixty (60) days of discontinuance. 
(3)  In the event any antenna is found to exceed the applicable F.C.C. standard, site plan approval shall be immediately revoked and the antenna shall be removed. 
(4)  To insure compliance with this section, the Planning Commission upon site plan approval, shall require that a cash deposit or an approved surety bond, covering the estimated cost of removal to be deposited with the City Treasurer. The Petitioner is required to maintain either the cash deposit or a surety bond for the performance of the removal until the antenna(s) or antenna tower is removed. In the event the antenna(s) or antenna tower is not erected as planned or is removed as required by this ordinance, the cash deposit shall be refunded. In the event, an antenna(s) or antenna tower is not removed pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the bond shall be forfeited to the general fund of the City of Warren. 
(Ord. No. 30-857, § 2, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 30-881, § 2, 10-28-97)  
Sections 4.69—4.89 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-999, § 1, adopted July 9, 2013, repealed §§ 4.70 through 4.84, which pertained to the regulation of fences and derived from Ord. No. 30-894, § 1, adopted June 23, 1998; Ord. No. 945, § 2, adopted April 27, 2004; and Ord. No. 30-960, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2005.  
Section 4.90 - Parking, storage or placement of vehicles and watercraft offered "for sale" or "for trade." 
(a)  Public Property. No person or owner of any vehicle or watercraft, including but not limited to all vessels, boats, recreational vehicles, off road vehicles and snowmobiles, shall allow such vehicle to be placed or parked on any public property in the City of Warren, including street rights-of-way, for the purpose of advertising the vehicle or watercraft "for sale" or "for trade." 
(b)  Residential Property. No person or owner of any vehicle or watercraft, including but not limited to all vessels, boats, recreational vehicles, off road vehicles and snowmobiles, shall allow such vehicle to be placed or parked on any residential front yard or right-of-way, excluding driveways, for the purpose of advertising the vehicle or watercraft "for sale" or "for trade." 
(c)  Commercial/Industrial Property. No person or owner of any vehicle or watercraft, including but not limited to all vessels, boats, recreational vehicles, off road vehicles and snowmobiles, shall allow such vehicle to be placed or parked on any private property zoned commercial or industrial for the purpose of advertising the vehicle or watercraft "for sale" or "for trade," except the provisions of this section do not apply to properly licensed automobile dealerships and properly licensed car lots. 
(Ord. No. 30-888, § 1, 2-24-98)  
ARTICLE IV-A. - SIGNS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Sign erectors and sign permit fees, Ch. 31. 
 
DIVISION I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Section 4A.01 - Necessity. 
It is hereby determined that the proliferation of signs in the City is unduly distracting to motorists and pedestrians, creates a traffic hazard and reduces the effectiveness of signs needed to direct and warn the public. It is also determined that the appearance of the City is marred by the proliferation of signs and that such proliferation restricts light and air, contributes to blighting, deteriorates the scenic and natural beauty of the community and negatively affects property values. It is necessary to regulate sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents; regulate to avoid hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way; regulate/reduce the illegal use of and demand for tobacco products by underage persons through restrictions on billboard advertising of tobacco products; and regulate to provide more open space thereby preserving the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-893, § 1, 6-9-98)  
Section 4A.02 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the establishment of signs that will promote viable commercial and industrial activity, will encourage community activity and events, will encourage political and other free expression of ideas and will disseminate messages regardless of content, but will not, by reason of their size, location, spacing, construction or manner of display, endanger life or limb, confuse or mislead traffic, obstruct vision necessary for traffic safety or otherwise endanger the public health or safety. Additionally, these regulations are designed to promote the welfare and temperance of minors exposed to tobacco billboards in order to reduce the demand for and use of tobacco products by underage persons. Furthermore it is the intent of this ordinance to preserve and improve the appearance of the City by preventing the placement of oversized signs that are out of scale with surrounding buildings and structures and by preventing an accumulation of signs that would cause visual clutter. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-893, § 1, 6-9-98)  
Section 4A.03 - Scope. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall govern the construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of all signs and outdoor display structures; the construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of appurtenant and auxiliary devices with respect to their structural and fire safety; and the licensing and regulation of sign and outdoor display companies. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.04 - Nonconforming signs. 
Any permanent sign already established on the effective date of this ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance is rendered nonconforming and shall be subject to the regulations contained in Division VII relating to nonconforming signs. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.05 - Substitution. 
Wherever this article permits a commercial message, a noncommercial message is automatically permitted. 
(Ord. No. 30-1029, § 1, 9-26-17)  
Section 4A.06 - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Article to be invalid for any reason, the remaining portions of this article, not specifically held to be invalid, remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 30-1029, § 2, 9-26-17)  
Sections 4A.07—4A.09 - Reserved.  
DIVISION II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 4A.10 - General definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Alter. Any addition to or removal of any part of any sign or billboard, or any other alteration which may change the design or approved method of functioning. 
1.1.  Ambient light level. The amount of illumination that is already present in the area before any additional light is added. 
2.  Approved. Acceptable to the Building Official of the City of Warren, or in accordance with this ordinance. 
3.  Approved combustible materials. Only those combustible materials which, when tested in accordance with the American Society for Testing Materials standard method of testing for flammability, burn at a rate of no faster than two and one-half inches per minute. 
4.  Awning. A metal, wooden, fiberglass or other approved fire retardant material such as cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or any light flexible material which extends over a porch, patio deck, balcony, window, door or open space. The construction and erection of an awning shall be regulated pursuant to the applicable BOCA codes. 
5.  Balloon. Any air filled or gas filled object tethered to a fixed location. 
6.  Building official. Shall include all representatives of the Buildings and Safety Engineering Division. 
7.  Building line. The front line of the building or the minimum distance required between the property line and the nearest supporting member of a building, structure or sign as specified by the zoning ordinance. 
8.  Canopy. A roof like structure which is either freestanding or is projecting from a building and is supported by structural members. A canopy may be constructed of metal, wood or any approved fire retardant material such as cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or any light flexible material which is attached to the canopy. The construction and erection of an awning shall be regulated pursuant to the applicable BOCA codes. 
9.  Clearance. The vertical distance between the surface grade beneath the sign and the lowest point of the sign, including framework and embellishments. 
10.  Collector roads. Collector roads are roads that gather traffic from local residential streets and carry it to major thoroughfares; they normally have an 86' right-of-way and are the half-mile roads. 
10.1.  Digital display area. The area of an electronic message center that is made up of a digital screen. 
11.  Erect. To build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or maintain any sign, including the painting of exterior wall signs. 
12.  Facade. The exterior wall of a building including window openings, door openings and the outside surface of a parapet wall. 
13.  Festoons. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags or pinwheels. 
13.1.  Foot-candle. A unit of illumination equal to that given by a source of one candela at a distance of one foot. 
14.  Front or face of a building. The external surface of a building which is visible from any private or public street or highway. 
15.  Height. The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including decorative embellishments, to the surface grade beneath the sign. 
16.  Maintenance. The cleaning, painting, repair or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the design or structure of the sign. 
17.  Major thoroughfares. Major thoroughfares are those major roads that carry traffic through the city; they normally have 120' rights-of-way and are located one mile apart. 
18.  Marquee. A permanent roof like structure extending from part of the wall of a building, but not supported by the ground, and constructed of material such as metal, glass, wood or other construction material. 
19.  Non-conforming sign. A sign which was erected legally, but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign regulations; or a sign which does not conform to the sign regulations but for which a special permit has been issued. 
20.  Parapet. The extension of a false front, wall or other surface above a roofline. 
21.  Parcel. One (1) or more lots under single ownership and control which are used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
21.1.  Public right-of-way . An area designated for public travel, owned by a government entity. 
21.2.  Responsible party. The responsible party is the person or entity that is a legal or equitable owner, tenant, or lessee of the property where the sign is located, the owner or lessee of the sign, a person erecting the sign, or other person or entity with legal rights to the sign. 
21.3.  School premises or school playground. Includes the buildings, grounds, or facilities, or any portion thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of public or private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational instruction to students at or below the twelfth grade level. 
22.  Sign . Any device, structure, fixture, painting, or visual image using words, graphics, symbols, numbers, lights, or letters to communicate a message or attract attention. 
22.1.  Static electronic messaging. Graphics or lettering on an electronic message center that includes: (1) no animation effects and (2) changes from one message to the next through fade or dissolve transitions, not traveling or scrolling transitions. 
22.2.  Tobacco advertisement. Any means of advertising used for the purpose or effect of promoting the use or sale of a tobacco product, a trademark of a tobacco product or a trade name. 
22.3.  Tobacco products. Includes but is not limited to cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco or snuff. "Chewing tobacco" means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco, which is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked. "Tobacco snuff" means shredded, powdered, or pulverized tobacco, which may be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed, or placed against the gums. 
23.  Use. The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or structure is intended, designed, occupied or maintained. 
24.  Zoning districts. Zoning district classification in this Article references Appendix A, Article III, Zoning Districts and Maps. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-893, § 2, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 30-1029, § 3, 9-26-17)  
Section 4A.11 - Specific sign definitions. 
For purpose of this ordinance, the following signs as listed shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Abandoned sign. A sign that, by reason of neglect, damage, or deterioration, requires repair or refurbishment, and the owner or other responsible party either (1) fails, neglects, or refuses to initiate repair or refurbishment to the sign within ten days of the City sending written notice; or (2) fails, neglects, or refuses to complete repairs or refurbishment within 60 days of the City sending written notice. 
2.  Animated sign. A sign or display manifesting either kinetic or illusionary motion by natural, mechanical or electrical means. 
3.  Awning sign. A sign that is painted on, printed on or attached flat against the surface of the awning and shall be allowed in place of a wall sign as regulated in this ordinance. 
4.  Balloon sign. A sign in which one (1) or more balloons are used as a temporary sign or as a means of directing attention to any business, profession, commodity, service, product or entertainment. 
5.  Banner sign. A temporary sign made of fabric or other non-rigid material with no enclosing framework. 
6.  Billboard. A sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which the sign is located, also called "off-premise" or "outdoor advertising" signs. 
7.  Canopy sign. A sign that is painted on, printed on or attached to a canopy which is affixed to a building wall or to the ground by columns or posts and shall be allowed in place of a wall sign as regulated in this ordinance. 
8.  Changeable copy sign. A sign whose informational content can be changed or altered by manual, electric, electro-mechanical or electronic means. 
9.  Construction sign. A temporary on-premise sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor or material supplier participating in construction on the property. 
10.  Double-faced sign. A sign with two faces, back-to-back. 
11.  Election sign. A temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national election or referendum. 
12.  Electrical sign. A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections or fixtures are used. 
12.1.  Electronic message center. A sign that displays its message via a lighted digital face with the capability to change the sign's message or color by computer control. 
13.  Feather flag sign. A sign consisting of a vertically elongated pennant attached on one of the sides to a single support post. 
14.  Festoon sign. A sign consisting of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels, garland or other material hanging or draped. 
15.  Freestanding sign. A sign that is erected upon or supported by the ground and is affixed to the ground, but not attached to any building, including signs on poles or pylons that are anchored into the ground. Also called ground signs. 
16.  Garage sale sign. A temporary on-premise sign advertising the sale of used household items. 
17.  Government sign. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the City, county, state or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, public service, public property, facility or function. 
18.  Identification sign. A sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, institution or person, activity or occupation being identified. 
19.  Illuminated sign. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
20.  Informational sign. An on-premise commercial sign two (2) square feet or less used for the limited purposes of identifying, directing or conveying a message. 
21.  Marquee sign. A sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure and shall be considered a wall sign for the purpose of this ordinance. 
22.  Monument sign. A sign mounted directly to the ground with a maximum height not to exceed five (5) feet. 
23.  Multiple faced sign. A sign containing three (3) or more faces, not necessarily back-to-back. 
24.  Mural. A picture painted directly on a wall and shall be considered a painted wall sign for the purpose of this ordinance. 
25.  Nameplate. A non-electronic, on-premise identification sign attached to the building giving only the name, address and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
26.  Obsolete sign. An on-premise sign that advertises an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment that is no longer sold, produced, manufactured, furnished on the premises or a business that has closed. 
27.  Off-premise sign. A sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which the sign is located, also called "billboards" or "outdoor advertising." 
28.  On-premise sign. A sign which pertains to the use of the premises or property on which it is located. 
29.  Opinion sign. A non-commercial sign, which expresses an opinion or other point of view, including but not limited to political and religious statements but which does not advertise any product, good, business or service. 
30.  Painted wall sign. A sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the surface of an exterior wall, fence, masonry, concrete or other building wall, including but not limited to murals. Painted wall signs shall be allowed in place of a wall sign as regulated in this ordinance. Prior to painting a sign on a wall in place of a wall sign, a permit must be obtained and the entire wall must be freshly painted with one continuous color. 
31.  Portable sign. A temporary sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building. A portable sign is capable of being readily moved from one location to another. 
32.  Projecting sign. A sign that is affixed to any building or part thereof, or to any structure and projects out by more than eighteen (18) inches. 
33.  Public carrier sign. Any temporary or permanent sign erected to designate a public carrier location. 
34.  Real estate sign. A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for sale, rent or lease. 
35.  Roof sign. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building. 
36.  Rope lighting sign. Lighting that has multiple interconnected lamps, including LEDs or light bulbs, connected to a single electrical source, or luminous tubing that contains a gas, such as neon, that glows when electric current is sent through it. Rope lighting includes strand lighting, lite ropes, flexible impact lighting, tubular lighting, string lighting, and other similar forms of illumination. 
37.  Temporary lighting. Lighting displayed for a limited time period with no permanent electrical wiring. 
38.  Temporary sign. A sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, wood or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame, intended to be displayed for a limited time period, including but not limited to election signs, portable signs and political signs. 
39.  Inflatable sign. A sign that is capable of being inflated with air, helium, or other gas. 
40.  Wall sign. A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than eighteen (18) inches from the wall of a building with no copy on the sides or edges, including painted, individual letter, cabinet and signs on a mansard. 
41.  Window sign. A sign installed on the inside, outside, or around the border of a window. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-1011, § 1, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 30-1029, § 4, 9-26-17)  
DIVISION III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 4A.12 - Permits required. 
It shall be the duty of the licensed sign erector who erects, alters, changes or remodels any sign or sign structure, to first obtain the required permit and provide payment of fees as provided in Division VIII. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.13 - Signs not requiring a permit. 
The following types of signs are exempt from the permit requirements but shall conform to all other applicable ordinance provisions. 
a)  Construction signs. Construction signs of sixteen (16) square feet or less, including engineer, architect and similar signs used in connection with construction operations. All construction signs shall be removed within one (1) week after completion of construction. 
b)  Government signs. 
c)  Nameplates. Nameplate signs of two (2) square feet or less. 
d)  Election signs. Temporary election signs may be erected on private property on the election filing deadline date for the elected office sought. For all elections or referendums without filing deadlines, temporary election signs may be erected 60 days prior to the earliest election date. All temporary election signs shall be removed in accordance with section 4A.26(c). Temporary election signs shall be allowed as follows: 
Two (2) nonilluminated election signs per candidate and per issue is allowed for each lot frontage; those located along a major thoroughfare or collector road shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per sign; and if located along a local residential street shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign. 
e)  [ Public carrier signs. ] Public carrier signs of three (3) square feet or less. 
f)  [ Traffic control/directional signs. ] Traffic control/directional signs located in parking districts smaller than two (2) square feet in size. 
g)  Real estate signs. On-premise signs erected to announce the sale or rent of property provided such signs are not over five (5) feet in height and if located in a residential district are not more than eight (8) square feet in area, or if located in non-residential districts shall not be more than sixteen (16) square feet in area. All real estate signs must be removed within one (1) week following the closing of the sale, rental or lease of the property. 
h)  Garage sale signs. One (1) garage sale sign per residence is allowed for the approved time period of the garage sale. The sign shall be located in the front yard set back at the site of the garage sale and shall be four (4) square feet or less. 
i)  Opinion signs. Three (3) opinion signs per residence shall be allowed in residential areas, excluding election signs which are otherwise regulated in this ordinance. The signs shall be located in the front yard set back and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in sign area. 
j)  Temporary community activity or event signs. A permit is not required, however, notification to the City Clerk's office is required pursuant to section 4A.44. 
k)  Window signs not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 1, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 30-1029, § 5, 9-26-17)  
Section 4A.14 - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in all districts: 
(a)  Any sign not expressly permitted by this article. 
(b)  Unless permitted elsewhere in this article, signs that use flashing, blinking, intermittent, or moving lights; or exposed incandescent light bulbs. 
(c)  Exterior rope lighting visible from the public right-of-way except temporary lighting and government signs. 
(d)  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals that are made of the same material, and are of similar size and shape and color. 
(e)  Signs attached to trees, telephone poles, public benches, streetlights, or placed on any public property or public right-of-way, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(f)  Roof signs. 
(g)  Abandoned signs. 
(h)  Obsolete signs. 
(i)  Signs in parking districts (P) greater than two (2) square feet in size. 
(j)  Off-premises signs other than billboards, election and special events or activities signs as regulated in this ordinance. 
(k)  Except as provided in this appendix, any billboard containing any tobacco advertisement in any publicly visible location on or within five hundred (500) feet of the perimeter of any school premises, playground, or playground area in a public park. 
(l)  A sign advertising alcoholic liquor as prohibited in Warren Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Article II, Section 4-9A. 
(m)  Inflatable signs, except as permitted in Warren Code of Ordinances, Appendix A, Article IV-A, Division V, Section 4A.42. 
(n)  Feather flag signs. 
(o)  A signs that contains the word or phrase "marihuana" or "marihuana facility" or another word slang word or pseudonym commonly known to mean marihuana or an illegal controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-893, § 3, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 30-1001, § 5, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 30-1011, § 2, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 30-1020, § 3, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 30-1029, § 6, 9-26-17)  
Section 4A.15 - Construction specifications. 
All signs shall be constructed, installed and erected in compliance with the BOCA National Building, Fire and Electrical Codes as adopted by reference in the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.16 - Measurement of sign area. 
(a)  The surface area of a sign is the area which encloses the limits of individual letters, words, symbols, graphics, numbers, lights, or message of the sign together with any frame. 
(b)  When a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except when two (2) such faces are placed back to back within two (2) feet from one another, if the two (2) faces are of equal area then the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one (1) face, or if the two (2) faces are of unequal area then the area of the longer face shall be taken as the area of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-1029, § 7, 9-26-17)  
Section 4A.17 - Setbacks. 
The following setback regulations shall apply to signs located in all zoning districts: 
a)  No sign shall project or overhang a public right-of-way or public easement. 
b)  All freestanding or ground signs shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum distance equal to the height of the sign. 
c)  Within any required front or corner side yard on any corner lot, no sign or other obstruction to visibility shall be permitted between the heights of two and one-half (2½) feet and ten (10) feet above the existing street grade within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and line connecting there at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the street lines or their extension. 
d)  No sign shall be erected, constructed or placed in such a manner so as to obstruct the driver's view of traffic or pedestrians at intersecting streets, highways or driveways. 
e)  No sign shall be erected so that any part of it, including cables, guys and other structural equipment is within four (4) feet of any electric light pole, street lamp or other public utility pole. 
f)  No sign shall be erected, constructed or placed within six (6) feet of a public utility conductor. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.18 - Height. 
The height of all signs, unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, shall comply with the following: 
a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the top or ends of the wall to which the signs are attached. 
b)  Freestanding signs. The height of all freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.19 - Clearance. 
All freestanding, projecting, and marquee signs shall have a clearance of ten (10) feet beneath the sign structure, excluding monument signs. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.20 - Maintenance. 
(a)  All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted if paint is required. All supports, braces, guys and anchors shall also be kept in repair. Defective parts shall be replaced promptly. 
(b)  The building official shall have the authority to order the repair of any sign in violation of this ordinance, or the removal of any sign which is defective, damaged, obsolete or substantially deteriorated to the extent that the public safety or welfare is endangered. The sign shall be repaired or removed within thirty (30) days of the notice of repair or removal. Notices shall be sent by certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.21 - Illumination. 
Unless otherwise prohibited, all signs permitted by this ordinance may be illuminated. All illumination shall be in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for display purposes unless specifically approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.22 - Identification. 
Every sign for which a permit has been issued and erected or constructed shall be plainly identified with the name of the person owning, erecting or operating such sign, and shall bear the original sign permit number. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.23 - Obstruction to exitways. 
No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exitway, window or door opening used as a means of egress; or to prevent the free passage from one part of a roof to another part thereof, or to prevent access thereto for the firefighting personnel. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.24 - Owner permission. 
No person shall erect, construct or place any sign, temporary or permanent, on the property of another without first obtaining permission of the property owner, agent or manager. For all signs over four (4) square feet in total area, written permission shall be filed with the Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering signed and dated by the owner, agent or manager granting permission and shall include the owner, agent or manager's address and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.25 - Biennial sign inspections. 
Every sign, whether erected prior to or after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be inspected biennially by the Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering. An inspection fee shall be required as prescribed in Chapter 31, section 31-13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.26 - Removal of signs. 
(a)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs erected in violation of this ordinance, such as in a public easement, public right-of-way, or without a valid permit, or signs left remaining after the expiration of a permit, may be removed and disposed of as follows: 
(1)  The sign may be removed by a building official without prior notice; 
(2)  Signs removed shall be held by the city for a period of fifteen (15) days to allow the owner to reclaim the signs; 
(3)  Before any sign is returned to the owner, the owner shall reimburse the City for the costs of removal and storage of the sign as provided in the sign permit fee schedule found in Chapter 31, section 31-14 of these ordinances; 
(4)  If the owner of the sign does not reclaim it within fifteen (15) days of removal, the sign shall be deemed abandoned and the city may dispose of the sign. 
(b)  Permanent signs. In cases of emergency, the building official may remove a permanent sign that is in violation of this ordinance as follows: 
(1)  The sign may be removed by a building official without prior notice; 
(2)  After removal of the sign, the building official shall mail a notice, certified mail, to the owner stating the action taken and the reasons for the action. 
(3)  Any sign removed must be held by the city for a period of thirty days to allow the owner an opportunity to reclaim the sign; 
(4)  Before any sign is returned to the owner, the owner shall reimburse the city for the actual costs of removal, storage and reclamation of the sign. If the owner of the sign does not reclaim it within thirty (30) days of notice, it shall be deemed abandoned and the City may dispose of the sign. 
(c)  Election signs. All candidates for political office and property owners shall be responsible to remove their temporary election signs within seven (7) days after the primary, school or special election. If any candidate for an office is nominated in the primary election, the candidate shall be allowed to have his or her election signs remain through the general election, however, all such election signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the general election. Further, the following provisions apply to the removal of temporary election signs: 
(1)  Any sign erected in violation of this ordinance may be removed and disposed of pursuant to the provisions set forth in section 4A.26(a). 
(2)  The city shall provide a written notice to any candidate who has any temporary election sign(s) remaining after the period for removal and shall include the address of the violation. If the offending sign(s) is not removed within seven (7) days of service of the notice, the city shall issue a civil infraction violation to the candidate. 
(3)  The first violation of this section is a civil infraction which shall result in the assessment of a fine not to exceed $100.00. Any subsequent violation shall result in assessment of a fine of not less than $100.00 or not more than $1,000.00 per violation, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(d)  Non-conforming signs. All non-conforming signs shall be removed pursuant to Division VII. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 2, 5-12-98)  
Section 4A.27 - Electronic message center. 
In addition to other applicable zoning requirements, a responsible party shall comply with all of the following electronic message center requirements: 
(a)  From one hour before dusk to one hour after dawn, the light emitted from the electronic message center does not exceed .3 foot-candles over the ambient light levels measured from anywhere on the public right-of-way or along the lot line; 
(b)  Except a property where a business has a valid State of Michigan Motor Fuels Retail Outlet License, the digital display area of an electronic message center does not exceed 25% of the total permitted free standing sign area; 
(c)  There is no more than one electronic message center; 
(d)  The electronic message center is a freestanding sign; 
(e)  An electronic message center uses only static electronic messaging; and 
(f)  An electronic message center does not change its graphics or message more than once every 30 seconds. 
(Ord. No. 30-1029, § 8, 9-26-17)  
Section 4A.28 - Window signs. 
In addition to other applicable Zoning requirements, a responsible party shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
(a)  Total non-illuminated window signage shall not exceed 50% percent of the window where it is placed. 
(b)  Total illuminated window signage, including rope lighting on the inside of a window, shall not exceed 25% percent of the window where it is placed. 
(c)  Total window signage shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the window where it is placed. 
(Ord. No. 30-1029, § 9, 9-26-17)  
Sections 4A.29—4A.30 - Reserved.  
DIVISION IV. - REGULATION BY ZONE 
 
Section 4A.31 - Signs permitted in residential zones (R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4, R-5). 
The following signs are allowed in residential zones: 
a)  All signs not requiring a permit. 
b)  Subdivisions. One (1) subdivision identification sign per street frontage, neighborhood, subdivision or development. Signs not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area for each location. 
c)  Apartment, condominium or mobile home complex. One (1) identification sign per entrance to apartment or condominium complex. Signs not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. 
d)  Permitted non-residential uses. One (1) freestanding and one (1) wall sign not to exceed thirty[-two] (32) square feet in sign area for each sign for permitted non-residential uses including churches, synagogues, schools, libraries and parks. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.32 - Residential height and setback regulations. 
All freestanding signs located in residential districts shall have a maximum height of five (5) feet and shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum distance equal to the height of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.33 - Signs permitted in Professional Business and Special Service Districts (P.B., S.S.). 
a)  All signs not requiring a permit. 
b)  One on-premise sign or advertising display of a size not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area for each business on the premises shall be allowed in professional business districts and special service districts. 
c)  Any freestanding sign located in a professional business or special service district shall have a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 3, 5-12-98)  
Section 4A.34 - Signs permitted in Office Districts (O). 
a)  All signs not requiring a permit. 
b)  One freestanding on-premise sign or advertising display of a size not to exceed fifty (50) square feet shall be allowed in office districts. 
c)  One (1) wall sign of a size not to exceed twenty (20) square feet shall be allowed for each business in office districts. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 3, 5-12-98)  
Section 4A.35 - Signs permitted in Commercial Business and Industrial Districts (C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2). 
a)  All signs not requiring a permit. 
b)  One freestanding on-premise sign or advertising display of a size not to exceed seventy-five (75) square feet shall be allowed in commercial business and industrial districts zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2. 
c)  Total wall signage of a size not to exceed forty (40) square feet shall be allowed for each business in commercial business and industrial districts zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 3, 5-12-98)  
Section 4A.36 - On-premise signs permitted in Industrial Districts (M-3 and M-4). 
a)  All signs not requiring a permit. 
b)  One freestanding on-premise sign or advertising display of a size not to exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet shall be allowed in industrial districts zoned M-3 and M-4. 
c)  Total wall signage of a size not to exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet shall be allowed for each building in industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 3, 5-12-98)  
Section 4A.37 - Shopping centers. 
Regardless of the zoning district, shopping centers as defined in section 2.67 are permitted the following signage: 
a)  All signs not requiring a permit. 
b)  One freestanding on-premise identification sign of a size not to exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet in size and which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height shall be allowed for each shopping center. 
c)  One (1) wall sign of a size not to exceed forty (40) square feet shall be allowed for each business located in the shopping center. 
d)  One (1) informational sign, hung from a walkway canopy of a size not to exceed two (2) square feet, shall be allowed for each business located in the shopping center. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 3, 5-12-98)  
Section 4A.38 - Street number required. 
All buildings located in commercial and industrial districts shall have the assigned street number displayed in six (6) inch numbers on the exterior of the building in a location that is readable from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-891, § 3, 5-12-98)  
Sections 4A.39, 4A.40 - Reserved.  
DIVISION V. - TEMPORARY SIGNS 
 
Section 4A.41 - Temporary signs permitted. 
In all districts, one (1) temporary sign may be approved for each parcel based on the permanent parcel identification number, two (2) times per calendar year for a temporary time period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days as follows: 
a)  Signs located along major thoroughfares shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in total area; shall have no more than two (2) faces and shall not project higher than six (6) feet above surface grade. 
b)  Signs located along collector roads shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in total area; shall have no more than two (2) faces and shall not project higher than six (6) feet above surface grade. 
c)  Signs located along local residential streets shall not exceed four (4) square feet in total area; shall have no more than two (2) faces and shall not project higher than three (3) feet above surface grade. 
d)  A sign with more than one face shall have its faces back to back or arranged so that any two (2) faces form a "V" and shall not have any angle greater than fifteen (15) degrees. 
e)  The sign shall contain no visible moving, revolving or mechanical parts or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations or wind current. 
f)  All temporary signs shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.42 - Temporary balloon signs. 
In all commercial and industrial districts, except where expressly prohibited in this ordinance, one (1) balloon sign may be approved one (1) time per calendar year for a temporary time period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days per business or premise. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-1001, § 6, 8-27-13)  
Section 4A.43 - Outdoor retail sales. 
Pursuant to an approved outdoor retail sale permit, a temporary sign shall be allowed that complies with the following: 
a)  The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in total area and shall not project higher than five (5) feet above grade. 
b)  The sign shall be limited to a double faced or back to back sign. For double-faced or back to back signs, the allowable sign surface area shall be calculated by using the area of only one side of the sign provided that the front and back of the sign are separated by no more than three (3) feet. 
c)  The sign shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the right-of way line. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.44 - Temporary community activity or event signs. 
Community activity signs may be erected on private property advertising temporary community activities or events as follows: 
1.  The non-profit organization sponsoring the community activity shall provide written notification to the City Clerk's office of the dates of the activity or event together with a list of the sign locations fourteen (14) days prior to the date when the signs will be erected. 
2.  Signs may be erected ten (10) days prior to the date of the activity or event and shall be removed within four (4) days after the activity or event. All signs erected in violation of the this ordinance shall be removed pursuant to section 4A.26. 
3.  No sign shall be erected greater than three (3) square feet in size. Community activity or event signs shall be limited to one sign per lot frontage and each non-profit organization shall be limited to erecting twenty-five (25) signs per activity or event. 
4.  All signs shall be erected on private property only. No sign shall be erected on public property or road rights-of-way. 
5.  Permission to erect temporary signs advertising community activities or events shall be limited to two (2) activities or events per calendar year for each non-profit organization. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.45 - Temporary sign locations prohibited. 
(a)  No temporary sign shall be attached to a tree, fence, utility pole, drain or fire escape or impair the access to a roof or ingress or egress of any structure. 
(b)  No temporary sign shall be located on any public right-of-way or any property required for parking. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Sections 4A.46, 4A.47 - Reserved.  
DIVISION VI. - BILLBOARDS 
 
Section 4A.48 - Billboards. 
a)  Except as regulated by the Highway Advertising Act, MCL 252.301 et seq., and this Appendix, billboards of a size not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet are allowed in M-3 and M-4 industrial zones, provided that the billboard is located no closer than five hundred (500) feet from any residential use. 
b)  Except as regulated by the Highway Advertising Act, MCL 252.301 et seq., and this Appendix; effective March 1, 1999, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, cause to be placed, or to maintain a billboard containing any tobacco advertisement in any publicly visible location on or within 1000 feet of the perimeter of any school premises, playground, playground area in a public park, unless the billboard is designed for the purpose of communicating the hazards of tobacco products or encourage minors to refrain from using or purchasing tobacco products. However, the public service billboard shall not include any positive display of a recognized image, artwork, photograph, logo, or graphic used for marketing or promotion of tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-893, § 4, 6-9-98)  
Section 4A.49 - Billboard sign spacing. 
No off-premise sign or billboard shall be located closer than five hundred (500) feet to another off-premise sign or billboard. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.50 - Billboard height. 
Billboards shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height as measured from the crown of the frontage road to the highest point of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.51 - Billboard set backs. 
Off-premise signs and billboards shall be set back pursuant to the setback regulations of the zoning district where the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.52 - Civil defense siren. 
No off-premise sign or billboard shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to any civil defense siren. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.53 - Off-premise signs prohibited. 
Off-premise signs and billboards shall be prohibited in the following districts: 
a)  Residential districts; 
b)  Parking districts; 
c)  Professional business districts; 
d)  Office districts; 
e)  Special services districts; 
f)  Commercial business districts; 
g)  M-1 and M-2 industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Sections 4A.54, 4A.55 - Reserved.  
DIVISION VII. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
 
Section 4A.56 - Determination of legal nonconformity. 
Existing signs which do not conform to the specific provisions of this ordinance may be eligible for the designation "legal nonconforming sign" provided that the following are complied with: 
a)  The building official determines that such sign is properly maintained and does not in any way endanger the health or safety of the public. 
b)  The sign was installed in conformance with a valid permit and complied with all applicable laws in effect prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
c)  The sign is not a billboard containing tobacco advertisements regulated by section 4A.48 b) of this Appendix. Billboards regulated by section 4A.48 b) shall not be afforded legal nonconforming status and any individual in violation of section 4A.48 b) shall remove the tobacco advertising from the billboard immediately upon the effective date of section 4A.48 b). 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-893, § 5, 6-9-98)  
Section 4A.57 - Maintenance and repair of legal nonconforming signs. 
The legal nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this ordinance regarding safety, maintenance and repair. If a sign suffers more than fifty (50%) percent damage or deterioration, it must be brought into conformance with this ordinance or removed. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.58 - Loss of legal nonconforming sign status. 
A legal nonconforming sign shall lose its designation and is required to be brought into conformity with this ordinance upon any of the following events occurring: 
a)  The sign is relocated or replaced. 
b)  The structure or size of the sign is altered in any way except toward compliance with this ordinance. This does not include change of copy or normal maintenance. 
c)  The use of the parcel is changed. 
d)  The activity, business or usage to which the sign relates has been discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days or longer. 
e)  Repealed. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-965, § 1, 4-11-06)  
Sections 4A.59, 4A.60 - Reserved.  
DIVISION VIII. - PERMITS 
 
Section 4A.61 - Application for permits. 
Application for the erection, structural alteration or relocation of a sign shall be made to the Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering. The following information shall be provided: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(b)  Name and address of the owner of the sign. 
(c)  Name and address of person erecting the sign. 
(d)  Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be located together with the name and address of the property owner. 
(e)  The type of sign or sign structure as defined in this ordinance. 
(f)  A site plan with measurements showing the proposed location of the sign together with the locations of all existing signs on the same premises. 
(g)  Specifications and drawings showing the materials, design, exact wording, dimensions, structural supports and electrical components of the sign. 
(h)  Copy of applicable stress sheets and calculations showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure. 
(i)  Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign. 
(j)  Any other information that the building division finds necessary to ensure compliance under this ordinance and all other applicable laws of the city and the State of Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-1011, § 3, 5-26-15)  
Section 4A.62 - Permit fees. 
All applications for permits filed with the Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering shall be accompanied by payment of a sign permit fee according to the schedule of fees set forth in the sign permit fees ordinance found in Chapter 31, section 31-2. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.63 - Permit issuance; denial; revocation. 
a)  Approval. Approved permits shall be issued within ten (10) working days of receipt of a valid permit application, provided the proposed sign, alteration or relocation complies with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
b)  Denial. When a permit is denied the applicant shall be notified, in writing, within ten (10) working days of the receipt of a permit application of the denial and the reasons for the denial. 
c)  Revocation. The permit issued may be revoked by the Building Official, if upon inspection the workmanship or materials used do not conform to the plans and specifications approved or required upon issuance of the permit, or upon the violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.64 - Final inspection. 
Upon the completion of the installation, structural alteration or the relocation of a sign, the permit holder shall notify the Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering. A final inspection may be required including an electrical inspection and footing inspection of freestanding signs. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.65 - Appeals. 
Any appeals from the requirements of this ordinance shall be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Article XX of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Section 4A.66 - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this article by any person shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 1, 3-26-96)  
Sections 4A.67, 4A-68 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV-B. - CONDOMINIUMS 
 
Section 4B.01 - Detached single family site condominiums: Purpose. 
The intent of these requirements is to ensure that all single family condominium subdivisions are developed in compliance with the similar planning and engineering standards applicable to similar forms of single family subdivision development within the City of Warren. It is also the intent of these requirements to insure that the development of all single family condominium subdivisions shall observe all applicable yard setback requirements and minimum floor requirements of the zoning district within which the project is located. The number of residences and the size of the condominium unit (lot area) shall be no greater and spacing no less than would be permitted if the parcel were subdivided for each specific zoning district, pursuant to the Subdivision Control Act, P.A. 288 of 1967 as amended and as permitted and regulated in the City of Warren Zoning Ordinance # 30 Articles V, VI and VII. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 4B.02 - Uses permitted. 
Single family detached condominiums may be allowed in any zoning district which permits single family subdivisions subject to the restrictions of the specific zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 4B.03 - Site plan review. 
All condominium subdivision plans shall be submitted pursuant to site plan review provisions of section 22.16 of this Ordinance and Section 66 of the State of Michigan Condominium Act, Act 59 of 1978: MCL 559.101 et seq., and include the following additional information: 
1.  A survey of the condominium subdivision site. 
2.  A flood plain plan if the condominium site is within or impacted by a flood plain area. Each development shall meet or exceed the requirements of Article XXI-C Flood Hazard District. 
3.  A plan delineating all natural features on the site including, but not limited to, ponds, streams, lakes, drains, flood plains, wetlands and woodland areas. 
4.  The location, size, shape, area, width and horizontal boundaries of all condominium units. A corresponding unit number shall be included and all common areas designated. The location of all proposed units shall be specified. 
5.  A copy of the master deed and a copy of all restrictive covenants to be applied to the project. 
6.  A utility plan showing all sanitary sewer, water, and storm drainage improvements, including all easements granted to the city for installation, repair and maintenance of all utilities. 
7.  A street construction, paving, and maintenance plan, certified by a professional engineer, for all streets within the proposed condominium subdivision plan. 
8.  A storm drainage and storm water management plan, including all lines, swales, drains, basins, and other facilities. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 4B.04 - Setback and dimensional requirements. 
a)  A condominium unit shall conform to the lot area, percentage of lot coverage, side and rear yard setbacks, height, and minimum floor area requirements of the zoning district within which the unit is located. If the project encompasses more than one zoning district, then each condominium unit shall conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
b)  The front yard setbacks along roads or streets shall be determined based upon the distance between the centerline of the street or road and the nearest point of the proposed building that shall front said street. In no case shall any such building be located closer than fifty-five (55) feet to the centerline of said street. 
The minimum front yard setbacks shall be as follows: 
Front Yard Setback Requirements 
Zoning 
District 	Local Streets 
60 feet 	Collector Street 
86 feet 	Major 
Thoroughfares 
120 feet 
R-1-A 	60 feet 	73 feet 	90 feet 
R-1-B 	55 feet 	68 feet 	85 feet 
R-1-C 	55 feet 	68 feet 	85 feet 
R-1-P 	55 feet 	68 feet 	85 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 4B.05 - Design standards. 
All development in a single family site condominium shall conform to the applicable engineering and planning design standards of Articles III and IV of Chapter 35 of the City of Warren Subdivision Regulations and are to be constructed to city engineering standards. All streets and roads may be dedicated to the public or may be private. In any case, they shall be constructed to the Warren Engineering Standards for public roads. Street connections shall be required, where necessary, to provide continuity to the public road system. 
The term "plat" shall be substituted with the term "site condominium subdivision plan"; the term "lot" shall be substituted with the term "condominium unit"; the term "tentative preliminary plat approval" shall be substituted with the term "preliminary plan review"; the term "final preliminary plat approval" shall be substituted with the term "final plan review"; and the term "proprietor" shall be deemed to refer to the applicant pursuant to this Ordinance. Any applications, fees, procedures for review or hearing, as set forth in these ordinances and their other provisions, shall be fully complied with, except as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 4B.06 - Utility easements. 
The site condominium subdivision plan shall include all necessary public utility easements to enable the installation, repair and maintenance of all necessary public utilities to be installed. Appropriate dedications for sanitary sewers, lines, and storm drainage improvements shall be provided. All such easements must be approved by the engineering division. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 4B.07 - Planning commission review. 
Pursuant to authority conferred by Section 141 of the Condominium Act. Act 59 of 1978, as amended, all site condominium subdivision plans shall require approval of the planning commission before units may be sold or site improvement initiated. The public hearing and site plan review provisions of section 22.16 shall apply where applicable. An application for site plan review shall be submitted to the planning commission. The planning commission shall follow the procedure for review of site condominiums as adopted by the planning commission in its "Rules of Procedure Standards and Policies." The review process for single family site condominiums shall consist of the following two (2) steps: 
1.  Preliminary plan review. In the preliminary review phase, the planning commission shall review the overall plan for the site including roads, streets, unit configurations and the consistency of the plans with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Plans submitted for preliminary review shall include information specified in items 1 through 4 of Section 4B.03 of this Ordinance. 
2.  Final plan review. Upon receipt of preliminary plan approval, the applicant shall prepare the appropriate engineering plans and apply for final review by the planning commission. Final plans shall include information as required by items 1 through 8 of Section 4B.03 of the Zoning Ordinance. Such plans shall be reviewed by the city attorney and the engineering division. Further, such plans shall be submitted for review and comment to all applicable local, county and state agencies and public utilities as may be deemed necessary by the City of Warren. Final approval shall not be granted until such time as the applicable agencies have reviewed said plans and report any findings to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
Section 4B.08 - Submission of as-built mylar, final acceptance. 
The city shall also require engineering inspections. After construction of the condominium subdivision, an as-built reproducible mylar of the completed site is to be submitted to the city for review by the engineering division. The engineering division shall review the as-built mylar and prepare a report to the director of public service recommending to accept or reject the as-built mylar. A final certificate of occupancy and any building bonds will not be released to the developer/owner until said as-built mylar has been approved by the engineering division. Upon acceptance by the director of public service, copies of the as-built mylars shall be filed with the city clerk, engineering division, building division, assessing department and planning department. 
(Ord. No. 30-862, § 2, 4-9-96)  
ARTICLE IV-C. - PERMITTED CHILD CARE USES  
DIVISION 1. - INSPECTION; REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
 
Section 4C.01 - State licensed child care facilities. 
Pursuant to the Child Care Organizations Act, PA 116 of 1973, found at MCL 722.101 et seq., the State of Michigan is authorized to license child care facilities. State licensed family child care homes and group child care homes are facilities licensed to operate in private homes by a resident of the home. Child care centers or day care centers are facilities generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, before- or after-school program, or drop-in center and are not permitted in residential homes. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.02 - Inspections; zoning regulations. 
a.  State inspections. Inspections of state licensed child care facilities are conducted by the Michigan Department of Human Services as authorized by state law. Fire safety inspections are conducted by the State of Michigan Bureau of Fire Safety. 
b.  Zoning. Child care licensees are required to comply with all applicable zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.03 - Annual registration required. 
All state licensed child care facilities shall register with the division of buildings and safety engineering using a registration form provided. The registration shall be an annual registration and shall be renewed by December 1 of each year. The division of buildings and safety engineering shall maintain a list of all state licensed child care facilities. A registration fee shall be collected in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Sections 4C.04—4C.05 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITTED ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Section 4C.06 - Family child care homes; zoning districts allowed. 
A state licensed family child care home which complies with all provisions of this article, shall be a permitted use in the following residential districts: One Family Residential Districts, R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, and Two Family Residential Districts, R-2, provided that an adult who lives in the home is the family child care home licensee. If the licensee ceases to live in the home, the family child care operations shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.07 - Group child care homes; districts allowed with approval. 
a.  Special exception approval required. A state licensed group child care home which meets all the standards listed below and receives approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals as a special exception pursuant to Article 20, Division 6, Special Exceptions Upon Approval of Zoning Board of Appeals, shall be permitted in One Family Residential Districts, R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, and Two Family Residential Districts, R-2: 
1.  Mortgage survey. The applicant shall file a written application together with a copy of the residential mortgage survey, showing the dimensional elements of the property including the availability of off-street parking and fencing. The requirement of section 20.36 that copies of a professional site plan be submitted shall be satisfied by the submission of fourteen (14) copies of a residential mortgage survey. 
2.  Residency. An adult who lives in the home is the group child care home licensee. If the licensee ceases to live in the home, the approval of the group child care exception shall be automatically revoked and the group child care operations shall cease. 
3.  Locational criteria. The group child care home shall comply with the following locational criteria: 
a.  Is located more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any of the following facilities that are in existence on the date the application for special exception approval is submitted: 
(i)  Any adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, 1979 PA 218, MCL 400.701 to 400.737. 
(ii)  Any facility offering substance abuse treatment as licensed under Article 6 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6101 to 333.6523. 
(iii)  Any community correction center or other similar facility under the jurisdiction of the department of corrections. 
b.  Is located more than seven hundred fifty (750) feet from another licensed group child care home in existence on the date the application for special exception approval is submitted. 
c.  In the event one (1) of the facilities listed in subsection (a) above locates within the required distance after the group child care home receives special exception approval, the previously granted special exception approval shall remain in effect and the group child care home may continue in the approved location. 
4.  Off-street parking. Provide one (1) off-street parking space per employee required by the State of Michigan Licensing Rules for family and group child care homes. The number of employees required for the child to caregiver ratio shall be specified in the application for special exception approval. A driveway on private property may be utilized for off-street parking, however, in no event shall any vehicle be parked in the driveway blocking the public sidewalk. 
b.  Application of regulations. Group child care homes operated in single family dwellings prior to the adoption of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 30-991] were never lawful uses, as a result they do not qualify as non-conforming uses that may continue without complying with this ordinance. Therefore, all State licensed group child care homes, regardless of when licensed, shall comply with all provisions of this Article. Group child care homes licensed and operated in single family dwellings prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall comply with the requirements of this Article within one hundred eighty (180) days of the ordinance effective date, however, in the event one of the facilities listed in subsection 3(a) located within the required distance after a licensed group child care home was already in existence, the group child care home may continue in that location. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.08 - Family and group child care homes; prohibited districts. 
State licensed family and group child care homes are prohibited in the following residential districts due to the increased density of the residential district: R-3, Multiple Family Dwelling Districts, R-3-A, Senior Citizen Congregate Living Districts, R-4, Mobile Home Districts, R-5, High Rise Apartment Districts, Planned Unit Development Districts, PUD, and DD, Downtown District. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.09 - Child care centers; permitted zoning districts. 
a.  Districts. A state licensed child care center generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, before- or after-school program, or drop-in center shall be a permitted use in the following districts: C-1, Local Business District, SS, Special Service District, C-2, General Business District, C-3, Wholesale and Intensive Business District, the non-residential uses within a PUD, Planned Unit Development District, DD, Downtown District. 
b.  Accessory use. A State licensed child care center shall be a permitted accessory use operated in conjunction with a public or private school or church meeting the requirements of section 5.11. 
c.  Off-street parking. Provide one (1) off-street parking space for every one (1) teacher, employee and administrator; plus one (1) off-street parking space for every seven (7) children based on the capacity number stated in the State issued license. 
d.  Certificate of occupancy. Prior to operating the facility, the State licensed child care center shall obtain a valid certificate of occupancy from the Division of Buildings and Safety Engineering certifying that the child care center complies with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Sections 4C.10, 4C.11 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 
 
Section 4C.12 - Fences required for state licensed child care homes. 
a.  Required. State licensed child care homes shall install a fence around the perimeter of the area used for child care to provide a visual buffer and to protect and enclose the yard to prevent intrusion from without and straying from within. The fence shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Height. The height of the fence shall be a minimum of four (4) feet, and shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
2.  Material. The fence shall be ornamental and may be constructed of wood, vinyl, chain link, wrought iron or other decorative material. 
3.  Fence permit required. A fence permit is required prior to installation of a fence. 
4.  Privacy fences on corner lots allowed. A privacy fence is permitted on corner lots provided that, all set back requirements are met and if the fence abuts any driveway, including driveways on adjacent property, the fence shall be set back a minimum of twelve feet from the intersection of the property line and the driveway providing a clear vision zone area as depicted on the diagram below. The portion of the fence set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet, may be angled away from the driveway or installed perpendicular to the driveway. The clear vision zone area is required to provide for the unobstructed vision of a driver exiting the driveway. 
 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.13 - Family and group child care homes; basement egress. 
If the basement area is approved for child care in a family or group child care home, a basement egress window shall be provided in compliance with the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.14 - Family and group child care homes; signage. 
Exterior signage is prohibited except as follows: one (1) non-illuminated name plate attached to the building entrance which is not more than one (1) square foot in total area. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.15 - Businesses. 
The provision to allow State licensed family and group child care uses in single family residential districts is limited to the child care as licensed by the State and no other business shall be operated on the residential premises. The residential nature of the dwelling shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.16 - Drop off and pick up of children. 
No vehicle shall be parked blocking any sidewalk or driveway approach when dropping off or picking up the children for care and supervision at the family or group child care home. The child care licensee shall notify all parents and guardians of this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Section 4C.17 - Child care facilities; smoke detectors. 
Smoke detectors shall be installed in compliance with all applicable State codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-991, § 4, 2-22-11)  
Sections 4C.18—4C.20 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV-D. - FENCES, WALLS AND LANDSCAPE SCREENS  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 4D.01. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, these words and terms are defined as follows: 
Cul-de-sac street means a short minor street with only one end open to vehicular traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicle turnaround. 
Fence means a permanent or temporary barrier or partition enclosing or surrounding a plot of land or portion thereof for the purpose of screening, preventing or controlling entrance, confining within or marking a boundary separating areas of land. 
Landscape berm means a natural buffer comprised of a mound of earth that is used for planting vegetation. Berms are usually two (2) to six (6) feet high and are used to shield, screen, and buffer views, separate incompatible land uses, provide visual interest and decrease noise. 
Landscape screen means hedges, ornamental shrubs, trees, bushes, and landscape berms, and/or any combination thereof which forms a continuous screen at minimum of thirty-six (36) inches high. 
Landscape greenbelt means a natural buffer that is a solid planting strip in compliance with section 2.26 of this appendix used to shield, screen, and buffer views, separate incompatible land uses, provide visual interest and decrease noise. 
Nonconforming fence means any fence which was lawfully in existence before the effective date of this article, and which no longer conforms to the requirements of this article. 
Opaque means it restricts the passage of light and sight and may result in obscurity and concealment. 
Privacy fence means a decorative fence constructed of a solid material such as wood, vinyl or other material that obscures view and provides privacy from without. 
Wall means a type of fence or barrier constructed of masonry on a continuous concrete footing. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 4D.02. - Compliance. 
It is unlawful to construct or install, or cause to be constructed or installed, any fence, wall or landscape screen upon any property within the city in violation of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.03. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect any fence or wall upon any property within the city without first having obtained a permit from the division of buildings and safety engineering. The permit application shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the type, size and proposed location of the fence and payment of the permit fee established by resolution adopted by city council. The fee shall be based on the lineal foot of fence to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.04. - Permit exemptions. 
No permit shall be required for the following fences and walls: 
1.  A temporary fence used in conjunction with a special event approved by the city. 
2.  For the installation of a temporary snow fence during the winter season. 
3.  Fences and walls constructed or erected on public property. 
4.  Temporary construction fences and fences required for protection around excavations that comply with the state construction code. Such fences shall not be maintained for a period greater than a year without special approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.05. - Nonconforming fences and walls. 
Fences and walls presently in existence that do not conform to the provisions of this article are nonconforming fences that shall not be permitted to increase or change from the description given on the permit application at the time the permit was issued. Such fences and walls, when repaired or replaced, shall conform to all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.06. - Location private property. 
All fences, walls or landscape screens must be located entirely on the private property of the person constructing the fence, wall or landscape screen, provided, however, that if the adjoining property owners jointly apply for and sign a permit or with written notarized consent of the adjacent property owner a fence may be erected on the common property line. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.07. - Setback required. 
Walls, fences and landscape screens shall conform to the setback requirements for the zoning district, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.08. - Fences, walls and landscape screens in front yard between building line and front property line. 
No fence, wall or landscape screen shall be constructed between the established building line and the front property line, except as follows: 
a.  Corner lot. On a corner lot abutting a street, a fence may be installed not exceeding thirty (30) inches in height between the established front setback line to the front property line, and shall be of a non-sight obscuring fence material. 
b.  Cul-de-sac. When a lot at the closed end of a cul-de-sac street and the side yard is adjacent to a street, fences or walls may be extended beyond the front building line up to one (1) foot from the sidewalk and shall not exceed the height of four (4) feet along the side yard property line adjacent to the street. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.09. - Measurement of height. 
Height of a fence, wall or landscape screen shall be measured from the approved or natural ground level closest to the fence, wall or landscape screen of the lot or parcel thereon to the highest point from the ground of the fence, wall or landscape screen. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.10. - Materials. 
All fences or walls shall be constructed of materials in compliance with the state construction code and shall be of sufficient quality with proper maintenance to withstand rusting, rotting and other weather-related deterioration for a period of not less than ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.11. - Orientation. 
All supporting posts, cross-members, and hardware of all fences shall face toward the interior of the lot of the person erecting the fence, except in the case of an opaque fence, which shall be uniform in appearance as viewed from both sides. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.12. - Posts or foundation. 
All fences shall be a self supporting structure. All fences shall be installed on posts sunk below grade to a depth of at least half of the height of the fence and shall not be further than ten (10) feet apart. Walls shall be erected on continuous foundations no less than forty-two (42) inches below grade. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.13. - Private agreements for lot lines. 
The city shall not be responsible for the enforcement of any agreement relative to mutual or separate payment for the cost of construction of fences, nor shall the city be responsible for the determination of the location of any fence which is constructed on lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.14. - Deed restrictions or other covenants. 
The issuance of a fence permit under this article is not intended nor should it be construed to abrogate or modify the permit holder's duties as contained in covenants and restrictions arising from a deed or other document. The city will not review covenants or building and use restrictions before the issuance of a fence permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.15. - Landscape berm. 
Where required, landscape berms shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Dimensions. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required berms shall be measured from the grade of the adjacent road right-of-way or parking lot adjacent to the berm, whichever is higher, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for each three (3) feet horizontal (33 percent) slope), with at least a two-foot flat area on top. Berms shall undulate both vertically and horizontally and the landscape plan shall show the proposed contours of the berm, subject to review and approval of berm design as shown on the site plan. 
2.  Protection from erosion. Any required berm shall be planted with sod, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material to protect it from erosion so that it retains its height and shape. The use of railroad ties, cement blocks, and other types of construction materials to retain the shape and height of a berm shall be prohibited. 
3.  Required plantings for front yard berms. Berms located in the front yard of nonresidential parcels shall be landscaped with a minimum of one (1) ornamental tree planted for each thirty-five (35) lineal feet or portion thereof of required berm, plus, one (1) row of shrubs that are planted five (5) feet apart. 
4.  Required plantings for berms used for screening other than in the front yard. Berms located on nonresidential parcels shall be landscaped with a minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) lineal feet or portion thereof, plus, a minimum of one (1) ornamental tree shall be planted for each fifty (50) lineal feet or portion thereof of required berm, plus, evergreen trees or hedges that are at least eight (8) feet high as measured from the top of the root ball, which, upon being planted in two (2) rows with staggered offset planted fifteen (15) foot on center of both rows. 
5.  Measurement of berm length. For the purposes of calculating required plant material, berm length shall be measured along the exterior edge of the berm. 
6.  Berm requirements for parking lots. Wherever front, side, or rear yards adjacent to public rights-of-way are used for parking, a berm shall be required to screen the parking from view of the road. The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the road right-of-way line to create a visual barrier for at least seventy-five (75) percent of the berm length, provided that corner visibility shall be maintained as required in section 4.09 of this appendix. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.16. - Maintenance. 
All fences, walls and landscape screens shall be maintained in a good condition at all times. All fences and walls shall be kept in good structural condition and neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved and such treatment shall be of the same contiguous color, stain or other treatment. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.17. - Prohibited fences and walls. 
The following installations shall be prohibited: 
a.  Razor wire, spikes and nails. No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a fence or wall with razor wire partially or wholly around any property, street, alley, lane or public highway or in front of any public place or space, nor shall the top of a fence material be sharp or pointed, nor shall there be affixed any spike, nail or other pointed instrument of any kind to any fence. 
b.  Barbed wire. No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a fence or wall with barbed wire partially or wholly affixed to the fence or wall around any property, street, alley, lane, public highway or in front of any public place or space, except as approved for a specific location by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
c.  Electrical current. No fence shall be constructed or maintained which is charged or connected with an electrical current. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.18. - Maintenance of nuisances prohibited. 
Fences shall be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of repair, type of construction or otherwise, endangers life or property is hereby deemed a nuisance. If an unsafe condition exists in regard to a fence, the city shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the property upon which such fence is located, a written notice describing the unsafe condition and specifying the required repairs or modifications to be made to render the fence safe or requiring the unsafe fence or any portion thereof to be removed, and shall provide a time limit for such repair, modification or removal. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Sections 4D.19—4D.30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Section 4D.31. - Entranceway structures. 
Residential subdivision entranceway structures including fences, walls or landscape screens shall be permitted, subject to site plan review as landscape features. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.32. - Specifications for residential areas. 
All fences in residential areas shall be of an ornamental type. Fences in residential areas shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and may be constructed of either metal, iron, chain link, wire, ornamental aluminum, vinyl or solid material construction such as wood, brick or masonry, except privacy fences allowed as provided in section 4D.33 may not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.33. - Privacy fences on interior and corner lots. 
a.  Interior lots. On interior lots in residential areas, privacy fences may be located on the lot line or immediately adjacent thereto and may be constructed not more than six (6) feet in height above the established grade of the property and shall not extend beyond either the front building line of the property or into the front yard setback. 
b.  Corner lots. A privacy fence is permitted on corner lots provided that if the fence abuts any driveway, including driveways on adjacent property, the fence shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the intersection of the property line and the driveway providing a clear vision zone area as depicted on the diagram below. The portion of the fence set back a minimum of ten (10) feet, may be angled away from the driveway or installed perpendicular to the driveway. The clear vision zone area is required to provide for the unobstructed vision of a driver exiting the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.34. - Fence required for pools and ponds. 
a.  Swimming pools. All regulations of the applicable building code provisions shall apply to swimming pools and the method of enclosing the swimming pool for the safety of the public. 
b.  Reflector pools and ponds. For the protection of the general public, any reflector pool, fish pond, lily pond or other artificially-constructed body of water which contains twenty-five (25) inches or more of water in depth at any point shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet in height. The fence gates shall be self-closing and latching, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily accessible for children to open. Fence gates shall be capable of being securely locked. However, if the entire premises of the residence is enclosed, then the provision requiring a fence enclosing the reflector pool, fish pond, lily pond, or other artificially-constructed body of water may be waived by the division of buildings and safety engineering upon inspection and approval. 
 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS  
Subdivision I. - Fences and Obscuring or Screen Walls 
 
Section 4D.36. - Obscuring walls. 
Where a non-residential land use abuts a residential district and a wall is used to obscure the non-residential property from the abutting property, the wall shall be constructed of masonry material. Standard concrete blocks are prohibited. Poured or precise concrete walls are permitted provided that they are installed on a continuous concrete footing and are eight (8) inches thick. Required walls shall be similarly finished on all sides and structurally sound. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.37. - Corner clearance. 
Obscuring walls and solid construction fences shall comply with the specifications for maintenance of corner visibility as required in section 4.09 of this appendix. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.38. - Height. 
Obscuring walls and fences in non-residential zones shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.39. - Location. 
All fences and walls constructed or installed between lots shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet above the average grade of the two (2) adjoining lots and shall not extend closer to the front lot line than the established building line or front set back line. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.40. - Refuse, recycling container screening. 
Containers for refuse and recycling uses shall be screened from view from any adjacent residential use or public right-of-way, excluding alleys. Screening may consist of a six (6) foot high opaque wall constructed of masonry material which matches the primary masonry of the principal structure on the site. Standard concrete blocks are prohibited. Poured or precise concrete walls are permitted provided that they are installed on a continuous concrete footing and are eight (8) inches thick. Live landscape material located so it does not interfere with the function of the refuse container is encouraged in addition to the opaque screen. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.41. - Service areas. 
All service areas shall be screened from view from all right-of-ways through use of a six (6) foot high opaque screen wall. Landscape materials shall be utilized in conjunction with the wall. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.42. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Landscape Screens and Natural Buffers 
 
Section 4D.43. - Purpose. 
Landscape screens and natural buffers are necessary for the continued protection and enhancement of all land uses. Landscape screens, berms and greenbelts are capable of enhancing the character of the area, preserving natural features, improving property values, alleviating the impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction associated with certain uses and improving storm water quality, reduce pollution, light glare, soil erosion and thermal heat island effects. Screening is important to protect less-intensive uses from the noise, light, traffic, litter and other impacts of more intensive, non-residential uses. Accordingly, these provisions are intended to set minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping screens and natural buffers for the protection and enhancement of the environment and under no circumstances shall they preclude the installation of more extensive landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.44. - Landscape screen required. 
Landscape screening shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Screening of utility substation and mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment, such as air compressors, pool pumps, transformers, air conditioning units, sprinkler pumps, satellite dish antennas, utility substations and similar equipment shall be screened by evergreens on at least three (3) sides. Insofar as practical, screening shall exceed the vertical height of the equipment being screened by at least six (6) inches within two (2) years of planting. 
b.  Foundations. Foundation plantings shall be provided along the front or sides of any building which faces a public road, or is adjacent to a parking lot or other area which provides access to the building by the general public. Foundation planting areas shall be integrated into the sidewalk system adjacent to the building. Foundation planting areas shall contain at a minimum, one (1) ornamental tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty-five (35) lineal feet of applicable building frontage. Individual planting areas shall be at least eight (8) feet in any single dimension and no less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Minor substitutions of plantings and distance requirements required by this paragraph may be permitted upon approval of the planning director. 
c.  Rights-of-way. Public rights-of-way shall be planted with sod or other suitable live ground cover, and shall be maintained by the owner or occupant of the adjacent property as if the rights-of-way were part of the required landscaped areas or greenbelts. No plantings except grass or ground cover shall be permitted closer than three (3) feet from the edge of the road pavement. 
d.  Approved outdoor storage areas in industrial districts. The requirements for open storage in an industrial district are set forth in Article XVII, section 17.02 of the zoning ordinance. 
e.  Approved outdoor storage area for parking and storage of commercial trucks and large equipment in industrial zones. Approved outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view on three (3) sides and from any adjacent residential use or public right-of-way, excluding alleys. Screening shall consist of a six (6) foot high opaque wall constructed of masonry material or poured or precise concrete walls, provided that they are installed on a continuous concrete footing; or an eight (8) foot greenbelt in conformity with the provisions set forth in section 2.26 of this appendix. 
f.  Multiple family dwellings adjacent to a freeway. Where multiple-family dwellings abut a limited access freeway, a landscaped buffer shall be provided to screen freeway noise and views. The buffer shall consist of a combination of closely spaced evergreens and earth mounding, providing a total minimum design height of eleven (11) feet. The size and placement of plantings should provide for a complete visual barrier at the desired height within five (5) years of planting. The planning commission may modify these requirements where noise mitigation measures, such as walls, have been constructed in the freeway right-of-way. 
g.  Privacy screen for multi-family patio areas. Where multiple-family dwellings are designed so that rear open areas or patio areas front onto a public street, a landscaped privacy screen shall be provided. Such screen shall consist of one (1) ornamental tree and five (5) shrubs per three (3) lineal feet of rear open or patio area. The planning commission may modify these requirements where the modifications to the planting materials or distance requirement is minor in nature. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.45. - Front yard landscape berm required. 
A front yard landscape berm that complies with section 4D.15 is required for the following land uses: 
a.  Used car lots. 
b.  Automotive repair facilities. 
c.  Gasoline or service stations. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.46. - Modifications to non-residential requirements for landscape screens or natural buffers. 
The planning commission may modify the specific requirements for landscape screens or natural buffers upon a finding that one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Topographic features or other unique features of the site create conditions such that strict application of the requirements would result in a less effective screen than an alternative design. 
2.  Parking, vehicular circulation, or land use are such that strict application of the requirements would not enhance the site or result in the desired screening effect. 
3.  The public benefit intended by the landscape screen or buffer requirements could be better achieved with an alternative design. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Section 4D.47. - Minor revisions to landscape plant materials. 
The planning director may approve minor revisions to landscape plant materials due to seasonal planting problems and lack of plant availability. Minor revisions may be approved only when there is no reduction in the quality of plant material, no significant change in size or location of plant material, the new plant material is compatible with the area, and the new plant material is of the same general category and the same general design characteristics, including mature height and crown spread, as the material being replaced. Following approval of plant substitutions, an as-built landscape plan must be submitted to the planning director for attachment to the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 30-998, § 2, 7-9-13)  
Sections 4D.48—4D.60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV-E. - ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE; DECLARATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent of this ordinance is to facilitate and encourage the use of electric vehicles and to expedite the establishment of convenient, cost-effective electrical vehicle infrastructure that such use necessitates.  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 4E.01 - General definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Accessible electric vehicle charging station means an electric vehicle charging station where the battery charging station is located within accessible reach of a barrier-free access aisle and electric vehicle. 
(b)  Battery charging station means an electrical component assemblies or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles. 
(c)  Battery electric vehicle means any vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle's battery, and produces zero emissions or pollution when stationary or operating. 
(d)  Charging levels means the standardized indicators of electrical force, or voltage, at which an electric vehicle's battery is recharged. The terms 1, 2 and 3 are the most common charging levels, and include the following specifications: 
(1)  Level 1 is considered slow charging. Voltage includes the range from zero (0) through one hundred twenty (120). 
(2)  Level 2 is considered medium charging. Voltage is greater than one hundred twenty (120) and includes voltage up to and including two hundred forty (240). 
(3)  Level 3 is considered fast or rapid charging. Voltage is greater than two hundred forty (240). 
(e)  Electric vehicle means any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets, and is powered either partially or exclusively on electrical energy from the grid or from an off-board source that is stored on-board via a battery for motive purpose. "Electric vehicle" includes: (1) a battery electric vehicle; and (2) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle. 
(f)  Electric vehicle charging station means a public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle. 
(h)  Electric vehicle charging station—private restricted use means an electric vehicle charging station that is (1) privately owned with restrictive access (e.g., single-family home, executive parking, designated employee parking) or (2) publicly owned and restricted from public access (e.g., fleet parking with no access to the general public). 
(i)  Electric vehicle charging station—public use means an electric vehicle charging station that is (1) publicly owned and publically available (e.g., Park and Ride parking, public library parking lot, on-street parking) or (2) privately owned and available to visitors for use (e.g., shopping center parking). 
(j)  Electric vehicle infrastructure means wiring conduit/wiring, structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle, including battery charging stations and rapid charging stations. 
(k)  Electric vehicle parking space means any designated parking space with a barrier-free access aisle that identifies the use to be exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle. 
(l)  Non-electric vehicle means any motor vehicle that does not meet the definition of an electric vehicle. 
(m)  Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle means an electric vehicle that (1) contains an internal combustion engine and also allows power to be delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor; (2) charges its battery primarily by connecting to the grid or other off-board electrical source; (3) may additionally be able to sustain battery charge using an on-board internal combustion-driven generator; and (4) has the ability to travel powered by electricity. 
(ord. No. 30-1019, § 1, 3-22-16)  
DIVISION 2. - COMPLIANCE 
 
Section 4E.02 - Compliance. 
It is unlawful to construct or install, or cause to be constructed or installed, any electric vehicle charging station upon any property within the city in violation of the requirements of this article. 
(ord. No. 30-1019, § 1, 3-22-16)  
Section 4E.03 - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect an electric vehicle charging station upon any property within the city without first having obtained a permit from the Building Division or other designated city division/department. The permit application shall be accompanied by a plot plan prepared by a licensed professional architect, engineer, landscape architect, professional community planner or land surveyor showing the type, size and proposed location of the electric vehicle charging station and payment of the permit fee established by resolution adopted by City Council. The fee shall be based on the existing fee schedule adopted by City Council. The requirement for submission of an official plot plan is not required for properties zoned R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C and R-2 when the electric vehicle charging station is located inside a structure. If the electric vehicle charging station is located outside of the structure for properties zoned R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C and R-2, a plot plan drawn to scale by the owner, occupant or interested party is required. 
(ord. No. 30-1019, § 1, 3-22-16)  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION BY ZONE 
 
Section 4E.04 - Permitted locations. 
(a)  Level 1 and Level 2 electric vehicle charging stations are permitted in every zoning district, when accessory to the primary permitted use. Such stations located at single-family, multifamily, and mobile home park dwellings shall be designated as private restricted use only. Installation shall be subject to permit approval administered by the Building Division. 
(b)  Level 3 electric vehicle charging stations are permitted in every zoning district except R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P and R-2 that is for residential use when accessory to the primary permitted use. Installation shall be subject to permit approval administered by the Building Division. 
(c)  If the primary use of the parcel is the retail electric charging of vehicles, then the use shall be considered a gasoline service station for zoning purposes. Installation shall be located in and subject to approval in zoning districts which permit gasoline service stations. 
(ord. No. 30-1019, § 1, 3-22-16)  
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL USE IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT AND NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Section 4E.05 - Residential use in residential district and non-residential development. 
(a)  Parking. 
(1)  For a newly developed parcel, an electric vehicle charging station space shall be included in the calculation for minimum required parking spaces required in accordance with Section 4.32. For an existing parcel, an approved existing parking space (except a handicapped space) may be converted to an electric vehicle parking space without being in violation of the requirements in Section 4.32. 
(2)  Public electric vehicle charging stations are reserved for parking and charging electric vehicles only. Electric vehicles may be parked in any space designated for public parking, subject to the restrictions that would apply to any other vehicle that would park in that space. 
(b)  Accessible spaces. It is strongly encouraged, but not required, that a minimum of one (1) accessible electric vehicle charging station be provided. Accessible electric vehicle charging station should be located in close proximity to the building or facility entrance and connected to a barrier-free accessible route of travel. It is not necessary to designate the accessible electric vehicle charging station exclusively for the use of disabled persons. 
(c)  Lighting. It is recommended that lighting shall be provided where an electric vehicle charging station is installed, unless charging is for daytime purposes only. Lighting shall not encroach upon abutting properties. 
(d)  Equipment standards and protection. 
(1)  Battery charging station outlets and connector devices shall be no less than thirty-six (36) inches and no higher than forty-eight (48) inches from the surface where mounted. Equipment mounted on pedestals, lighting posts, bollards, or other devices shall be designed and located so as not to impede pedestrian travel or create trip hazards on sidewalks. 
(2)  Adequate battery charging station protection, such as concrete-filled steel bollards shall be used. Curbing may be used in lieu of bollards if the battery charging station is set back a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the curb. 
(e)  Usage fees. The property owner is not restricted from collecting a service fee for the use of an electric vehicle charging station made available to visitors of the property. 
(f)  Signage. 
(1)  Information shall be posted identifying voltage and amperage levels and any time of use, fees, or safety information related to the electric vehicle charging station. 
(2)  Each electric vehicle charging station space shall be posted with signage indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. For purposes of this subsection, "charging" means that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment. Restrictions shall be included on the signage if removal provisions are to be enforced by property owner pursuant to Chapter 37 of the City of Warren Traffic Code and/or the Motor Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq. 
(3)  Design specifications for signage shall be obtained from the Building Division or designated city division/department. 
(g)  Maintenance. Electric vehicle charging stations shall be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the equipment for reporting non-functioning equipment, malfunctioning equipment, or other issues regarding the equipment. 
(Ord. No. 30-1019, § 1, 3-22-16)  
ARTICLE IV-F. - ALTERNATIVE ENERGY  
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE 
 
Section 4F.01 - Purpose. 
This section is intended to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City of Warren by protecting groundwater from pollution, contamination or depletion resulting from construction, reconstruction, repair, or abandonment of geothermal systems. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 4F.02 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
Annular space means the space between the casing or well screen, and the wall of the borehole; between drilling pipe and casing; or between two separate strings of casing. 
Aquifer means the subsurface water-bearing layer of soil, sand, gravel, or rock that will yield usable quantities of water to a well. 
Borehole means a hole drilled or bored into the earth, usually for exploratory or economic purposes; a hole into which casing, screen, and other materials may be installed to construct a well. 
Casing means an impervious, durable pipe placed in a borehole to prevent the walls of the borehole from caving, and to seal off surface drainage or undesirable water, gas, or other fluids and prevent entrance into a well. 
Closed horizontal loop geothermal system means a geothermal system that consists of the following basic elements: underground loops of piping; heat transfer fluid; a heat pump, and an air distribution system. An opening is made in the earth. The closed horizontal loop geothermal system is constructed in the following way. A series of pipes are installed into the opening and connected to a heat exchange system in the building. The pipes form a "closed loop" and are filled with a heat transfer fluid. The fluid is circulated through the piping from the opening into the heat exchanger and back. The system functions in the same manner as the open loop system except there is no pumping of groundwater. 
Closed vertical loop geothermal system means a geothermal system in which a borehole extends beneath the surface. Pipes are installed with U-bends at the bottom of the borehole. The pipes are connected to the heat exchanger and heat transfer fluid is circulated through the pipes. 
Drinking water means water which is intended for human consumption and other domestic uses, and is considered to be free of harmful chemicals and disease-causing microorganisms. 
Geothermal borehole means a hole drilled in the earth that piping is inserted for use into a geothermal system. 
Geothermal system means a system for heating and/or cooling buildings using the earth's thermal properties in conjunction with electricity. 
Groundwater means water beneath the earth's surface, located between saturated soil and rock, which supplies wells and springs. 
Grout means a low permeability material that is placed in the space between the wall of the borehole and the casing of a well end, or placed in the annular space of the borehole. The placement of grout is to prevent the migration of water or fluid contaminants into and through the borehole. Grout shall consist of neat cement, high solids bentonite slurry, or hydrated bentonite chips. 
Heat transfer fluid means any liquid used for the purpose of transferring thermal energy from the heat source to another location. 
Open loop geothermal system means a geothermal system in which groundwater is pumped from a well into a heat exchanger located in a surface building. The water drawn from the earth is then pumped back into the aquifer through a different well or in some cases the same well (commonly referred to as "re-injection"). Alternatively, the groundwater could be discharged to a surface water body (also known as "pump and dump"). In the heating mode, cooler water is returned to the earth, while in the cooling mode, warmer water is returned to the surface water body. 
Permeability means the propensity of a material to allow fluid to move through its pores or interstices. 
Separation/Isolation distances means the distance of a source of contamination from a surface drinking water source, a groundwater source supply well, or any type of borehole. 
Water supply well means a well used for extracting groundwater for human consumption. 
Well means any excavation that is drilled, cored, driven, dug, bored, augured, jetted, washed, or otherwise constructed for the purpose of exploring for groundwater, monitoring groundwater, utilizing the geothermal properties of the ground, or extracting water from or injecting water into an aquifer. A well does not include an open ditch, drain tiles, an excavation made for obtaining or prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals, or products mined or quarried, lateral geothermal heat exchange systems less than 20 feet deep, nor temporary dewatering wells such as those used during the construction of subsurface facilities only for the duration of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 4F.03 - Permit required. 
(1)  No person or entity shall do any of the following without first obtaining a permit: 
(a)  Construct or install a geothermal system; 
(b)  Dig, bore, drill, replace, modify, repair, or destroy a well that is, is intended to be, or was part of a geothermal system; or 
(c)  Make any other excavation that may intersect groundwater without first obtaining a permit from the City and, for construction of a well, a permit from the Macomb County Health Department. 
(d)  Install a closed loop horizontal or closed loop vertical geothermal system. (No permit shall be issued for any open loop geothermal system because such systems are prohibited by Section 4F.05 below.) 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.04 - Application procedure. 
(1)  The application may be made by the property owner; a representative of the property owner authorized in writing by the property owner such as a tenant authorized under a lease, or the well driller, and shall be accompanied by the required filing fee. 
(2)  Applications for City permits shall be made to the City Engineer on approved forms and shall contain the information required in Section 4F.05 of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Permits shall be issued for the particular parcel of property on which the geothermal system is to be constructed and/or installed. The locations of the loops that are part of any closed loop geothermal system shall be completely located within the property's boundaries. 
(4)  A site plan showing the proposed location, number of wells, and location of loops must be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval. The plan must include the calculated, anticipated volume of grout that will be needed. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.05 - Permit requirements. 
(1)  Permits may be issued only for closed loop geothermal systems. A horizontal closed loop geothermal system shall be no more than 20 feet deep. 
(2)  Boreholes shall be drilled by water well drillers registered/licensed in the State of Michigan. 
(3)  The standing column well geothermal system, including heat pump exchanger, piping, and all other related systems shall be installed by a geothermal well installation contractor, who is certified in the proper installation methods as specified by the geothermal system manufacturer. 
(4)  The property owner shall maintain a well log of the borehole and "as built" plans showing the location and specifications of closed loop geothermal system components. 
(5)  Borehole piping shall be high density polyethylene as specified in International Ground Source Heat Pump Association standards for closed loop heat pumps. 
(6)  The annular space of the boreholes must be grouted for the full depth of the borehole using high solid bentonite grout. 
(7)  Heat transfer fluids must be non-toxic, environmentally safe material approved by the City Engineer. 
(8)  All wells permits must be obtained from the Macomb County Health Department (or its successor agency) and must comply with the Michigan Water Well Construction and Pump Installation Code, Groundwater Quality Control, Part 127, 1978 P.A. 368, as amended, and all rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or any replacing statute and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.06 - Permit fee. 
The geothermal system permit fee shall be in the amount established by resolution of the City Council and shall be paid when the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.07 - Permit revocation. 
(1)  The City Engineer may revoke a permit if: 
(a)  Any action or any geothermal system violates a provision of this article or applicable City ordinance; or 
(b)  There are factual inaccuracies in a permit application or the documents supporting it. 
(2)  The City Engineer shall notify the property owner and occupant in writing of a permit revocation. 
(3)  The property owner or occupant may appeal a revocation within 21 days to the Public Service Director who shall hold a hearing on that revocation to allow the appellant to prove the geothermal system complies with this article or applicable City ordinance or that the statements in the application and supporting documents are true. 
(4)  When a permit is revoked, the property owner shall immediately abandon the geothermal system as required by this section. Except in cases where the City Engineer reasonably determines that groundwater contamination is an imminent risk, the obligation to abandon the geothermal system after revocation shall be stayed while any appeal is pending. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.08 - System testing. 
Pipes for geothermal system permitted under this section shall be tested hydrostatically at one and one-half times the maximum system design pressure, but not less than 100 psi (689 kPa), for a duration of not less than 15 minutes. All geothermal systems must be pressure checked by a licensed geothermal system contractor every five years from the date of its initial successful test. Results shall be filed with the City Engineer. If the test results show the system fails to meet these requirements, the City Engineer may require the property owner to shut down and /or repairs the system. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.09 - System abandonment. 
Abandonment of a geothermal system shall comply with the laws, rules and regulations applicable to abandonment of water supply wells. Heat transfer fluid must be removed by displacement with grout. The top of the borehole must be uncovered and capped with grout. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.10 - Conflict with other regulations. 
If any provision of this section conflicts with any applicable state or federal law, rule or regulation which is more strict or which is determined to preempt a provision of this section, the applicable state or federal requirement shall control. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Section 4F.11 - Violation and penalty. 
Any violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of not less than $100.00 but not more than $1,000.00. Each day of that a condition exists that violates any provision of this sections shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 30-1009, § 1, 3-24-15, eff. 4-13-15)  
Sections 4F.12—4F.60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV-G. - MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES  
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 4G.01 - Short title. 
This Article is known and cited as the "Medical Marihuana Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Section 4G.02 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Article to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City by permitting medical marihuana facilities and medical marihuana operations in areas of the City that are appropriate for each proposed use. This will reduce potential danger, nuisance, and security problems that arise as a result of the medical marihuana cultivation, processing, and transfer. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Section 4G.03 - Applicability. 
This Article addresses medical marihuana cultivating, processing, testing, selling, extracting, and transporting, pursuant to the Medical Marihuana Facility Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. (MMFLA). Manufacturing, distributing, or dispensing, or possessing with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense is illegal under Federal Law, 21 USC841. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Section 4G.04 - Definitions. 
(1)  For purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, the following definitions apply: 
Co-location Facility. A facility that is used as some combination of Growing, Processing, and Provisioning Facility, as permitted by the Bureau of Medical Marihuana Regulation (BMMR). 
Cultivate and process marihuana. The act of growing, storing, cultivating, manufacturing or otherwise processing marihuana into usable form. 
Growing Facility. A location where a state-licensed Grower cultivates, dries, trims or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a Processor or a Provisioning Center pursuant to the MMFLA. 
Marihuana. Any plant or derivative of the species Cannabis sativa L. 
Medical Marihuana Facility or Facilities. A Growing, Processing, Provisioning Center, Secure Transporter, Safety Compliance, or Co-location Facility. 
Processing Facility. A location where a state-licensed Processor purchases marihuana from a Grower and extracts resin from the marihuana or creates marihuana-infused products for sale and transfer in packaged form to a Provisioning Center, pursuant to the MMFLA. 
Provisioning Center Facility. A location where a state-licensed Provisioning Center purchases marihuana from a Grower or Processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to a Qualifying Patient, directly or through the Qualifying Patient's Primary Caregiver, pursuant to the MMFLA. 
Safety Compliance Facility. A location where a state-licensed Safety Compliance licensee receives marihuana from another Marihuana Facility or Primary Caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, pursuant to the MMFLA. 
Secure Transporter Facility. A location where a state-licensed Secure Transporter stores marihuana, pursuant to the MMFLA. 
(2)  If not specifically defined by this Ordinance, the definitions found in the MMMA and MMFLA. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
DIVISION II. - REGULATION BY ZONE 
Medical Marihuana Facilities are only permitted in the zones as listed below. 
 
Section 4G.05 - Growing, processing, secure transporter, and co-location facilities. 
Medical Marihuana Growing, Processing, Secure Transporter, and Co-location Facilities are permitted in M-1, M-2, M-3, and M-4 zones, if the Facility is located, at the time of Local License application submittal: 
(1)  at least 500 feet from the nearest lot line of all of the following: 
(a)  A R-1-A R-1-B R-1-C R-2 R-3 R-3-A R-4 R-5 zone; 
(b)  A Planned Unit Development; 
(c)  A public library; 
(d)  A public park; or 
(e)  A tax-exempt religious institution. 
(2)  At least 1,000 feet from the nearest lot line of a school. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Section 4G.06 - Provisioning center facilities. 
Provisioning Center Facilities are permitted in M-1, M-2, M-3, M-4, and C-3 zones, if the Facility is located, at the time of Local License application submittal: 
(1)  at least 500 feet from the nearest lot line of all of the following: 
(a)  A R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4, R-5 zone; 
(b)  A Planned Unit Development; 
(c)  A public library; 
(d)  A public park; or 
(e)  A tax-exempt religious institution. 
(2)  At least 1,000 feet from the nearest lot line of a school. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Section 4G.07 - Safety compliance facilities. 
Safety Compliance Facilities are permitted in M-1, M-2, M-3, and M-4 zones. 
(Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
DIVISION III. - PROHIBITIONS 
 
Section 4G.08 - Prohibitions. 
(1)  A Medical Marihuana Facility is not permitted to have any of the following: 
(a)  Medical marihuana related outdoor retail sales; or 
(b)  Except as permitted by MCL 333.26423(d), medical marihuana-related outdoor storage. 
(2)  A Medical Marihuana Facility is not permitted in any of the following areas: 
(a)  the portion of the Downtown District (commonly known as the ODA District as described in Chapter 2, Section 2-112) north of 12 Mile Road, south of the 13 Mile/Chicago Road thoroughfare including all lots (north and south), east of Mound Road, and west of Lorraine Avenue; 
(b)  the Downtown Center, (DC) as described in Appendix A, Article 21 B; 
(c)  the Village Historic District, as described in Appendix A, Article 21A; and 
(d)  the Van Dyke TIFA Authority District as described in Exhibit A of the Resolution Establishing Tax Increment Finance Authority adopted September 23, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1041, § 1, 10-23-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Section 4G.09 - Penalty. 
A person violating this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and reasonable court costs of not more than $1,000; imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or both. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Section 4G.10 - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Article to be invalid for any reason, the remaining portions of this Article, not specifically held to be invalid, remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 30-1035, § 1, 4-9-18; Ord. No. 30-1048 , § 1, 7-23-19) 
State Law reference— Medical Marihuana Facility Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et. seq. and Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et. seq.  
ARTICLE V. - R-1-A ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Section 5.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all R-1-A Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(a)  One-family dwellings. 
(b)  Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of proprietary or supervisor's plats, having an area of not less than three (3) acres, all subject to City and County health and sanitation ordinances. 
(c)  Churches, synagogues, mosques, public schools, public libraries, private educational institutions, funeral homes, community buildings, country clubs, fraternal lodges, or similar civic or social clubs, (but not a residential club, or a club operated as a commercial enterprise), upon approval by the Planning Commission pursuant to section 5.11. 
(d)  Municipal owned and operated parks and playgrounds upon approval by the Planning Commission. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Publicly owned buildings, transformer stations and substations without service yards, upon approval of the Planning Commission and upon a finding that the proposed use is in harmony with the structures in the area, not injurious to the surrounding neighborhood and in accord with the spirit and purpose of this Ordinance. 
(g)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(h)  The use of a parcel, lot or lots for the carrying on of gardening activities or the production or agricultural products through the direct tilling of the soil together with facilities for the sale of products thus produced thereon shall be permitted, provided that said facilities for the sale of such products shall be located on the premises not nearer than thirty (30) feet from the front lot line. 
(i)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, when located on the same or an adjoining lot and which do not involve any business, profession, trade or occupation. One (1) private garage for each residential lot in which there is housed not more than three (3) vehicles, not more than one (1) of which may be commercial vehicle, shall be considered a legal accessory use, provided, however, any such commercial vehicle shall not exceed one (1) ton capacity, and shall be kept housed within a garage when not in use; and provided, further, that no moving vans shall be housed in private garages. All garages and/or accessory buildings shall not contain more than seven hundred (700) square feet of floor area. 
(j)  The storage or parking of recreational units as allowed pursuant to Article V-A, Recreational Vehicles. 
(k)  One (1) estate sale per dwelling of the personal property located thereon in a residential district may be conducted per calendar year, provided that a license is obtained from the City Clerk pursuant to Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. All estate sales shall comply with the following regulations: 
1)  The sale shall be conducted between the hours of 9 a.m. and 9 p.m. only. 
2)  The items offered for sale shall not be displayed or located outside the dwelling and/or garage located thereon. 
3)  The estate sale is limited to four (4) specified days per calendar year as listed on the estate sale license. 
(l)  The storage or parking of recreational units as allowed pursuant to Article V-A, Recreational Vehicles. 
(m)  Growing, storing, or cultivating marihuana or processing or manufacturing marihuana into a usable form, except that such uses may be permitted if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The use, storage, cultivation, growth, manufacturing or processing of the medical marihuana is in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.264231 et seq., as amended, including but not limited to the requirements stated in Section 4, MCL 333.26424, as amended, and in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations, including the Fire Protection Code and Article VI of Chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances; 
(2)  The dwelling is registered with the department of buildings and safety engineering and has passed an administrative safety inspection for electrical, heating, plumbing, storage, and disposal of materials or water used in connection with the marihuana; 
(3)  The dwelling has a filtration for its ventilation system or unit to prevent the emission of odors upon neighboring properties, and which has been inspected by and meets with the satisfaction of the Department of Buildings and Safety Engineering; 
(4)  No more than one (1) person may grow, cultivate, manufacture, store or process marihuana in each dwelling structure; 
(5)  The growth, cultivation, manufacture, or storage of medical marihuana occurs solely at the property under exclusive control, through written lease, contract or deed in favor a qualifying patient who occupies the property as his or her principal residence; 
(6)  The legal owner or property manager of the residential dwelling authorizes the use, storage, cultivation, growth, or processing of the marihuana; 
(7)  No more than one (1) person per residential dwelling may cultivate, grow, manufacture or process marihuana on the premises who otherwise meets the standards in this section. 
(8)  The uses permitted in this subsection (m) are allowed only in the residential districts classified as R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2 and R-3, unless expressly permitted elsewhere in this Code. 
(9)  No use, storage, growth, cultivation or processing of marihuana is permitted in Downtown Center District as described in Appendix A of the Code of Zoning Ordinances, Section 21-B. 
(Ord. No. 30-141, § 1, 9-8-64; Ord. No. 30-277, § 1, 5-14-68; Ord. No. 30-810, § 2, 6-29-92; Ord. No. 30-860, §§ 4, 5, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-871, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 30-875, § 2, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 30-876, §§ 4, 5, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 30-859, § 2, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-1020, § 4, 4-12-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-875, § 2, adopted March 11, 1997, amended § 5.01 with the addition of subsection (n). At the direction of the city this subsection has been redesignated as (k) in order to preserve the sequential lettering of the subsections.  
Section 5.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in R-1-A Districts shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 5.03 - Lot area. 
In R-1-A Districts each one (1) family dwelling, together with its accessory buildings hereafter erected shall provide a lot area of not less than ten thousand nine hundred eighty (10,980) square feet, and shall have a lot width of not less than ninety (90) feet. Provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any lot which at the time of this Ordinance becomes effective is narrower at the building line, or less in area than the specifications herein provided, if such lot was of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, or if such lot is in a proposed subdivision which has received the approval of the City Council as to lot and street layout at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. 
Where lots are to be created having widths in excess of the minimum required in R-1-A Districts, the following standards shall be permitted, provided that no lots shall have less than one hundred (100) feet in depth. 
Lot Width 	Lot Depth 	Area (sq. ft.) 
90 	122 	10,980 
91 	119 	10,829 
92 	116 	10,672 
93 	113 	10,509 
94 	110 	10,340 
95 	107 	10,165 
100 	100 	10,000 
  
Section 5.04 - Percentage of lot coverage. 
One-family dwellings, together with accessory buildings, hereafter erected on any lot in R-1-A Districts, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of such lot.  
Section 5.05 - Front yard. 
Each lot in R-1-A Districts shall have a front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet, provided, however, that where a front yard of greater or lesser depth than above specified exists in front of dwellings on more than fifty (50) percent of the lots of record on one side of the street in any one block in an R-1-A District, the depth of front yard for any building thereafter erected or placed on any lot in such block shall be not less, but need not be greater, than the average depth of front yards of such existing buildings. 
Where residences are to be erected on adjacent lots, such building line shall be staggered at least two (2) feet, with no building located closer than thirty (30) feet from the front property line.  
Section 5.06 - Side yards. 
All lots in R-1-A Districts shall have two (2) side yards, each having a width of not less than ten (10) feet and the combined width of both side yards, shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet, provided that principal buildings on adjoining lots shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet apart, provided the overhang shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches, not including gutter. 
On lots less than ninety (90) feet in width which were of record on the date of this amendment, the required combined width of side yards may be reduced six (6) inches for each foot or major fraction thereof by which the width of such lot is less than ninety (90) feet, provided that the minimum side yard shall be not less than five (5) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet, and provided, further, that principal buildings on adjoining lots shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet apart.  
Section 5.07 - Side yards abutting upon a street. 
In R-1-A Districts, the width of the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than thirty (30) feet when rear yards abut side yards; however, when rear yards abut rear yards, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.  
Section 5.08 - Rear yards. 
Each lot in R-1-A Districts shall have a rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.  
Section 5.09 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
Section 5.10 - Floor area. 
See "Schedule A", Article IV, for minimum floor area requirements for residential dwellings in R-1-A Districts.  
Section 5.11 - Churches, schools, libraries and civic clubs. 
Churches, synagogues, mosques, public schools, public libraries, private educational institutions, funeral homes, community buildings, country clubs, fraternal lodges or similar civic or social clubs shall be permitted with permission of the Planning Commission pursuant to the standards set forth in section 22.14(b)(1) and upon compliance with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  That these uses shall be located on a major thoroughfare as identified by the City of Warren Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
(2)  That the size of the site shall be a minimum of one-half (½) acre, shall have a lot width of not less than one hundred (100) feet and a lot depth of not less than two hundred (200) feet. 
(3)  That the driveway approaches shall not be located closer than [five hundred] 500 feet to a major intersection. 
(4)  That all vehicular access to and from the permitted uses shall be on a major thoroughfare or collector street. 
(5)  That a six (6) foot wall or eight (8) foot greenbelt pursuant to section 2.26 of this Ordinance, be provided where the site abuts a residential district or residential use or is adjacent to an alley which abuts a residential district or residential use. 
(6)  No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories. 
(7)  The total site coverage shall be no more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area. 
(8)  Every building shall have a front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet. If a circular drive is proposed in the front yard, a distance equal to the width of the drive shall be added to the front yard setback. 
(9)  Every building shall have two [2] side yards of not less than twenty (20) feet each. 
(10)  The width of the side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet when the rear yard abuts a rear yard. However, in the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent residential lot, the side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(11)  Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than forty-five (45) feet where the building does not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. Where any building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height, then such building shall be set back one (1) foot in addition to the forty-five (45) feet for each foot the building exceeds the height allowed. 
(12)  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as specified in section 4.32 of this Ordinance. 
(13)  Accessory facilities such as community halls, fellowship or social halls, recreation facilities and other similar uses incidental to the principal use or facility shall also conform to the standardized parking requirement outlined in section 4.32 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-871, § 2, 11-12-96)  
ARTICLE V-A. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND UNITS ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS 
 
Section 5A.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this parking and storage ordinance is to provide regulation for the parking and storage of recreational vehicles, camper enclosures, utility trailers, snowmobiles, boats and other watercraft on a lot used for single or two family residential uses. These regulations are intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare by reducing traffic hazards; maintaining unobstructed access to public sidewalks, thoroughfares and rights-of-way; maintaining sanitation standards; and by preserving the residential character of the neighborhoods of the community. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.02 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Camper enclosure. Any structure or enclosure designed for mounting on a pickup truck or truck chassis to provide temporary sleeping or living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, including but not limited to a slide in camper or camper cap. 
2.  Recreational vehicle. A vehicular unit which provides either temporary living quarters or transportation of recreational, camping or travel apparatus such as campers. The recreational vehicle may have its own motive power or may be designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. The term recreational vehicle shall include but is not limited to a motor home, a travel trailer, a truck camper, a folding camper trailer, a fifth wheel. 
3.  Recreational unit. Any recreational vehicle, camper enclosure, utility trailer, snowmobile, boat or other watercraft. 
4.  Snowmobile. A motor driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice, which usually utilizes sled type runners or skis, an endless belt tread, or any combination of these. 
5.  Utility trailer. A vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle, used for carrying property including but not limited to a boat or other watercraft, motorcycle, snowmobile, off-road vehicle or other equipment for recreational, camping or travel use. 
6.  Watercraft. Any vessel for traveling in or on water, whether the unit is unpowered or powered including those units powered by oars, paddles, sail or motor and rafts both rigid and inflatable. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.03 - Parking and storage in enclosed building. 
Recreational units may be parked and/or stored in an enclosed building such as a shed, barn or garage. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.04 - Parking and storage in front or side yard. 
No person shall park or store any recreational unit in the front or side yard of any single or two family residential lot, except that one recreational unit may be parked on an established driveway for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours for purposes of loading, unloading, trip preparation, and routine maintenance and repair except that at no time shall any unmounted camper enclosure or any boat not mounted on a boat trailer be parked or stored on a front or side yard driveway. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.05 - Blocking sidewalk prohibited. 
At no time shall any recreational unit which is parked or stored on the driveway, as provided in section 5A.04, block the sidewalk or otherwise interfere with pedestrian travel on the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.06 - Parking and storage in rear yard. 
A recreational unit may be parked or stored in the rear yard provided that the recreational unit is parked or stored no less than five (5) feet from any property line, and ten (10) feet from the dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.07 - Storage pad required. 
A recreational unit parked or stored outside of a building shall be located on a storage pad constructed of either concrete, asphalt or patio block which shall encompass the wheel areas of the vehicle. All storage pads shall be constructed and maintained to properly hold the vehicle stored thereon. All storage pads shall be brought into compliance with this section within ninety (90) days from the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.08 - Parking or storage on public property. 
No person shall park or store any recreational unit upon any public property including the planting areas between the sidewalk and curb, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and public streets, except that pursuant to section 37-464 of the Warren Code of Ordinances relating to the regulation of traffic, one (1) recreational unit may be parked on a public street in front of the residence for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours for the purpose of loading, unloading, trip preparation and routine maintenance and repair, however, at no time shall any unmounted camper enclosure or any boat not mounted on a boat trailer be parked or stored on a public street. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.09 - Number of recreational units allowed. 
Other than in an enclosed building, no person shall park or store more than one (1) recreational unit upon any single family or two family residential lot or parcel. Units used in conjunction with one another such as a boat mounted on a trailer shall be considered one recreational unit. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.10 - Use while parked or stored prohibited. 
No recreational unit parked or stored on a residential lot shall be used for lodging or habitation. Use for sleeping over one night is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.11 - Connection to utilities prohibited. 
No recreational unit parked or stored shall be connected to electricity, gas, water or sanitary sewer facilities, except that a temporary electrical connection may be made for purposes of recharging batteries. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Section 5A.12 - Use limited to single and two family dwellings. 
The parking or storage of recreational units as allowed in this article is limited to those lots or parcels upon which a single or two family dwelling is located. Parking or storage shall be limited to units owned by the occupants of the dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 30-860, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-876, § 1, 3-11-97)  
Sections 5A.13—5A.16 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - R-1-B ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Section 6.01 - Uses permitted. 
All uses permitted and as regulated in R-1-A Districts, except as hereinafter modified.  
Section 6.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in R-1-B Districts shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 6.03 - Lot area. 
In R-1-B Districts each one (1) family dwelling, together with its accessory buildings hereafter erected, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet, and a lot width of not less than seventy (70) feet. Provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any lot which at the time this Ordinance becomes effective is narrower at the front building line, or less in area than the specifications herein provided, if such lot was of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, or if such lot is in a proposed subdivision which has received the approval of the City Council as to lot and street layout at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. 
Where lots are to be created having widths in excess of the minimum required in R-1-B, the following shall be permitted, provided that no lots shall have less than one hundred (100) feet in depth: 
Lot Width 	Lot Depth 	Area (sq. ft.) 
70 	120 	8,400 
71 	117 	8,307 
72 	114 	8,208 
73 	111 	8,100 
74 	108 	7,992 
75 	105 	7,875 
80 	100 	8,000 
  
Section 6.04 - Percentage of lot coverage. 
One (1) family dwellings, together with accessory buildings, hereafter erected on any lot in R-1-B Districts, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of such lot, provided that this requirement shall not apply to any lot which at the time of this Ordinance becomes effective is lesser in area than the specifications herein provided if such lot was of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 6.05 - Front yard. 
Each lot in R-1-B Districts shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Where residences are to be erected on adjacent lots, such building line shall be staggered at least two (2) feet with no building located closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the front yard.  
Section 6.06 - Side yards. 
All lots in R-1-B Districts shall have two (2) side yards, each having a width of not less than six (6) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall not be less than twenty (20) feet; provided, that principal buildings on adjoining lots shall be located not less than twenty (20) feet apart, provided the overhang shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches, not including gutter. In such cases, said measurements shall be taken from the outer edge of the overhang. 
On lots less than seventy (70) feet in width which were of record on the date of the adoption of this Ordinance, the required combined width of side yards may be reduced by six (6) inches for each foot or major fraction thereof by which the width of such lot is less than seventy (70) feet, and provided, further, that the minimum side yard shall be not less than five (5) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.  
Section 6.07 - Side yards abutting upon a street. 
In R-1-B Districts, the width of the side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet when rear yards abut side yards, however, when rear yards abut rear yards, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.  
Section 6.08 - Rear yards. 
Each lot in R-1-B Districts shall have a rear yard depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.  
Section 6.09 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
Section 6.10 - Floor area. 
See "Schedule A", Article IV, for minimum floor area requirements for residential dwellings in R-1-B Districts.  
ARTICLE VII. - R-1-C ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Section 7.01 - Uses permitted. 
All uses permitted and as regulated in R-1-B Districts, except as hereinafter modified.  
Section 7.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in R-1-C Districts shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 7.03 - Lot area. 
A one (1) family dwelling in R-1-C Districts, together with accessory buildings, hereafter erected, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than nine thousand (9000) square feet and a lot width of not less than sixty (60) feet; provided, however, when a community water and sewer system is provided, the lot area shall not be less than seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet and with a width of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
All corner lots whose rear yards abut rear yards shall have a minimum width of seventy-five (75) feet. All corner lots whose rear yards abut a side yard shall have a minimum width of eighty (80). feet. 
Where lots are to be created having widths in excess of the minimum required in R-1-C Districts, the following standards shall be permitted, provided that no lot shall have less than one hundred (100) feet of depth. 
Lot Width 	Lot Depth 	Area (sq. ft.) 
60' 	120' 	7,200 
61' 	117' 	7,137 
62' 	114' 	7,068 
63' 	111' 	6,993 
64' 	108' 	6,912 
65' 	105' 	6,825 
70' 	100' 	7,000 
 
Provided that these requirements shall not apply to any lot which at the time of [sic] this Ordinance becomes effective is narrower at the front building line or less in area than the specifications herein provided, if such lot was of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or if such lot is in a proposed subdivision which has received the approval of the City Council as to lot and street layout, at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-61, § 1, 11-13-62)  
Section 7.04 - Percentage of lot coverage. 
One (1) family dwellings, together with accessory building, hereafter erected on any lot in R-1-C Districts, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of such lot, provided, that this requirement shall not apply to any lot which at the time of [sic] this Ordinance becomes effective is less in area than the specifications herein provided if such lot was of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 7.05 - Front yard. 
Each lot in R-1-C Districts shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
Where residences are to be erected on adjacent lots, such building line shall be staggered at least two (2) feet, with no building located closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line.  
Section 7.06 - Side yards. 
All lots in R-1-C Districts shall have two (2) side yards, each having a width of not less than five (5) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall be not less than thirteen (13) feet; provided, that principal buildings on adjoining lots shall be located not less than thirteen (13) feet apart, provided the overhang shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches, not including gutter. On lots less than sixty (60) feet in width, which were of record on the date of adoption of this Ordinance, or on lots in a proposed subdivision which has received the approval of the City Council as to lot and street layout at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, a minimum side yard of three (3) feet and a minimum combined width of both side yards of eleven (11) feet shall be permitted, provided that the principal buildings on adjoining lots shall be located not less than ten (10) feet apart, and provided the width of the overhang shall not exceed twelve (12) inches, not including gutter. 
On lots less than thirty-five (35) feet in width which were of record on the date of adoption of this Ordinance, the required combined width of side yards may be reduced by six (6) inches for each foot or major fraction thereof by which the width of such lot is less than thirty-five (35) feet provided that the minimum side yard shall be not less than three (3) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall be not less than six (6) feet.  
Section 7.07 - Side yards abutting upon a street. 
In R-1-C Districts, the width of the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet when rear yards abut side yards; however, when rear yards abut rear yards, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.  
Section 7.08 - Rear yards. 
Each lot in R-1-C Districts shall have a rear yard depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.  
Section 7.09 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
Section 7.10 - Floor area. 
See "Schedule A", Article IV, for minimum floor area requirements for residential dwellings in R-1-C Districts.  
ARTICLE VIII. - R-1-P ONE FAMILY PARKING DISTRICT 
 
Section 8.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all R-1-P Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided for, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(a)  All uses permitted and as regulated in R-1-C Districts. 
(b)  Parking of private passenger motor vehicles as prescribed in Article XVI.  
Section 8.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in R-1-P Districts shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 8.03 - Lot area. 
A one family dwelling in R-1-P Districts, together with accessory buildings, hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet and with an average width of not less than sixty (60) feet; provided, however, when a community water and sewer system is provided the lot area shall not be less than seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet and with a lot width of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
Where additional lot widths are provided, the sliding scale in Section 7.03 shall be permitted. 
Provided that these requirements shall not apply to any lot which at the time this Ordinance becomes effective is narrower at the street line or less in area than the specifications herein provided if such lot was of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or if such lot is in a proposed subdivision which has received the approval of the City Council as to lot and street layout, at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 8.04 - Percentage of lot coverage. 
One family dwellings, together with accessory buildings, hereafter erected on any lot in R-1-P Districts, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of such lot, provided that this requirement shall not apply to any lot which at the time of [sic] this Ordinance becomes effective is lesser in area than the specifications herein provided if such lot was of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 8.05 - Front yard. 
Each lot in R-1-P Districts shall have a front yard not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth.  
Section 8.06 - Side yards. 
All lots in R-1-P Districts shall have two (2) side yards each having a width of not less than five (5) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall be not less than thirteen (13) feet; provided that the principal buildings on adjoining lots shall be located not less than thirteen (13) feet apart, provided the overhang shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches, not including the gutter. 
On lots less than thirty-five (35) feet in width, the required combined widths of side yards may be reduced by six (6) inches for each foot or major fraction thereof by which the width of such lot is less than thirty-five (35) feet, and provided further, that the minimum said yard may be three (3) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall not be less than six (6) feet.  
Section 8.07 - Side yards abutting upon a street. 
In R-1-P Districts, the width of the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet when rear yards abut side yards; however, when rear yards abut rear yards, the side yard abutting the street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.  
Section 8.08 - Rear yards. 
Each lot in R-1-P Districts shall have a rear yard depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.  
Section 8.09 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
Section 8.10 - Floor area. 
See "Schedule A", Article IV, for minimum floor area requirements for residential dwellings, in R-1-P Districts. The minimum floor area requirements applicable to dwellings in R-1-C Districts shall apply to all dwellings in this District.  
ARTICLE IX. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Section 9.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all R-2 Residential Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(a)  All uses permitted and as regulated in R-1-C Districts. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Private museums, on approval of the Planning Commission. 
(d)  Building and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses shall include not more than one (1) private garage which shall provide parking space for not more than two (2) motor vehicles per living unit, not more than one of which may be a commercial vehicle which shall not exceed three-quarter (¾) ton capacity and shall be kept housed within a garage when not in use, provided said commercial vehicle is owned and operated by a member of the family who resides in said living unit. Maximum area per car to be stored in such garages shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
(e)  A residence may be used for a home occupation, provided it complies with Section 2.29 of this Ordinance, after approval has been granted by the Board of Appeals. 
(f)  Hospitals, except animal hospitals or sanitariums for contagious, mental or drug or liquor addict cases, and institutions of a philanthropic and charitable nature, after approval has been granted by the Planning Commission. 
(g)  The storage or parking of trucks, truck tractors and truck trailers of over three-quarter (¾) ton capacity, automobile trailers, or the storage, parking or use of coaches, bus or streetcar bodies, or similar dwellings, tourist cabins, or tents shall not be allowed or considered a legal accessory use in an R-2 District. This shall not prohibit the storage of one unoccupied house trailer or watercraft, which is the property of the occupant, provided, however, that such house trailer or watercraft shall be parked in the rear yard at least ten (10) feet away from any dwelling and any property line.  
Section 9.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in R-2 Districts shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 9.03 - Lot area. 
Every lot in an R-2 District, upon which a building for dwelling purposes is hereafter erected, shall be not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet for the first living unit, plus three thousand (3,000) square feet for the second unit and such lot shall not be less than sixty (60) feet in width; provided, however, when such lot is provided with a community water and sewer system, such lot shall contain a lot width of not less than sixty (60) feet and a lot area of not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet for the first living unit plus two thousand (2,000) square feet for the second living unit, provided that these requirements shall not apply to any lot which at the time of [sic] this Ordinance becomes effective is narrower at the street line or lesser in area that the specifications herein provided if such lot was of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 9.04 - Percentage of lot coverage. 
No dwelling together with its accessory buildings hereinafter erected on any lot in R-2 Districts, shall cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of such lot, provided that this requirement shall not apply to any lot which at the time of [sic] this Ordinance becomes effective is lesser in area than the specifications herein provided if such lot was of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 9.05 - Front yards. 
Each lot in R-2 Districts shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth.  
Section 9.06 - Side yards, one and two family dwellings. 
All lots in R-2 Districts on which one (1) family dwelling is established, shall have two (2) side yards, one with a minimum width of not less than five (5) feet and the aggregate width of both side yards shall be not less than thirteen (13) feet. All lots in R-2 Districts on which a two (2) family dwelling is established shall have two (2) side yards of not less than ten (10) feet each.  
Section 9.07 - Side yard-non-residential use. 
Every lot on which a building or structure used for a non-dwelling purpose, other than an accessory building is erected, shall have a side yard on each side of such lot, and each such yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width with an increase of one (1) foot in width for each five (5) feet or part thereof by which the said building or structure exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in overall dimensions along the side yard and also of an additional one (1) foot for every two (2) feet in height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.  
Section 9.08 - Side yards abutting upon a street. 
In R-2 Districts, the width of the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet when rear yards abut side yards; however, when rear yards abut rear yards, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.  
Section 9.09 - Rear yards. 
Each lot in an R-2 District shall have a rear yard of a depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet for one (1) story buildings and not less than fifty (50) feet for two (2) story buildings.  
Section 9.10 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Article 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
Section 9.11 - Floor area. 
All dwelling units shall comply with the minimum floor area requirements of "Schedule A", Article IV, for R-2 Districts.  
ARTICLE X. - R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 
 
Section 10.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all R-3 Districts no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(a)  All uses permitted and as regulated in R-2 Districts. 
(b)  Multiple-family dwellings and efficiency apartments. 
(c)  Boarding, rooming and lodging houses or tourist homes. 
(d)  Private garages or community garages, either separated or in connected groups, having common and unpierced dividing walls between contiguous private garages. Maximum area per car to be stored in such garages shall not exceed two hundred-fifty (250) square feet.  
Section 10.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in R-3 Districts shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two and one-half (2½) stories.  
Section 10.03 - Lot area. 
Every lot in an R-3 District on which a one-family dwelling is to be erected shall comply with lot area regulations for R-1-C Districts. Every lot in an R-3 District on which a two-family dwelling is to be erected shall comply with lot area regulations for R-2 Districts. 
Every lot in an R-3 District on which a multiple family dwelling is to be erected shall provide a minimum lot area of seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet for the first living unit, and not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of lot area for each additional efficiency unit or dwelling unit with one (1) or two (2) bedrooms, (including dens, libraries, and/or any other rooms outside kitchen, living, or dining room (except bathroom) exceeding eighty (80) square feet, not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet to be counted as one (1) room, and not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet for each additional three (3) or four (4) bedroom unit. 
The aforementioned minimum square foot requirements shall not be applicable to site plans approved prior to the effective date of this amendment provided a building permit is obtained and construction commenced within six (6) months after the effective date of this amendment. In such case the minimum square foot requirements shall conform to Section 10.03 of Ordinance No. 30 as adopted on December 8, 1964. 
(a)  Senior Citizen Housing Lot Area. Every parcel of land in an R-3 District on which a Multiple Family Dwelling for senior citizens is to be erected shall provide a minimum lot area of not less than fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet for each efficiency unit or dwelling unit with one (1) bedroom and not less than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot area for each two (2) bedroom unit. No unit to exceed two bedrooms. The building shall be so arranged as to provide outdoor sitting areas and courtyards. 
(Ord. No. 30-153, § 1, 12-8-64; Ord. No. 30-469, § 6, 9-24-74; Ord. No. 30-500, § 1, 1-27-76; Ord. No. 30-534, § 2, 4-12-77)  
Section 10.04 - Front yard. 
Each lot in R-3 Districts shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth for a one (1) story building plus ten (10) feet for each additional story or portion thereof.  
Section 10.05 - Side yards-residential use. 
Every lot on which a multiple dwelling is erected shall be provided with a side yard on each side of such lot. Each such side yard shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet which shall be increased by one-half(½) foot for each ten (10) feet or part thereof by which the length of the multiple dwelling exceeds fifty (50) feet in overall dimensions along the adjoining lot line.  
Section 10.06 - Side yards-non-residential use. 
Every lot on which a building or structure used for non-dwelling purposes, other than accessory buildings is erected, shall be provided with a side yard on each side of such lot. Each such side yard shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet, which shall be increased by one (1) foot for each five (5) feet or part thereof by which the length of the building or structure exceeds fifty (50) feet in overall dimension along the adjoining lot line and also, by an additional one (1) foot for every two (2) feet or part thereof by which the height of such building or structure exceeds thirty-five (35) feet.  
Section 10.07 - Side yard abutting upon a street. 
In R-3 Districts the width of side yards abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  
Section 10.08 - Rear yard. 
Each lot in an R-3 District shall have a rear yard depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet for one (1) story buildings and not less than fifty (50) feet for two (2) or more story buildings.  
Section 10.09 - Floor area. 
All dwelling units shall comply with the minimum floor area requirements of "Schedule A", Article IV, for R-3 Districts.  
Section 10.10 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinafter specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance. 
Whenever off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to an existing single or two-family residence or single or two-family residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing single or two-family residence or residential district, an eight (8) foot greenbelt or decorative wall shall be erected and maintained in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-256, § 1, 7-25-67)  
Section 10.11 - Approval. 
In case of planned residential developments involving the construction of one (1) or more two-family dwellings or multiple family buildings or combination of multiple and two (2) or one (1) family dwellings on a lot, parcel or tract of land, or on a combination of lots under one ownership, a detailed site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval. Such site plan shall indicate: 
(a)  The location of main and accessory buildings on the site and the relation of one to another. 
(b)  Traffic and pedestrian circulation features within and without the site. 
(c)  The location of off-street parking areas. 
(d)  The identification of all service lanes and areas within the development. 
(e)  The location of open spaces on the site. 
(f)  The location of any landscape, fences or walls proposed in and around the site. 
(g)  The height and bulk of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 30-256, § 2, 7-25-67)  
Section 10.12 - Uses permissible on special approval. 
Senior citizen housing may be permitted under such conditions as the Planning Commission, after hearing, finds the use not being injurious to the R-3 District and surrounding area and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Ordinance, subject further to review and approval by Warren City Council. Further, before any recommendation is made, the Planning Commission will consider the following factors: 
(a)  The comfort and rest of elderly citizens will not be disturbed by noises and fumes from motor vehicles because of the proximity of the proposed site to heavily traveled highways. 
(b)  That the possible inability of senior citizens to drive will not require them to walk along heavily traveled roads without safe pedestrian ways allowing them to reach public transportation facilities. 
(c)  That such public transportation should be available in the immediate area which is adequate for senior citizens. 
(d)  That other facilities required by senior citizens, such as hospitals, medical, dental, banking and like places, are similarly not far removed from the proposed site. 
(e)  That the site be located within a reasonable distance from open air public recreational facilities, such as parks and swimming pools, etc. 
(Ord. No. 30-469, § 2, 9-24-74)  
Section 10.13 - Environmental design criteria. 
The Planning Commission shall review the site plan with regard to the natural features of the property in question. Of specific concern to the Planning Commission shall be trees and other existing foliage, topography, and natural terrain. The Planning Commission shall be assured that the development of the site plan will not adversely affect any of the above natural features. Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. The location of trees must be considered when planning the open and recreation spaces, location of buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas, and finished grade levels. The Planning Commission shall inquire into the means whereby trees and other natural features will be protected during construction. 
(Ord. No. 30-500, § 3, 1-27-76)  
Section 10.14 - Useable recreation space. 
For each square foot of total floor area there shall be a minimum of two-tenths (.2) square feet of useable recreation space. The site plan submitted to the Planning Commission shall include the location and use of such recreation space areas. Useable recreation areas may include but not be limited to the following uses: Swimming pool, tennis, handball, basketball or related type courts; shuffleboard, lawn bowling, baseball diamond, recreation or community building; play lots; picnic area; and passive recreational areas for sidewalk and pedestal benches. Passive recreation areas, however, shall not comprise more than thirty (30) per cent of the useable recreation areas. 
(Ord. No. 30-500, § 2, 1-27-76; Ord. No. 30-534, § 1, 4-12-77)  
ARTICLE X-A. - R-5 HIGH-RISE APARTMENT DISTRICTS 
Intent and purpose. 
The high-rise districts are designed to provide for residential apartment buildings with appropriate standards on population density, building bulk, open spaces, and spacing of buildings. These districts are designed to provide adequate light and air to windows and for privacy; to provide open spaces to serve the residents of these districts; and to provide freedom of architectural design in order to encourage the development of more attractive and economic building forms. These districts are designed to be used at planned locations in the City, which because of their strategic location and/or proximity to major commercial, office or institutional development and thoroughfares have special importance for sound growth and where a demand for such residential uses has been demonstrated by economic and planning studies. 
(Ord. No. 30-188, § 1, 10-26-65) 
 
Section 10A.01 - Uses permitted in R-5 Districts: 
(a)  High-rise apartment residential buildings. 
(b)  Other multiple-family buildings as provided and regulated by Article X. 
(c)  Accessory uses similar to the following: 
1.  Private parking building for use of residents of the high-rise dwelling units. 
2.  Swimming pools and other recreational facilities which are not conducted as a business for profit and are intended for use by the residents of the principal buildings. 
3.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 30-188, § 1(10A.01), 10-26-65; Ord. No. 30-859, § 2, 3-26-96)  
Section 10A.02 - Yard area, bulk and height restrictions. 
(a)  Minimum lot width shall be at least two hundred (200) feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot depth shall be at least two hundred (200) feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot area shall be at least two (2) acres. 
(d)  Minimum yard setbacks shall be as follows: 
1.  All high-rise apartment buildings, accessory buildings or structures shall be set back from public roads, side and rear yards, a distance of one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of vertical height, but in no event less than fifty (50) feet from the public road or any property line. 
2.  If the R-5 high-rise apartment district abuts a residential district which includes R-1-C, R-1-B, R-1-A, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 the distance between the high-rise building and the residential district shall be equal to at least twice the height of the high-rise buildings. 
(e)  Principal and accessory buildings and parking area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of total land area as viewed in site plan within the property line as stated in the Master Thoroughfare Plan. Lot area and parking spaces for each unit site shall be computed upon the land coverage. 
% of 
Lot Coverage 	1 Bdr. 	2 Bdr. 	3-4 Bdr. 	Parking Req. 
46 to 50% 	2,500 	3,000 	4,000 	2.2 per unit 
41 to 45% 	2,250 	2,750 	3,750 	2.1 per unit 
36 to 40% 	2,000 	2,500 	3,500 	2.0 per unit 
31 to 35% 	1,750 	2,250 	3,250 	1.9 per unit 
26 to 30% 	1,500 	2,000 	3,000 	1.8 per unit 
21 to 25% 	1,250 	1,750 	2,750 	1.7 per unit 
16 to 20% 	1,000 	1,500 	2,500 	1.6 per unit 
15% or under 	50 Units per Acre Maximum 
 
(f)  The architectural renderings of all high-rise apartment buildings shall be approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
(g)  Minimum height of principal high-rise apartment buildings shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet high and at least four (4) stories high and no apartment unit floor shall be below established grade. 
(h)  All high-rise apartment buildings shall be equipped with elevators and fire stairs. 
(i)  All apartment units shall comply with the minimum floor area as specified by Schedule A, Article IV for R-5 Districts. 
MANUFACTURING ZONE FIGURE 
(Ord. No. 30-188, § 1(10A.02), 10-26-65; Ord. No. 30-287, § 1, 8-13-68; Ord. No. 30-310, §§ 1, 2, 3-25-69)  
Section 10A.03 - Other provisions and requirements. 
(a)  Parking. An off-street parking space shall not be less than nine (9) feet wide nor twenty (20) feet in length. Off-street parking areas shall be located within reasonable proximity of the apartments which they serve. Open parking areas shall be screened from view of all property lines by means of screen fencing, evergreens, or other barriers deemed suitable by the Planning Commission to minimize noise and direct glare of headlights from motor vehicles. 
1.  Parking areas shall have sufficient parking spaces as required by Section 10A.02 (e). 
2.  Spaces for all commercial uses shall be in accordance with parking requirements as set forth in Section 4.32. Parking area shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the rear or side property line. 
3.  Parking may be permitted in the side and rear yards if the abutting property is zoned other than a residential zone. Parking will be set back a minimum distance of 25' from the rear and side yards where the property abutting a residential zone and parking will be set back a minimum of 50' from the front property line. 
(b)  Spacing and orientation of residential building groups: Such buildings shall be so arranged as to avoid undue exposure to concentrated loading or parking facilities and shall be so oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings. 
(c)  Sufficient garbage pick-up and other utility areas shall be provided and shall be located with a view both to convenience and to minimizing the detrimental effect on the aesthetic character of the development and shall be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing, walls, or evergreen shrubbery of at least six (6) feet in height around the perimeter. 
(d)  The owner shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines for telephone and electric service, exclusive of main supply lines, perimeter feed lines, and related surface facilities such as padmount transformers, switching equipment and service pedestals, to be placed underground in accordance with the valid rules and regulations of the telephone or electric service company involved providing for installation of such underground service. 
(e)  All high-rise developments shall be provided with a liberal and functional landscaping scheme. Interior roads and pedestrian walks [shall] be provided with shade trees which are of minimum size and character. Open space adjacent to buildings and malls between buildings to be utilized by residents, border strips along the sides of pedestrian walks shall be graded and sodded to provide a thick stand of grass or other plant material. Approaches shall also be attractively shrubbed and landscaped. 
(f)  Interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling entranceways, and pedestrian walks shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize hazards, and where necessary, be shielded to avoid disturbing glares to occupants of buildings. Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away from all adjoining properties. 
(g)  Other standards and conditions to the site plan pertaining to curbing, driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks, open spaces, landscaping and planting and buffer areas not otherwise specified herein may be attached as conditions of the Planning Commission. 
(h)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, approval of the plans by the Fire Department will be required. 
(i)  Upon approval of the Planning Commission, the following special uses may be permitted: Retail stores, restaurants, and personal service shops (i.e. beauty and barber shops, drug stores, food stores, and delicatessens, eating and drinking establishments, package liquor stores, tailor or dressmaking shops), provided that they are located in a principal building and are conducted for the accommodation of residents of the development in serving their day-to-day and otherwise frequent needs in connection with normal household operations; provided further that, with respect to every such use: 
1.  There shall be no entrance except from inside the building. 
2.  There shall be no exterior window display of any kind. 
3.  There shall be no sign relating thereto that is visible from outside the building. 
4.  Except for a restaurant, no single establishment shall occupy a gross floor area of more than One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
5.  No such use shall be located in any part of the building other than on the ground floor, in the basement, or in a roof garden. 
(Ord. No. 30-188, § 1(10A.03), 10-26-65; Ord. No. 30-287, § 2, 8-13-68)  
Section 10A.04 - Procedure of planning commission—Review of site plan. 
Prior to obtaining a building permit the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission four (4) copies of such plans and information for review and approval to assure that there is compliance with the design requirements set forth in this and other pertinent articles of the Zoning Ordinance. Plans and information submitted should include the following: 
(a)  The location, use, design, dimensions, and height of each proposed building or structure, including elevations. 
(b)  The location and arrangement of vehicular accessways and location, size and capacity of all areas to be used for off-street parking, loading and unloading. 
(c)  The location and dimensions of sidewalks, walkways and all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use. 
(d)  The design and treatment of buffer areas and screening devices to be maintained including dimensions of all areas devoted to planting, lawns, trees or other landscaping devices. 
(e)  Provisions for water supply, storm drainage and sewer disposal, as required by the Director of Public Service. 
(f)  Sufficient data to indicate the effects of the proposed development in producing traffic congestion and safety hazards, and sufficient additional data to enable the Planning Commission and the Building Department to determine compliance with the design requirements set forth in this and other pertinent sections of this Ordinance. 
(g)  The owner shall provide easements for telephone and electric utilities and shall make suitable arrangements for their location with the telephone and electric service company involved. 
(Ord. No. 30-188, § 1(10A.04), 10-26-65)  
Section 10A.05 - Uses permissible on special approval. 
Senior citizens housing shall be approved in the R-5 District in the same manner as provided for in the R-3 District; however, those dimensional requirements will be used which are designed for R-5 senior citizen housing. 
(Ord. No. 30-469, § 3, 9-24-74)  
ARTICLE X-B. - R-3-A SENIOR CITIZEN CONGREGATE LIVING 
INTENT AND PURPOSE. 
This District is intended to accommodate those uses termed congregate living projects which by their nature and design, will provide special living environments for senior citizens. It is intended to provide a means of living for those senior citizens, who although ambulatory and capable of caring for their own personal needs, either choose or require that all meals be served in a central dining area. It is also intended that the uses permitted be compatible with residential areas and will not encourage the development of commercial establishments of a retail nature. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1, 7-24-84) 
 
Section 10B.01 - Use regulations in R-3-A Districts. 
(A)  In all R-3-A Districts, no buildings or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
1.  All uses permitted in R-1-A, R-1-B, and R-1-C Districts. 
2.  Congregate living projects for senior citizens. 
3.  An accessory building and use customarily incident to a use authorized by this section. 
4.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.01), 7-24-84; Ord. No. 30-859, § 2, 3-26-96)  
Section 10B.02 - Definitions. 
(A)  Dwelling, Congregate Living. 
A building or portion thereof containing a minimum of twenty-four (24) living units designed for occupancy by senior citizens living independently of each other except that cooking, kitchen, and dining accommodations are provided in a central area and not located within the individual living units. 
(B)  Living Unit, Congregate Living. 
The individual area within a given Congregate Living Dwelling or project that provides an enclosed living environment for those activities relating to self-maintaining behavior such as sleeping, grooming, bathing and toileting. Each living unit may be occupied by no more than two persons. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.02), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.03 - Criteria for congregate living projects. 
In considering the designation of an R-3-A District, the Warren Planning Commission and City Council shall apply the following criteria: 
A.  That those districts shall be developed for the express purpose of providing living space for senior citizens. Senior citizens for the purpose of this section are those persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older. 
B.  That every parcel of land in an R-3-A District on which a congregate living project is constructed shall provide not less than 2,000 square feet of lot area for each living unit. 
C.  That all congregate living projects will provide for is residents living space with a minimum of 350 square feet including a separate full bathroom, closet and visitation area. Each unit, however, shall not be provided with more than one bedroom, nor its own kitchen or cooking facilities except for a manager's unit. 
D.  That each congregate living project shall provide for centralized kitchen and dining areas providing all meals for all persons living in the project. Combinations of more than one centralized kitchen and/or dining area are permitted in larger congregate living projects provided that each such area serves a minimum of twenty-four (24) living units. 
E.  All congregate living dwelling projects shall be constructed with the assistance of mortgage financing or other financial assistance insured by or procured through or with the assistance of municipal, State or Federal government agencies, and is constructed and maintained on a non-profit basis by a charitable organization which is organized pursuant to the provisions of Michigan's General Corporation Act (P.A. 1931 No. 327). 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.03), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.04 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in an R-3-A District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except that if the height of any such building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet, then such building shall be set back from all lot lines not less than one (1) foot in addition to the required yard dimensions for each foot such building exceeds the height allowed. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.04), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.05 - Yard area, width and depth. 
In R-3-A Districts, each lot shall have a lot area of not less than two (2) acres. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.05), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.06 - Lot coverage. 
In R-3-A Districts, the total land coverage shall be no more than thirty (30) per cent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.06), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.07 - Front yards. 
In R-3-A Districts, every building shall have a front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet. If a circular drive is proposed in the front yard, a distance equal to the width of the drive shall be added to the front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.07), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.08 - Side yards. 
In R-3-A Districts, every building shall have two side yards, each of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.08), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.09 - Rear yards. 
In R-3-A Districts, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet where such building does not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. Where any such building exceeds two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, then such building shall set back in accordance with Section 13B.03 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.09), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.10 - Useable recreation space. 
For each square foot of total floor area devoted to individual living units, there shall be a minimum of one (1) square foot of useable outdoor recreation space. The site plan submitted to the Planning Commission shall include the locations and use of such recreation space areas. Useable recreation areas may include but not be limited to gardens, court yards, reflecting pools, shuffleboard courts, putting or bowling greens provided that all such areas be located outside the front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.10), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.11 - Architectural plans. 
In R-3-A Districts, plans for buildings shall be subject to the approval of the Warren Planning Commission with respect to area and bulk regulations, all site and planting plans, useable recreation space, and building elevations, prior to submitting plans to the Building Department for approval and issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.11), 7-24-84)  
Section 10B.12 - Off-street parking requirements. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32(h)(25) of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-681, § 1(10B.12), 7-24-84)  
ARTICLE XI. - R-4 MOBILE HOME DISTRICTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Mobile homes generally, Ch. 20. 
 
Section 11.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all R-4 Districts no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, on approval of the Planning Commission with respect to site layout and pedestrian and vehicular circulation: 
(a)  Mobile home courts and trailer coach parks.  
Section 11.02 - Building height. 
No building or structure hereafter erected or altered in an R-4 District shall exceed one (1) story in height or fifteen (15) feet, except as provided in Article XIX of this Zoning Ordinance.  
Section 11.03 - Space requirements. 
(a)  The minimum unit area of premises used or occupied by each trailer shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, clearly defined on the ground by stakes, posts, or other markers, except that where a separate parking area is provided on the trailer camp lot for motor vehicles and no motor vehicles are parked on the trailer unit area, that the minimum unit area of the premises used or occupied by each trailer shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet, and in such event there shall be provided one (1) parking stall for each trailer unit. 
(b)  There shall be unobstructed open spaces between each trailer coach or mobile home of not less than fifteen (15) feet and not less than ten (10) feet of unobstructed open space between the ends of adjacent trailer coaches. Hitches shall not extend beyond the boundary lines of the sites, except where such parking space is provided in street in accordance with Schedule of Road Widths in Article XI. 
(c)  No trailer shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way line of a main highway, or ten (10) feet from the mobile court or trailer camp property line. 
(d)  One passenger motor vehicle may be parked on the private street in front of the trailer coach site, provided it complies with the Schedule of Road Widths, in Article XI, of this Ordinance, and provided further additional off-street parking space of one-half (½) parking stall per trailer unit is provided within the trailer coach park for additional private passenger vehicles which belong to the occupants of the trailers and for visitors' cars. 
(e)  Each trailer space or site shall be provided with a concrete apron or concrete ribbons, not less than twenty-four (24) inches wide, upon which the trailer shall be located.  
Section 11.04 - Roads and sidewalks. 
Each individual trailer coach site shall abut or face a driveway, roadway, or street of at least thirty (30) feet in width which street shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. Existing licensed trailer parks shall not be required to increase the width of the streets within said parks to thirty (30) feet as long as said parks are not redesigned or altered. All such roadways shall be hard surfaced. 
Each trailer coach park shall provide a thirty (30) inch concrete walk from the entrance of each trailer to all required service facilities. 
Roadways and streets within all existing trailer coach parks shall conform to the following schedule regarding vehicle traffic use, including motor vehicle parking. 
Motor Vehicle Parking 
Allowance 	Traffic Use 	Min. Rd. Width 
1. No parking on road 
(Separate lot or on-site parking provided) 	2-way road 	20 feet 
2. Parallel parking, 
1 side only 	1-way road 	20 feet 
3. Parallel parking, 
2 sides 	1-way road 	26 feet 
4. Parallel parking, 
2 sides 	2-way road 	36 feet 
 
Where sidewalks are provided, the space required shall be in addition to the above schedule.  
Section 11.05 - Plumbing and electrical installations. 
Plumbing and electrical installations in R-4 Districts shall be maintained in accordance with the City of Warren Plumbing and Electrical Codes.  
Section 11.06 - Additional requirements. 
In addition, all trailer coach parks shall comply with the following: 
(a)  There shall be provided an area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet for recreation, for each trailer space in the Mobile Home Park, with a minimum area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, which shall be no longer than two (2) times its width. Such area shall be developed and maintained by the management so as to provide healthful recreation for the children of the Mobile Home Park. 
(b)  A greenbelt planting strip, not less than eight (8) feet in width, shall be located along all lot lines not bordering a street. Such greenbelt shall be composed of one (1) row of deciduous and/or evergreen trees, spaced not more than four (4) feet apart and not less than one (1) row of shrubs spaced not more than eight (8) feet apart and which grow at least to a height of five (5) feet or more after one (1) full growing season and which shrubs will eventually grow to a height of not less than twelve (12) feet. A fence may be built on the trailer coach park property lines, in lieu of a greenbelt as heretofore required, said fence shall be not less than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height, constructed of woven wire or open metal or wood pickets and no barbed wire shall be used in the construction of said fence. 
(c)  The front yard and the side yard adjacent to a street shall be landscaped and the entire Mobile Home Park shall be maintained in a good, clean presentable condition at all times. 
(d)  No business of any kind shall be conducted in any mobile home, trailer or building or on the premises of the Mobile Home Park, except that of the management office. 
(e)  Street and yard lights, sufficient in number and intensity to permit the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night, shall be provided and shall be effectively related to buildings, trees, walks, steps, and ramps. 
(f)  All fuel oil and all gas tanks shall be located on each trailer site in a uniform manner. All tanks shall be of an approved type to comply with building code standards and shall be equipped with vent pipes and with fused valves. All tanks shall be elevated on non-combustible stands and placed on a concrete base. 
(g)  There shall be no storage underneath any trailer and each trailer site shall be maintained in a clean and presentable condition at all times. 
(h)  Fences other than those surrounding the park shall be uniform in height and shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height and shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide firemen access to all sides of each trailer. 
(i)  Fire hydrants of a size and pressure to be used by the City of Warren Fire Department shall be placed within said trailer park so that no trailer shall be more than six hundred (600) feet from a fire hydrant. 
(j)  A one family dwelling may be permitted on the site provided that such dwelling is limited to the management's residence and provided further, such dwelling complies with the requirements of the R-1-D Districts of the Ordinance. A portion of such dwelling may be utilized for management's office. 
(k)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 30-945, § 4, 4-27-04) 
Cross reference— License fee schedule, § 18-18.  
ARTICLE XII. - PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
 
Section 12.01 - Use regulations. 
In all PB Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(a)  All uses permitted in R-1-P Districts. 
(b)  Professional office of a medical doctor, osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, or lawyer. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Buildings and uses, customarily incident and accessory to the above permitted uses. 
(e)  No use shall be permitted which involves the selling of any article or product other than the above services. 
(Ord. No. 30-859, § 2, 3-26-96)  
Section 12.02 - Dwelling units. 
In PB Districts, every one family dwelling shall comply with requirements established under Article VIII of this Ordinance.  
Section 12.03 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in PB Districts shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories.  
Section 12.04 - Lot area and width. 
In PB Districts, each lot for use other than residential, shall have a lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and a lot width of not less than eighty (80) feet.  
Section 12.05 - Lot coverage. 
In PB Districts, every building for use other than residential, shall cover not more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area, and in no event shall such building be in excess of thirty-two hundred (3,200) square feet.  
Section 12.06 - Front yards. 
In PB Districts, every building, for use other than residential, shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  
Section 12.07 - Side yards. 
In PB Districts, every building or use other than residential shall have two (2) side yards each having a width of not less than four (4) feet and the combined width of both side yards shall not be less than fourteen (14) feet; provided that principal buildings on adjoining lots shall be located not less than ten (10) feet apart; provided the overhang, shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches, not including the gutter. In such cases, said measurement shall be taken from the outer edge the overhang.  
Section 12.08 - Rear yards. 
In PB Districts, each lot shall have a rear yard not less than thirty (30) feet.  
Section 12.09 - Rear yards abutting side lot lines. 
In PB Districts where a side yard of an interior lot abuts a rear yard of a corner lot or an alley separating such lots, the principal building and/or any accessory building on the corner lot, shall set back from the side street as far as the dwellings set back on the side street.  
Section 12.10 - Architectural plans. 
In PB Districts, all architectural plans for buildings other than residential, shall be presented to the Planning Commission and receive their approval prior to submitting plans to the Building Department for approval and issuance of a building permit. 
It is intended that such Professional Business buildings, when located adjacent to a residential area, shall take on the appearance of residential buildings in order to preserve the general character of the residential neighborhood. 
All PB buildings shall conform to the regulations prescribed under "Commercial Buildings", as specified in the City of Warren Building Code.  
Section 12.11 - Off-street parking requirements. 
In all zoning districts, off-street parking for the storage or parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the building hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
Section 12.12 - Greenbelt. 
All non-residential uses, when adjacent to an existing residence or residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing residence or residential district, shall provide and maintain an eight (8) foot greenbelt or decorative wall, in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance.  
ARTICLE XIII. - C-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
 
Section 13.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all C-1 Districts no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(a)  All uses permitted in R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-2, R-3, R-1-P, and Office Districts except residential dwellings, hospitals, sanitoriums, and rest and convalescent homes. 
(b)  Generally recognized retail businesses, which supply commodities on the premises, for persons residing in the surrounding residential areas: 
Market - A retail market where groceries, fruit, vegetables, dairy products, and meat may be purchased. 
Delicatessen, including commonly referred to Carry-Out-Food Stores, in which prepared food that is purchased is consumed off the premises. 
Drug Stores. 
Variety Store (5 and 10 cent store) 
Hardware Store 
Gasoline and Oil Service Stations 
Florist or Gift Shop 
Shops producing food merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises, such as a bakery shop provided that the service of not more than five (5) persons are required to produce merchandise. 
(c)  Martial art or yoga studios, instruction in or practice or participation in the martial arts or yoga, which are not open for business or to patrons or other invitees between 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. 
(d)  Business offices and professional offices of doctors, dentists, lawyers, chiropractors, osteopaths, and similar or allied professions. 
(e)  Banks. 
(f)  Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, gas regulator stations, transformer stations and substations with service yards but without storage yards, water and sewerage pumping stations. 
(g)  (1) 
Veterinary clinics - providing professional services and medical care for sick or diseased household pets by a licensed professional veterinarian. Such building shall be of soundproof construction so as to prevent the noise from disturbing the surrounding area. 
The use of the premises as a kennel or boarding establishment as such shall not be allowed, nor shall the clinic have open or outdoor runways or pens. Off-street parking requirements shall be determined as provided in Section 4.32(h)19. 
(h)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. A storage garage for the storage of commercial vehicles used by a business or other permitted activity, when located on the same lot therewith and occupying not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of such lot shall be considered a legal accessory building and use in C-1 Districts. 
(i)  Retail businesses which maintain for operation on the premises amusement machines but not an amusement machine center as defined in Section 3-501[6-226] of the Code of Ordinances. 
(j)  Outdoor retail sales pursuant to Section 4.45 of this ordinance. 
(k)  Health Club or Fitness Center, provided a health club or fitness center shall not be open business or provide activities, services or recreation to members, patrons or other invitees between 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. 
(l)  Personal Fitness Center or Gym, provided the personal fitness center or gym shall not be open for business or provide services or activities to members, patrons or other invitees, between 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. 
(m)  Indoor Recreational Center Indoor, provided that the indoor recreational center shall not be open for business or provide activities, services or recreation to patrons, members or other invitees between 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 30-139, § 1, 8-25-64; Ord. No. 30-235, § 1, 2-14-67; Ord. No. 30-283, § 4, 6-25-68; Ord. No. 30-595, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 30-657, § 4, 4-12-83; Ord. No. 30-726, § 5, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 30-835, § 4, 2-22-84; Ord. No. 30-859, § 3, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-1005, § 2, 7-9-14; Ord. No. 30-1027, § 2, 5-9-2017)  
Section 13.01A - Approval of special land use permit. 
Under such conditions as the City Council, after hearing, finds the use not being injurious to the C-1 District and surrounding area and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Ordinance and subject to the conditions that may be imposed, the following uses may be permitted: 
(a)  An establishment permitted in Section 13.01 above, that is granted a license by the State Liquor Control Commission as either a Class C licensed establishment or tavern. 
(Ord. No. 30-659, § 3, 4-26-83)  
Section 13.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in a C-1 District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 13.03 - Greenbelt. 
All non-residential uses, when adjacent to an existing residence or residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing residence or residential district shall provide and maintain an eight (8) foot greenbelt or decorative wall in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance.  
Section 13.04 - Front yards for commercial buildings. 
A fifteen (15) foot front yard setback shall be provided by all commercial buildings in a C-1 District, measuring from the proposed right-of-way line established by the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan.  
Section 13.05 - Side yards on interior lot lines. 
In C-1 Districts side yards are not required along an interior side lot line where all walls of buildings abutting such interior side lot lines are wholly without windows or other openings, but if windows or openings are provided, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided.  
Section 13.06 - Side yards on the street side of corner lots. 
The width of a side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet when rear yards abut rear yards. However, in the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent residential lot, the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  
Section 13.07 - Rear yards. 
In C-1 Districts, a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be required; where alleys exist the measurement of the rear yard may include one-half (½) of the alley. 
A rear yard shall not be required of all commercial lots having depths of one hundred (100) feet or less, if such lots are of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 13.08 - Rear yard abutting a street. 
In C-1 Districts on any lot running through from street to street, a rear yard shall be provided on the rear street conforming to the requirements for front yards on that street.  
Section 13.09 - Corner clearance for business use. 
In C-1 Districts no business building or structure may be erected between the property lines of intersecting streets or highways and a line joining points on such lines fifteen (15) feet distant from their point of intersection, or in the case of a rounded corner, the point of intersection of their tangents. 
All lots of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, having widths of forty (40) feet or less or depths of one hundred (100) feet or less shall set back six (6) feet.  
Section 13.10 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
Section 13.11 - Signs. 
Business signs [are permitted], but only those relating to the use conducted in the building or in the immediate premises thereof, with two (2) square feet of sign area permitted for each front foot of the property, provided that no sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, and that no portion of any sign shall project more than fifteen (15) inches from any structure or building and if illuminated shall not be of the flashing or intermittent type or in any way create a traffic hazard. 
(Ord. No. 30-726, § 6, 9-23-86)  
ARTICLE XIII-A. - OFFICE DISTRICTS 
INTENT AND PURPOSE. 
This District is intended to accommodate those non-residential uses of an administrative or professional nature which are necessary to the normal conduct of a community's activities. It is specifically designed, however, to prohibit the introduction of commercial establishments of a retail nature or other activities which require the constant visits of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1, 2-8-66) 
 
Section 13A.01 - Use regulations, in O Districts. 
(a)  In all O Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
1.  All uses permitted in PB or R-1-P Districts, except residential dwellings. 
2.  Offices in which the personnel will be employed for work in one (1) or more of the following fields; executive, administrative, legal, accounting, advertising, insurance, real estate, writing, clerical, stenographic and similar enterprises. 
3.  Offices of physicians, dentists and other similar professional persons concerned with improving personal and community health. 
4.  Offices of architects, land architects, engineers, urban planners, artists, and others employed in the graphic arts. 
5.  Hospitals, except animal hospital and hospitals or sanitoriums, primarily established for mental, drug or liquor addict cases; sanitoriums, rest and convalescent homes and medical clinics except community mental health centers, clinics for treatment of alcoholism, drugs or other substance abuse, rehabilitation centers for treatment involving any of the above and/or former convicts, emotionally disturbed or mentally deficient persons, and children or adolescents who have been adjudged delinquent. 
6.  Publicly owned buildings, and offices of public utility companies but not including storage yards, transformer stations, exchanges or substations. 
7.  An accessory building and use customarily incident to a use authorized by this section. A pharmacy or apothecary shop, store limited to corrective garments, or bandages, optical company, may be permitted as accessory uses to an entire building; provided, it is within the building to which it is accessory and does not have a direct outside entrance for customers. 
8.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.01), 2-8-66; Ord. No. 30-488, § 2, 7-22-75; Ord. No. 30-538, § 3, 6-14-77; Ord. No. 30-859, § 2, 3-26-96)  
Section 13A.01A - Uses permissible on special approval. 
Banks, savings and loans and other credit agencies as described in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, published by the Office of Management and Budget shall be permitted upon approval of the planning commission after a public hearing has been held and it is found that the proposed use meets all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, including the standards for approval set forth in Section 22.14 of the Ordinance, and the following standards. 
(A)  Banks, savings and loans and other credit agencies shall have a minimum lot area of one (1) acre. 
(B)  When a stack space lane for drive-thru windows or an ATM (automated teller machine) window is adjacent to an existing residence or residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing residence or residential district both an eight (8) foot greenbelt and a decorative wall shall be provided and maintained in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance. If, however, any portion of the stack space lane is within twenty-five (25) feet of an existing residence both a twenty (20) foot greenbelt and a decorative wall shall be provided and maintained in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance. In addition to the requirements of Section 2.26, the greenbelt shall consist of evergreen trees not less than eight (8) feet in height from grade to top on planting. 
(C)  If ATM (automated teller machine) windows are proposed for use, lighting plans must be submitted and approved. 
(D)  Devices for the transmission of, or projection of, voices or music shall be so directed or covered as to prevent said sounds or music from being audible beyond the boundaries of the site. 
(Ord. No. 30-772, § 1, 5-23-89)  
Section 13A.02 - Criteria. 
(a)  In considering the designation of an O District, the Warren Planning Commission and City Council shall apply the following criteria: 
1.  That these districts be located on major thoroughfares as identified by the City of Warren Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
2.  That these districts be developed in conjunction with or adjacent to property zoned for commercial or industrial uses. 
3.  That all vehicular access to and from the permitted uses shall be on a major thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.02), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.03 - Building height. 
(a)  No building hereafter erected or altered in an O District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except that if the height of any such building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet, then such building shall be set back from all lot lines not less than one (1) foot in addition to the required yard dimensions for each foot such building exceeds the height allowed. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.03), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.04 - Greenbelt. 
(a)  All non-residential uses, when adjacent to an existing residence or residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing residence or residential district, shall provide, and maintain a twenty (20) foot greenbelt, or decorative wall in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.04), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.05 - Lot area and width. 
(a)  In O Districts, each lot shall have a lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and a lot width of not less than eighty (80) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.05), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.06 - Lot coverage. 
(a)  In O Districts, every building shall cover not more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.06), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.07 - Front yards. 
(a)  In O Districts, every building shall have a front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.07), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.08 - Side yards on interior lot lines. 
(a)  In O Districts, every building shall have two (2) side yards, each having a width of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.08), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.09 - Side yards on the street side of corner lots. 
(a)  The width of a side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet when rear yards abut rear yards. However, in the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent residential lot, the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.09), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.10 - Rear yards. 
(a)  In O Districts, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than forty-five (45) feet where such building does not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. Where any such building exceeds two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet then such building shall set back in accordance with Section 13A.03 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.10), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.11 - Architectural plans. 
(a)  In O Districts, plans for buildings shall be subject to the approval of the Warren Planning Commission with respect to area and bulk regulations, all site and planting plans, and building elevations, prior to submitting plans to the Building Department for approval and issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.11), 2-8-66)  
Section 13A.12 - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-200, § 1(13A.12), 2-8-66)  
ARTICLE XIII-B. - SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICTS 
INTENT AND PURPOSE. 
This District is intended to accommodate those uses, which by their nature, require large tracts of property with certain traffic generation necessary to their use. It is also intended that the uses permitted are compatible with residential areas based on the size of the property and the access. It is specifically designed, however, to prohibit the introduction of commercial establishments of a retail nature. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1, 5-19-70) 
 
Section 13B.01 - Use regulations in SS Districts: 
(a)  In all SS Districts, no buildings or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
1.  All uses permitted in R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-3 and R-2 Districts, except residential dwellings. This clause is not intended to prohibit the director or his family, caretaker or attendants, from living in the main structure. 
2.  Funeral homes, churches, hospitals and schools. 
3.  An accessory building and use customarily incident to a use authorized by this section. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Hospitals or sanitoriums primarily established for mental, alcoholism, or drug addict cases; community mental health centers, clinics for treatment of alcoholism, drugs or other substance abuse; rehabilitation centers for treatment involving any of the above and/or former convicts, emotionally disturbed or mentally deficient persons, and children or adolescents who have been adjudged delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.01), 5-19-70; Ord. No. 30-538, § 4, 6-14-77; Ord. No. 30-859, § 2, 3-26-96)  
Section 13B.02 - Criteria. 
(a)  In considering the designation of an SS District, the Warren Planning Commission and City Council shall apply the following criteria: 
1.  That these districts be located on major thoroughfares as identified by the City of Warren Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
2.  That the size of site be a minimum of one-half (½) acre. 
3.  That the site be located no closer than 500 feet to a major intersection. 
4.  That all vehicular access to and from the permitted uses shall be on a major thoroughfare or collector street. 
5.  That a six foot wall be provided where the tract abuts a residential zone or use, or adjacent to an alley which abuts a residential zone or use. 
6.  That the driveways onto the major thoroughfare from a funeral home site not conflict with any adjacent school driveways. A distance of three hundred (300) feet shall be maintained from a school driveway to a funeral home driveway. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.02), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.03 - Building height. 
(a)  No building hereafter erected or altered in an SS District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories, except that if the height of any such building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet, then such building shall be set back from all lot lines not less than one (1) foot in addition to the required yard dimensions for each foot such building exceeds the height allowed. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.03), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.04 - Yard area, width and depth. 
(a)  In SS Districts, each lot shall have a lot area of not less than one-half (½) acre and a lot width of not less than one hundred (100) feet and a lot depth of not less than two hundred (200) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.04), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.05 - Lot coverage. 
(a)  In SS Districts, the total coverage shall be no more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.05), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.06 - Front yards. 
(a)  In SS Districts, every building shall have a front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet. If a circular drive is proposed in the front yard, a distance equal to the width of the drive shall be added to the front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.06), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.07 - Side yards on interior lot lines. 
(a)  In SS Districts, every building shall have two side yards, each of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.07), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.08 - Side yards on the street side of corner lots. 
(a)  The width of a side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet when rear yards abut rear yards. However, in the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent residential lot, the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.08), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.09 - Rear yards. 
(a)  In SS Districts, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than forty-five (45) feet where such building does not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. Where any such building exceed [exceeds] two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, then such building shall set back in accordance with Section 13B.03 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.09), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.10 - Architectural plans. 
(a)  In SS Districts, plans for buildings shall be subject to the approval of the Warren Planning Commission with respect to area and bulk regulations, all site and planting plans, and building elevations, prior to submitting plans to the Building Department for approval and issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.10), 5-19-70)  
Section 13B.11 - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-335, § 1(13B.11), 5-19-70)  
ARTICLE XIV. - C-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Section 14.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all C-2 Districts no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(a)  All uses permitted in C-1 Districts, except dwellings for one-family, two-family and multiple-family in which the occupants primarily make their home twelve (12) months out of each year. This is not intended to exclude over-night, weekly or monthly transient living quarters. 
(b)  Stores and shops for the conducting of a service or retail business, except that the storage of lumber and other building supplies or similar materials for retail sale shall be housed within a substantial building having four (4) side walls and roof, open storage of this or similar material, shall not be permitted. 
(c)  Veterinary clinic and dog kennels, when all are enclosed within a building. 
(d)  Any service establishment of an office-showroom workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, printer, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct and in which establishments no more than five (5) persons shall be employed at one (1) time in the fabrication, repair, and other processing of goods. 
(e)  Theaters, public assembly buildings, bowling alleys, catering establishments, parking lots, publicly owned buildings, conservatories, sales and show rooms, studios, mortuary establishments and tattoo parlors. 
(f)  Private clubs and lodge halls licensed by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission to sell beer, wine and spirits. 
(g)  Class C establishments as defined in Section 2.70 of this Ordinance, Taverns as defined in Section 2.71 of this Ordinance. 
(h)  Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and sub-stations, and gas regulator stations with service yards but without storage yards, water and sewerage pumping stations. 
(i)  Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit. 
(j)  Automobile repair shops, including body and fender business, provided that such uses are conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and provided further that such establishments are located at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential district or are operated on the premises of and in conjunction with an automobile dealership in a building with appropriate filtering system to prevent emission of paint odors and with a masonry wall facing any such residential district, which shall have sound retarding insulation, shall have no doors other than any door required by law as a fire exit, and shall have no windows but may have glass block areas to transmit light. 
(k)  Drive-in restaurant, an establishment whose principal business is to serve food that may be consumed in the building on the premises, on the premises outside the building, or off the premises. Drive-in restaurants shall be permitted upon approval of the Planning Commission, after a public hearing has been held and it is found that the proposed drive-in restaurant meets all the requirements of the Zoning Ordinances and the following standards: 
1.  Be so located and designed to eliminate undue congestion in the public streets: (a) be two hundred (200) feet from the intersection; and (b) be limited to two (2) curb cuts and if the property is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet wide, be limited to one (1) curb cut. 
2.  Lighting shall be shielded from all adjacent properties and public streets. 
3.  Any actual storage areas for refuse or any other uses shall be enclosed or screened from view of the public. 
4.  Drive-in restaurant properties shall be completely enclosed with a chain-link fence with a height of four (4) feet; however, when abutting a residential property, a decorative masonry screening wall constructed to a height of six (6) feet shall be provided. 
5.  The entire site, other than occupied by the building or structure, shall be landscaped or provided with a permanent durable, and dustless surface having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder, and shall be cleaned and trimmed to dispose of all surface water accumulated on the site. 
6.  Devices for the transmission of, or projection of, voices or music shall be so directed or covered as to prevent said sounds or music from being audible beyond the boundaries of the site. 
(l)  Public stables and riding academies when located adjacent to existing bridle trails or when bridle trails are constructed and maintained on the same property with the stable or riding academy. 
(m)  Cleaning establishments when in compliance with fire regulations and all other city ordinances related thereto. 
(n)  Any other use similar in character to the above uses, when it is not obnoxious or offensive to the locality by reason of the emission of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, waste, vibration or noise. 
(o)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. A storage garage to be used exclusively for the storage of commercial and/or passenger vehicles used by a business or other permitted activity in C-2 Districts. 
_____ 
(p)  Auto wash uses as regulated in this section. Auto washes or motor vehicle laundries shall be divided into three (3) classifications: 
1.  Coin-operated self-service. A coin-operated self-service auto wash is defined as an auto wash where a person washes the auto himself after depositing a coin in a machine. A coin-operated self-service auto wash shall be allowed only in C-2, C- 3, M-1 and M-2 zones. 
2.  Automatic drive-through. An automatic drive-through auto wash is defined as an auto wash where the person drives the auto through the system and machines wash the auto. An automatic drive-through auto wash shall be allowed only in C-2, C- 3, M-1 and M-2 zones. 
3.  Automatic conveyor. An automatic conveyor is defined as an auto wash where the auto is attached to a conveyor to move the auto through the line as it is washed by machines and employees. An automatic conveyor auto wash shall be allowed only in C-3, M-1 and M-2 zones. 
A.  Site Design Requirements: 
1.  Lot Area: 
a.  A coin-operated self-service auto wash shall have a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet with a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage along one (1) major road. 
b.  An automatic drive-through auto wash shall have a minimum lot area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet with a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet of frontage along the major road. 
c.  An automatic conveyor auto wash shall have a minimum lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage along the major road. 
2.  Front Yard Setback. All auto washes shall have a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet front yard setback measuring from the proposed right-of-way line established by the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan to the front wall of the building. All other setback requirements provided in this Ordinance for the zoning district where a particular auto wash is located shall apply. 
3.  Protective Wall. All auto washes shall have a six-foot high wall, constructed in compliance with the requirements set forth in section 2.26 for decorative masonry walls, when adjacent to an existing residence, a residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing residence or residential district. 
4.  Parking shall be provided to accommodate required stack spaces, dry-off spaces and employee parking defined as follows: 
Stack space. A stack space is defined as an area on site where the auto can wait before entering the auto wash. Each stack space shall consist of at least two hundred (200) square feet, with a length of twenty (20) feet and a width of ten (10) feet. 
Dry-off space. A dry-off space is defined as an area on site where the automobile can be parked after leaving the wash area so that the auto can be dried off. Each dry-off space shall consist of at least two hundred (200) square feet, with a length of twenty (20) feet and a width of ten (10) feet. 
Employee parking space. An employee parking space is an area where an employee may park his/her auto. Each employee parking space shall consist of two hundred (200) square feet, with a length of twenty (20) feet and a width of ten (10) feet. 
a.  A coin-operated self-service auto wash shall have a minimum of four (4) stack spaces per bay not including the wash bay spaces; two (2) dry-off spaces per bay in addition to the wash bay space; and one (1) parking space per employee. 
b.  An automatic drive-through auto wash shall have a minimum of ten (10) stack spaces per bay or one-half (½) of the maximum total output per hour, whichever is greater; the minimum dry-off spaces equal to the number of spaces required for stack spaces; and one (1) employee parking space for every employee during one (1) shift, when the maximum employees are employed. 
c.  An automatic conveyor auto wash shall have a minimum of twenty (20) stack spaces per bay or one half (½) of the maximum total output of vehicles per hour; the minimum dry-off spaces equal to the number required for stack spaces; and one (1) employee parking space for every employee employed during one (1) shift when the maximum employees are employed. The above dry-off space requirements for an automatic drive-through and automatic conveyor auto wash may be reduced by the following formula: 
1.  Providing one (1) mechanical drying device per bay reduces the dry-off space requirements by one-half (½) of the required amount. 
2.  Providing two (2) mechanical drying devices per bay reduces the dry-off space requirements by one-fourth (¼) of the required amount. 
3.  Providing three (3) mechanical drying devices per bay reduces the dry-off space requirements by one-eighth (?) of the required amount. 
4.  Providing two (2) employees charged with the duty of drying automobiles may be substituted for one (1) drying device mentioned above. 
5.  A minimum of two (2) spaces per bay shall be required for dry-off. 
5.  Lanes. 
a.  Stack space lanes shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width with pavement markings painted between lanes. The center line of the lane closest to the auto wash building must be set back a distance perpendicular to the building for the following turns in degrees from the lane to the bay entrance: 
0* = 0* 
From 0*- 45* = 15' 
From and including 45* - 90* = 20' 
From and including 90* - 120* = 25' 
From and including 120* - 360* = 30' 
b.  One (1) escape lane shall be provided to permit circulation through the site without going through the washing process. 
c.  Access shall be provided to the escape lane and the dry-off area from the building exits for each auto wash. 
Public Road 
 
6.  Lighting . All parking and building mounted lighting installed shall be full cut-off fixtures. All lighting on site shall be shielded and not encroach upon abutting uses and properties. All glare shall be eliminated from all light fixtures. Upward directed lighting is prohibited. Light fixtures shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. The site plan shall include full lighting details for the entire site. All other premises lighting proposed shall conform to Edison's Site Lighting Regulations. 
7.  Drainage. Catch basins shall be provided at all exits as approved by the engineering division. 
8.  Building Operations. All operations shall be conducted within the buildings except for vacuuming and the dispensing of gasoline. 
9.  Site Plan Review. 
a.  All site plans for an auto wash use shall be reviewed and recommendations made to the Planning Commission by the Traffic Division of the Police Department, the Engineering Division and the Public Services Department to ensure the site design will not result in vehicles backing up into the public right-of-way. 
b.  No building permit for an auto wash shall be issued until the Planning Commission has approved a detailed site plan for the auto wash property. 
_____ 
(q)  Outdoor retail sales pursuant to Section 4.45 of this ordinance. 
(r)  Pawnshops shall be permitted if the following locational criteria are complied with: 
1.  The site for a pawnshop shall be located more than one thousand (1000) feet from the nearest lot line of any of following zoning districts: R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R- 2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4 or R-5 and any mixed residential zone such as a Planned Unit Development or the Downtown Center; and 
2.  To be consistent with the objectives and stated purpose of the Downtown Development Authority Ordinance, Section 2-108 et seq., and the Tax Increment Financing Authority mission statement, pawnbroker businesses as defined in Chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances shall be prohibited from locating within the Downtown District boundaries as described in Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances and from the Van Dyke TIFA Authority District as described in Exhibit A of the Resolution Establishing Tax Increment Finance Authority adopted September 23, 1986. 
3.  The site must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest lot line of any of the following land uses within the City of Warren: 
i.  Any public or private preschool, elementary school, middle school, junior high school, or high school; 
ii.  Any public or private child day care facility licensed by the State of Michigan; 
iii.  Any public library; 
iv.  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship, provided that buildings containing food banks, homeless shelters, emergency shelters, and similar uses shall not be considered a "church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship" notwithstanding the fact that worship services may also occur on the property; 
v.  Any public park or public recreational area under the control, operation, or management of the department of parks and recreation of the city or any other federal, state, or local municipality, which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including recreation centers, parks, playgrounds, nature trails, swimming pools, athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, or wilderness areas. 
4.  The pawnbroker business must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest structure used for a pawnshop or other secondhand goods business. 
5.  Measurement. For Section 14.01(r)(1) and 14.01(r)(3) measurement shall be made in a straight line from the nearest point on the lot line of the premises containing the principal structure used for the pawnbroker business to the nearest point specified in Section 14.01(r)(1) and 14.01(r)(3). For Section 14.01(r)(4), measurement shall be made in a straight line between the nearest points of the structures used for pawnbroker businesses. Presence of intervening structures or objects shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
6.  Nonconforming uses. Any pawnbroker business lawfully operating on the date this section takes effect that is in violation of 14.01(r), "locational criteria", shall be deemed a nonconforming use. 
a.  The nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue as provided in Section 4.17 of this ordinance. 
(s)  Sexually oriented business as regulated in this subsection. 
1.  Sexually oriented business includes an adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theatre, semi-nude model studio, sexual device shop, or sexual encounter center as defined in Chapter 6 of the Warren Code of Ordinances. 
2.  To be consistent with the objectives and stated purpose of the Downtown Development Authority Ordinance, Section 2-108 et seq., and the Tax Increment Financing Authority mission statement, sexually oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances shall be prohibited from locating within the Downtown District boundaries as described in Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances and from the Van Dyke TIFA Authority District as described in Exhibit A of the Resolution Establishing Tax Increment Finance Authority adopted September 23, 1986. 
3.  Location criteria for sexually oriented businesses. Any sexually oriented business shall be permitted if all of the following location criteria are met: 
a.  The site for the sexually oriented business must be located more than seven hundred fifty (750) feet from the nearest lot line of any of the following zoning districts within the City of Warren: R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4, R-5, any mixed residential zone such as Planned Unit Development or the Downtown District. 
b.  The site for the sexually oriented business must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest lot line of any of the following land uses within the City of Warren: 
i.  Any public or private preschool, elementary school, middle school, junior high school, or high school; 
ii.  Any public or private child day care facility licensed by the State of Michigan; 
iii.  Any public library; 
iv.  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship, provided that buildings containing food banks, homeless shelters, emergency shelters, and similar uses shall not be considered a "church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship" notwithstanding the fact that worship services may also occur on the property; 
v.  Any public park or public recreational area under the control, operation, or management of the department of parks and recreations of the city or any other federal, state, or local municipality, which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including recreation centers, parks, playgrounds, nature trails, swimming pools, athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, or wilderness areas. 
c.  The sexually oriented business structure must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest structure used for a sexually oriented business. 
d.  Measurement: For subsections "a" and "b," measurement shall be made in a straight line from the nearest point on the lot line of the premises containing the principal structure used for the sexually oriented business to the nearest point specified in subsection "a" or "b." For subsection "c," measurement shall be made in a straight line between the nearest points of the structures used for sexually oriented businesses. Presence of intervening structures or objects shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
4.  Nonconforming uses. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date this section takes effect that is in violation of section 3, "locational criteria", shall be deemed a nonconforming use. 
a.  The nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue as provided in Section 4.17 of this ordinance. 
b.  If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming. 
c.  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a use listed in subsection 14.01(s)(3)(a) or 14.01(s)(3)(b) of this chapter within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. 
(t)  Book or stationery store. 
(u)  Outdoor Recreational Center provided the outdoor recreation center shall not be open for business or provide activities, services or recreation to members, patrons or other invitees between the hours of 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. 
(v)  Arena Recreational Center. 
(Ord. No. 30-182, § 1, 8-31-65; Ord. No. 30-283, § 2, 6-25-68; Ord. No. 30-284, § 1, 6-25-68; Ord. No. 30-285, § 1, 7-2-68; Ord. No. 30-462, § 3, 7-9-74; Ord. No. 30-488, § 1, 7-22-75; Ord. No. 30-657, § 5, 4-12-83; Ord. No. 30-659, §§ 4, 5, 7-24-84; Ord. No. 30-726, §§ 7, 8, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 30-805, § 3, 12-26-91; Ord. No. 30-835, § 5, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 30-859, § 4, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 30-879, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 30-900, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 30-943, § 2, 2-24-04; Ord. No. 30-961, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 30-964, § 1, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 30-1002, § 3, 10-22-13; Ord. No. 30-1026, § 1, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 30-1027, § 3, 5-9-2017)  
Section 14.02 - Approval of special land use permit. 
Under such conditions as the City Council, after recommendation of the planning commission, finds the use meets the standards for approval set forth in Section 22.14 of the Ordinance and subject to the conditions that may be imposed, the following uses may be permitted: 
A.  Recreational businesses, indoor or outdoor, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Health Clubs, Fitness Centers, Martial arts or Yoga Studios that provide either 1) on-site indoor or outdoor spectator, organized sport matches or contests, other than group sports intended as exercise only, and which do not have sufficient on-site parking space to accommodate the spectators, participants or other invitees; 2) indoor or outdoor activities, services, or recreation to patrons, members, or other invitees between the hours of 11 p.m. and 5 a.m., 
(2)  Turkish baths, bath houses, saunas, or businesses providing whirlpool baths, or mineral baths as a primary use, 
(3)  Outdoor Recreational Centers, 
(4)  Indoor Recreational Centers that are open for business or offer activities, services, or recreation to members, patrons or invitees between the hours of 11 p.m. and 5 a.m., 
(5)  Arena Recreational Centers, 
(6)  Amusement machine center as defined in Section 6-226 of the Code of Ordinances, provided that an amusement machine center may not be located closer than 1500 feet from any public or private school, 
(7)  Dancing halls, recreation halls, and night clubs, 
B.  Hospitals or sanatoriums primarily established for mental, alcoholism, or drug addict cases; community mental health centers, clinics for treatment of alcoholism, drugs or other substance abuse, rehabilitation centers for treatment, involving any of the above and/or former convicts, emotionally disturbed or mentally deficient persons, and children or adolescents who have been adjudged delinquent. The above uses shall be permitted only as part of a shopping center as defined in Section 2.67 of this ordinance. Said shopping center shall contain a minimum of five (5) acres of land area and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of total floor area. 
C.  Antennas and antenna towers. Any request for special land use approval for an antenna or antenna tower in a C-1, C-2, C-3 or SS district must comply with all the standards set forth in section 4.64 for site plan approval and for special land use approval set forth in section 22.14. 
D.  Motels, hotels, and motor courts. In addition to the standards for approval of a special land use approval, set forth in section 22.14, the following minimum requirements shall be met: 
1.  Each such use shall be located on a major thoroughfare as identified by the City of Warren Master Thoroughfare Plan. This requirement may not apply in the city center district at the discretion of the city council. 
2.  Each such use shall be located a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet from any one-family residential district, except an R-1-P one-family parking district. 
3.  Each such use shall have a minimum total site area of two (2) acres. 
4.  Each such use shall have a minimum lot area of seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet for the first unit and one thousand (1,000) square feet for each additional unit. 
5.  Each such use shall have a front, two (2) sides and one (1) rear yard, each yard having a minimum width equal to the height of the building. Furthermore, each yard bordering along any street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
6.  Each unit shall have at least one (1) room with a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of floor area and a separate bathroom with a minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area. 
7.  These minimum requirements may be varied at the discretion of the city council if any such use is part of larger development, which incorporates other uses in a coordinated, comprehensive site plan. 
E.  Pawnbrokers. 
F.  Automotive sales businesses, both indoor and outdoor, and which shall include: 
(a)  Used car lots; 
(b)  New car dealerships; and 
(c)  Retail or service establishments that include on their premises the storage, sale or display of new or used cars for sale. 
(Ord. No. 30-462, § 4, 7-9-74; Ord. No. 30-538, § 5, 6-14-77; Ord. No. 30-545, § 1, 9-27-77; Ord. No. 30-559, § 1, 5-9-78; Ord. No. 30-566, § 1, 8-22-78; Ord. No. 30-573, § 1, 12-27-78; Ord. No. 30-657, §§ 6, 7, 4-12-83; Ord. No. 30-726, §§ 9, 10, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 30-835, § 6, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 30-857, § 3, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 30-879, § 3, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 30-881, § 3, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 30-900, § 3, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 30-1001, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 30-1005, § 3, 7-9-14; Ord. No. 30-1026, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 30-1027, § 4, 5-9-2017)  
Section 14.03 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in C-2 Districts, shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories in height, except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 14.04 - Greenbelt. 
All non-residential uses, when adjacent to an existing residence or residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing residence or residential district, shall provide and maintain a twenty (20) foot greenbelt, or decorative wall, in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance.  
Section 14.05 - Lot area. 
Every lot in C-2 Districts, used as a business, shall have an area sufficient in size to supply an adequate and safe water supply and a safe and adequate sewage disposal system as established by standards required by the State or County Health Departments' rules and regulations. In no case shall a business lot be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, except lots of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 14.06 - Front yard for commercial buildings. 
A front yard set-back of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided for commercial buildings, measuring from the right-of-way line proposed by the Master Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Warren.  
Section 14.07 - Side yards on interior lot lines. 
Side yards are not required along an interior side lot line where all walls of buildings abutting upon such interior side lot line are wholly without windows. 
If windows or opening are provided, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided.  
Section 14.08 - Side yards on the street side of corner lots. 
The width of a side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet when rear yards abut rear yards. However, in the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent residential lot, the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  
Section 14.09 - Rear yards. 
In C-2 Districts, a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be required; where alleys exist, the measurement of the rear yard may include one-half (½) the width of the alley.  
Section 14.10 - Corner clearance for business use. 
In C-2 Districts no business building or structure shall be erected between the property lines of intersecting streets or highways, and a line joining points on such lines fifteen (15) feet distant from their point of intersection, or in the case of a rounded corner the point of intersection of their tangents. 
All lots of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance having widths of forty (40) feet or less, or depths of one hundred (100) feet or less shall set back six (6) feet, as measured in this section.  
Section 14.11 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
ARTICLE XV. - C-3 WHOLESALE AND INTENSIVE BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
 
Section 15.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all C-3 Districts no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(a)  All uses permitted in a C-2 District. 
(b)  Any wholesale business including warehouse and storage buildings, lumber yards, building material yards, dealing in unused-material, laundry and dry cleaning establishments, but not including junk yards or used auto parts or auto wrecking establishments or business handling wastes, coal yards, junk, the incubation, raising or storing of poultry, the slaughtering of animals, poultry and those businesses which are offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vapor, noise or vibration. 
(c)  Buildings and uses customarily accessory to any of the above permitted uses, but which will not be detrimental either by reason of dust, odor, noise, smoke or vibration to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  Outdoor or Drive—In Theaters on approval of the Board of Appeals after recommendation by Planning Commission, provided they comply with the following requirements: 
Picture Screens —Screens shall not be permitted to face the highway and shall be so located as to be out of view of any thoroughfare, identified as such in the Master Thoroughfare Plan of Warren. 
Design of Entrances and Exits: 
1.  Not more than one entrance should exist for each access road. 
2.  On two lane roads where left turns are permitted, the entrance should not exceed forty (40) feet in width. 
3.  On three or more lane highways where left turns are prohibited, the entrance lane should not exceed fourteen (14) feet in width. 
4.  On three or more lane highways where left turns are permitted, the entrance should not be over nineteen (19) feet wide. 
5.  Entry turn speeds of twenty (20) miles per hour or a thirty (30) foot corner radius should be provided for right turn movements. 
6.  Entry turn speeds of ten (10) miles per hour or a ten (10) foot corner radius should be provided for left turn movements. 
7.  Separated entries should be provided for right and left turns where arrival volume is nearly equally divided by direction. 
8.  Not more than one (1) exit should exist for each access highway. 
9.  Where left turns are prohibited, the exit should not be more than fourteen (14) feet wide. 
10.  Where left turns are permitted, the exit should not be more than nineteen (19) feet wide with a small island in the throat. 
11.  Acceleration and deceleration lanes should be used if possible. 
12.  Cuts should not be made in the medial island on multi-lane highways to permit left turn movements. 
13.  Where breaks in the island are provided, they should include provision for special left turn deceleration and acceleration lanes. 
Vehicle Storage —Problems of storage between the ticket gates and the highways are primarily a function of the number of ticket gates. Assuming that the theater operates at capacity, provision should be made for: 
1 ticket gate: 	300 car capacity theaters 
2 ticket gates: 	600 car capacity theaters 
3 ticket gates: 	800 car capacity theaters 
4 ticket gates: 	1000 car capacity theaters 
 
Traffic Control: 
1.  Left turns at entrances or exits should be prohibited on the highway where possible. 
2.  Theater signs should be placed within the building setback area from the highway right-of-way, as existing or proposed. 
3.  "No Parking" signs should be used to prevent stopping or standing of vehicles on the shoulders or pavement. 
Minimum Area Requirement; Relationship to Surrounding Area: 
1.  The lot or tract of land on which a drive-in theater is to be located should be at least four hundred (400) feet wide and six hundred (600) feet deep or two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet in area. 
2.  The lot or tract on which a drive-in theater is located must be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any residential district. 
(e)  Used Car Lots, operating as second hand motor vehicle dealers, provided they comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for a used car lot shall be 25,000 square feet. 
2.  Location criteria. The site must be located more than 700 feet from the property line of any other site with an existing used car lot or the site of a proposed used car lot subject to review for approval. The site must be located more than 200 feet from the property line of a site being used for the following purposes: automobile repair shop, automotive service business, tire service business, new car dealership or new automotive retail business, auto wash or vehicle laundry, or automobile storage. In addition, the site must be located more than 200 feet from the nearest lot line of property used as or zoned as: R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-P, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, a Planned Unit Development, and the Downtown Center. 
3.  Permanent structure. A permanent structure containing not less than two hundred (200) square feet of interior floor space to be used as business or sales office. 
4.  Vehicle preparation. Cleaning and refurbishing of vehicles shall be permitted only within an enclosed permanent building. 
5.  Noise limitations. Any use of horns, amplifiers or any other devices for the outdoor transmission, amplification or broadcasting of voices or music shall be prohibited. All other ordinances restricting noise and loud music shall apply. 
6.  Festoon signs. Festoon signs are prohibited. 
7.  Flashing lights are prohibited. 
8.  Temporary signs shall be prohibited from the site, but may be allowed with an approved permit twice annually, unless prohibited in this section. 
9.  Temporary feather or windblown signs. Outdoor temporary feather signs or windblown signs or streamers are prohibited from the outdoor areas of the property, including without limitation, from display, attachment or affixture upon parked or display outdoor vehicles, outdoor structures, buildings pedestals or any other outdoor item upon which they may be affixed. National flags affixed upon a permanent post are excluded. 
10.  Human signs. Live dancing or jumping signs, or human-carried signs or human-carried boards are prohibited. 
11.  Used car display area. The display area shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  There shall be provided a minimum of eight (8) feet by seventeen (17) feet of storage/display space for each used car to be displayed. 
b.  Access to each individual used car shall be provided. Used cars shall not be positioned in a stacked or packed formation. 
c.  There shall be no storage or display of used cars in the public right-of-way. 
d.  Used cars shall be prohibited from parking within any maneuvering lane or driveway. 
e.  Outdoor storage of inoperable, wrecked, or stripped vehicles shall be prohibited from the site. 
f.  The setback areas along street frontages shall not be used for the parking or for the storage/display of used cars. 
12.  Off-street parking required. Separate off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with the regulations contained in section 4.32 and the following provision: 
The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided shall be calculated based on the formula of five (5) spaces plus one (1) space per each fifteen (15) used car storage/display spaces. 
13.  Site design requirements. The site plan shall comply with the following site design requirements: 
a.  The site shall be hard-surfaced, graded and drained in accordance with the regulations of section 4.32 (k). Concrete curbing shall be provided along the perimeter of the parking area. 
b.  Maneuvering lanes for the storage/display area shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. 
c.  Two driveways, one for ingress and one for egress, or one driveway adequate to permit simultaneous ingress and egress shall be provided. The driveway shall be a minimum of twenty-six (26) feet in width as measured at the property line. The center of the driveway shall be located a minimum of seventy (70) feet from the intersection of any two roadway right-of-way lines. 
d.  The setback areas along street frontages shall be landscaped. 
e.  Overhead service doors shall not face or open toward residentially zoned property. 
f.  An eight (8) foot wide landscaped greenbelt complying with section 2.26 of this Ordinance or a six (6) foot high brick embossed poured concrete wall shall be provided along any residentially zoned property. A decorative or ornamental fence, in a split rail, picket, basket weave or similar style, constructed of wood, metal or iron, but without sharp points protruding upward, shall be provided along the setback line of the front. Chain link fences are not allowed. 
g.  All lighting on the site shall be shielded. All glare shall be eliminated from all light fixtures and not encroach upon abutting properties. Lighting shall otherwise not direct illumination upon abutting properties, or emit illumination upon abutting properties in a manner that or of such magnitude that encroaches upon their peace. The light poles shall be no higher than twenty (20) feet. Upward directed lighting, searchlights, moving beams, and spotlights shall not be permitted. 
h.  Approval of a special land use permit from the City Council, after application to and recommendation of the Planning Commission, and under such conditions as the Council finds the use meets the standards for approval set forth in Section 22.14 of the Ordinance. A special land use permit is required for the expansion of an existing used car lot. 
i.  Compliance with the procedures and conditions set forth in section 22.14, and full compliance with any conditions established by the Planning Commission and/or City Council. 
(f)  Outdoor retail sales pursuant to Section 4.45 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-835, § 7, 2-22-84; Ord. No. 30-984, § 1, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 30-1001, § 1, 8-27-13)  
Section 15.02 - Building height. 
No building hereafter erected or altered in a C-3 District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories, except as provided in Article XIX of this Ordinance.  
Section 15.03 - Greenbelt. 
All non-residential uses, when adjacent to an existing residence or residential district or adjacent to an alley which abuts an existing residence or residential district, shall provide and maintain a twenty (20) foot greenbelt or decorative wall, in compliance with Section 2.26 of this Ordinance.  
Section 15.04 - Lot area. 
Every lot in C-3 Districts, used as a business shall have an area sufficient in size to supply an adequate and safe water supply and a safe and adequate sewage disposal system as established by standards required by the State or County Health Departments' rules and regulations. In no case shall a business lot be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, except lots of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.  
Section 15.05 - Front yard for commercial buildings. 
A front yard setback of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided for commercial buildings, measuring from the right-of-way line proposed by the Master Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Warren.  
Section 15.06 - Side yards on interior lot lines. 
Side yards are not required along an interior side lot line where all walls of buildings, abutting upon such interior side lot line are wholly without windows. If windows or openings are provided, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided.  
Section 15.07 - Side yards on the street side of corner lots. 
The width of a side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet when rear yards abut rear yards. However, in the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent residential lot, the side yard abutting upon a street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  
Section 15.08 - Rear yards. 
In C-3 Districts a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be required; where alleys exist, the measurement of the rear yard may include one-half (½) the width of the alley.  
Section 15.09 - Corner clearance for business use. 
In C-3 Districts no business building or structure shall be erected between the property lines of intersecting streets or highways and a line joining points on such lines fifteen (15) feet distant from their point of intersection, or in the case of a rounded corner the point of intersection of their tangents. 
In the case of lots of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance having widths of forty (40) feet or less and depths of one hundred (100) feet or less, a building or structure may be erected between the property lines of intersecting streets or highways, and a line joining points on such line six (6) feet distant from their point of intersection, or in the case of a rounded corner, the point of intersection of their tangents.  
Section 15.10 - Off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinbefore specified in Section 4.32 of this Ordinance.  
ARTICLE XVI. - P PARKING DISTRICTS 
 
Section 16.01 - Uses permitted. 
In all P Districts, no land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted, or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided for in this Article, for any use other than automobile parking.  
Section 16.02 - Limitation of the use. 
(a)  Parking areas shall be used for parking of private passenger vehicles only. 
(b)  Parking may be with or without charge. All parking lots and garages which operate with charge, shall comply with the City of Warren Ordinance No. 49 [Code of Ordinances, Chapter 37, Article IV]. 
(c)  No business involving the sale of, repair, or services to vehicles permitted thereon, provided, however, that where such premises adjoin premises zoned and used for an automobile dealership they may be used in conjunction therewith for the parking of passenger vehicles held in inventory. 
(d)  No buildings other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon premises, and there shall be not more than two (2) such buildings in the area and each such building shall not be more than fifty (50) square feet in area nor shall each exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(e)  No sign shall be erected upon such parking areas, except not more than one (1) sign at each entrance to indicate the operator, the purpose for which it is operated and/or the parking rates. All signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area, shall not extend more than ten (10) feet in height above nearest curb elevation and shall be located entirely upon the premises, with no part of such sign extending beyond the property line. 
(Ord. No. 30-272, § 1, 2-27-68)  
Section 16.03 - Location. 
All P Districts shall be contiguous to a Business District and/or industrial District and in all cases lots which are used for parking, shall be the adjacent successive lots from the business or industrial block, or the adjacent successive lots from either end of a block where lots front on a street parallel to and at the rear of a business or industrial block; and before any lots may be used across the street, all lots in back of and next to the business or industrial block must first be utilized for parking purposes; provided, however, that there may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P District and such Business and/or industrial block.  
Section 16.04 - Ingress and egress. 
Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided in accordance with the plan which shall be submitted in duplicate to the Traffic Engineer for approval.  
Section 16.05 - Surfacing and drainage. 
All off-street parking area in P Districts shall be hard surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material (base may be stabilized gravel or equivalent), said lot shall be maintained in a usable dust-proof condition; and shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water.  
Section 16.06 - Protective barrier. 
(a)  When such parking area boundary adjoins property zoned for any residential use, an eight (8) foot wide greenbelt shall be provided and further, provided that a bumper rail of either wood, metal or concrete shall be established on the inside of the boundary planting as a barrier which shall not be more than twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
(b)  All street boundaries of such parking areas shall be provided with a fifteen (15) foot wide greenbelt which shall be used for ornamental purposes only, and nothing shall be placed thereon except trees, shrubs, plants, and grass; and provided such greenbelt material shall not exceed two (2) feet in height.  
Section 16.07 - Curb. 
Necessary curbs, or other protection against damage to adjoining properties, streets, sidewalks and greenbelts shall be provided and maintained. Further, if a wall is required in accordance with Section 2.26(c) of this ordinance, all parking spaces adjoining said wall shall be provided with continuous curbs constructed of concrete measuring six (6) inches in height and eight (8) inches in depth. The area from the property line to the vertical edge of the exposed curb shall be a minimum of five (5) feet and shall be filled and hardsurfaced to permit drainage toward the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 30-489, § 3, 7-22-75; Ord. No. 30-627, § 2, 11-12-80)  
Section 16.08 - Lighting. 
Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided and so arranged as to reflect light away from any residential use adjacent to the area. When any such property is emptied of vehicles and so closed that no vehicles may enter, then no lighting need be maintained.  
Section 16.09 - Approval. 
Plans for the development of any such parking area shall be approved by the Planning Commission and a Building Permit shall be obtained from the Building Department before construction is commenced. No such land shall be used for parking purposes until approved by the Building Inspector and a certificate of occupancy is issued.  
ARTICLE XVII. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Section 17.01 - Industrial classification. 
Industry shall be classified as M-1, M-2, M-3 and M-4.  
Section 17.02 - Industrial standards. 
All uses not herein expressly prohibited shall comply with the following table of standards. 
	M-1 	M-2 	M-3 	M-4 
(a) 
Front Yards 	8 ft. 	25 ft. 	150 ft. 	200 ft. 
	1. All building lines and front yards shall be established no closer to the street than the future street line as established by the Master Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Warren. 
	2. In an M-2 zone where a front yard has been established by the majority of the existing buildings in a block, all buildings hereinafter erected or altered shall conform to the building line thus established, provided no building in an M-2 zone shall be required to set back further than 50 feet. Provided, further, however, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, in M-2 zones, yards fronting on a major thoroughfare as defined by the Master Thoroughfare Plan for the City of Warren or front yards facing a residential district shall be fifty (50) feet. 
	3. In M-3 and M-4 zones, front yards may be utilized for parking or vehicles provided that the front fifty (50) feet of a lot or tract in an M-3 district and the front seventy-five (75) feet of a lot or tract in an M-4 district shall be landscaped and the balance shall be depressed at least two (2) feet so as to have all parked vehicles therein, completely out of sight or view of the roadway. 
(b) 
Side Yards, and rear 
yards. 	None 
Twenty-five (25) foot side yard on a side street where rear yard abuts side yard of a lot containing a residence or in a residential district. 	20' each 	60' each 	100' each 
(c) 
Greenbelt 	None, except when a side or rear yard abuts a zoning district other than industrial then eight (8) feet wide as per Section 2.26. 	Along all zoning district boundary lines which border on a more restrictive zoning district. Along all street property lines but may be omitted along the front yard when the front yard is landscaped. 
		8' wide as per [Section 2.26] 	20' wide as per Section 2.26 	20' wide as per Section 2.26 
(d) 
Height of buildings 
See Article XIX for 
Height Exceptions 	2 stories 
30 feet 	2 stories 
30 feet 	2 stories 
40 feet 	2 stories 
40 feet 
			(See Height Exceptions) 
(e) 
Dwelling 	No 	No 	No 	No 
(f) 
Commercial Business 	Yes 	Yes 	No 	No 
	Commercial Business as regulated in this Ordinance 	(Except body and fender shops, outdoor theaters, antenna towers and those uses incidental to the principal uses thereof) 
(g) 
Automatic Screw 
Machines 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
	When operated with noise silencers or by other sound absorbing devices and when located not less than 200 feet from any zoned residential district. 		
(h) 
Stamping machines, 
punch presses, press 
breaks and hydraulic 
presses used only for 
tryout purposes. 	All machines shall be placed on shock absorbing mountings and on a suitable reinforced concrete footing. No machine shall be loaded beyond the capacity as prescribed by the manufacturer. 
	Up to 10 tons for 18 gauge metal 
or less in thickness when located 
200 ft. from any zoned residential district. 	Up to 50 ton when 250 ft. from residential district. 
Up to 100 ton when 300 ft. from residential district. 
Up to 150 ton when 500 ft. from residential district. 
(i) 
Hot forgings steam or 
board hammers 	No 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
			When located 1,000 ft. from any zoned residential district and when operations are located within a masonry building, on a suitable reinforced concrete mat mounted on shock absorbers that reduce vibration to a reasonable minimum. 
(j) 
Noise decibels as 
measured at the street 
or property line which- 
ever causes the largest 
reading. 	75 	80 	85 	90 
	All mechanical noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness. Noise may equal but shall not exceed average street traffic noise during such periods that traffic noise exceed above decibel readings. 
(k) 
Smoke, as measured by 
the Ringlemann Chart 	No 2 	No. 2 	No. 2 	No. 2 
	For periods aggregating four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minutes. 
		No. 3 	No. 3 	No. 3 
	For periods aggregating three (3) minutes in any fifteen (15) minutes when starting a new fire. 
(l) 
Smoke, dust, dirt, and fly ash 	Shall not exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of flue gas at stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and not to exceed fifty (50) percent excess air and shall in no manner be unclean, destructive, unhealthful, hazardous nor shall visibility be impaired by the emission of a haze which unduly impedes vision without apparent opaqueness equivalent to No. 1 of the Ringlemann Chart. 
(m) 
Odors 	The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be permitted which are contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(n) 
Gases 	No gas shall be emitted which is deleterious to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(o) 
Glare and heat 	Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of the property. 
(p) 
Fire and safety hazards (the storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gases and explosives shall comply with State rules and regulations as established by Public Act No. 207, P.A. 1941 [MCL 29.1 et seq.], as amended, and in addition the following regulations shall apply): Bulk storage of flammable liquids, liquid petroleum gases and explosives allowed above ground if conditions meet those established by Chapter 13 of the Warren Codified Ordinances - Fire Prevention and Protection and Michigan flammable Liquids Regulations as amended. 	No 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
			All tanks shall be located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from property lines. 
Bulk storage of flammable below ground 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
	All tanks shall be located not closer to the property line than the greatest depth to the bottom of the buried tank. 
Rags, waste, similar materials 	No 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
			The storage of rags, wastes, paper or similar materials shall be in an enclosed masonry building of four (4) hour construction, no part of which may be located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any property line. 
(q) 
Sewage Waste 	1. No wastes shall be discharged in the public sewer system which is dangerous to the public health and safety. 
	2. Acidity or alkalinity shall be neutralized to a pH of 7.0 as a daily average on a volumetric basis, with a temporary variation of [sic]. 
	3. Wastes shall contain no Cyanides and no Halogens and shall not contain more than 10 ppm of the following gases: Hydrogen Sulphide, Sulphur Dioxide and Nitrous Oxide. 
	4. Wastes shall not contain any insoluble substances in excess of 10,000 ppm or exceed a daily average of 500 ppm or fail to pass a No. 8 Standard Sieve, or, have any dimensions greater than ½ inch. 
	5. Wastes shall not have chlorine demand greater than 15 ppm. 
	6. Wastes shall not contain phenols in excess of .005 ppm. 
	7. Wastes shall not contain any grease or oil or any oily substance in excess of 50 ppm or exceed a daily average of 25 ppm. 
(r) 
Number of Production work hours including Sunday and holidays. 	From 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. if nearest residence is two hundred (200) feet or more from industrial plant. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 
	7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. if nearest residence is less than two hundred (200) feet from industrial plant. 			
(s) 
Open storage other than junk 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
		All open storage shall be located in a designated area approved by the Planning Commission as a part of site plan approval. The area shall be enclosed on three (3) sides by chain link fencing with metal/plastic slats used for screening as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. In M-3 and M-4 zones the Planning Commission shall determine whether screening of the outside storage is necessary based on the relationship of the storage to properties zoned residential as identified in Section 3.01(1—7) of the Zoning Ordinance. 
		The designated area shall always be hardsurfaced and screened from the public street and any residentially zoned areas. The designated areas shall not be located in any area required for parking space and is necessary to meet the minimum requirements of Section 4.32 of this ordinance. Further, the designated area may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the primary structure on the site except in M-3 and M-4 zones where the amount of outside storage area is not limited based on the size of the primary structure. In M-1 and M-2 zones the designated area shall not be located any closer than seventy-five (75) feet to the front property line unless the size of the lot is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth in which case the Planning Commission may allow the designated area to be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line. In M-3 and M-4 zones outside storage may not be closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any street right-of-way line. 
		Lumber, including wood pallets or other combustible material, shall not be stored less than twenty (20) feet from any interior lot line. An open driveway shall be provided that has a graded roadway, is hardsurfaced and maintained from the street to the storage area in order to permit clear access for fire trucks at any time to the open storage areas. 
(t) 
Open storage for junk, 
auto wrecking yards and other waste products. 	No 	No 	No 	Yes 
			When enclosed within a tight unpierced fence not less than six (6) feet in height, when not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any street or right-of-way line, when not less than twenty (20) feet from any interior lot line, when surrounded with a greenbelt planting strip not less than twenty (20) feet in width and not less than eight (8) feet in height to completely screen yard from outside view, and when complying with Section 4.13. 
(u) 
Loading space as required in Section 4.31. 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
(v) 
Off-street parking for any permitted use as required and regulated by Section 4.32. 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
	Such parking area shall be paved within a period of two (2) years from date of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the principal building for which said permit was issued. 
(w) 
Source of Power 	Power for any manufacturing or heating process or activity shall be derived only from electrical energy, smokeless fuels, such as gas or oil, smokeless solid fuels containing less than twenty (20) percent of volatile content on a dry basis, and bituminous coal fired by mechanical equipment. 
(x) 
Vibration 	No operation shall cause a ground displacement exceeding .003 of one (1) inch as measured at the boundary line property. 
(y) 
Radioactive Materials 	Radioactive materials shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. 
(z) 
Sexually oriented businesses 	Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in and regulated by Chapter 6 of the Warren Code of Ordinances, are allowed in all Industrial Districts. Sexually oriented businesses may use any industrial lot, without regard to the lot area and lot width provisions in Section 17.04. Within 45 days of receiving an application to split a lot, subdivide a parcel, or combine lots or parcels, in order to facilitate the siting of a sexually oriented business, the Planning Director shall grant the application, provided that the application:(1) Is accompanied by the required application fee; and(2) Contains maps of the proposed resulting parcel(s) showing that the proposed location of the sexually oriented business satisfies the location criteria of Section 14.01(s)(3). 
(aa) Medical Marihuana facility as defined by Section 2.93 of this Zoning Ordinance 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	No 
	A medical marihuana facility is exclusively permitted in M-1, M-2 and M-3 zones, if the facility, the owner, and any occupants meet all of the following requirements: 
	1. Compliance with all applicable laws, including but not limited to: 
	 (a) The requirements stated in Section 4 of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421, et seq., as amended, including the requirement that the marihuana be contained in an enclosed, locked facility or other closed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the registered primary caregiver or his or her qualifying patient, and such facility must be separately used and maintained by each occupying caregiver or patient; and 
	 (b) All local ordinances and regulations, including the Fire Protection Code and Article VI of Chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances. 
	2. With the exception of growing marihuana plants outdoors as permitted by MCL 333.26423(d), all activity related to the marihuana is conducted inside the facility. 
	3. No open storage is permitted on the property. 
	4. The facility is registered with the division of building inspection, and as part of its certificate of compliance, is inspected by zoning, electrical, building, mechanical, and plumbing inspectors, and the fire and police departments for compliance with applicable laws, local ordinances and codes, including this ordinance. The facility must pass annual safety inspections for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
	5. The facility maintains: 
	 (a) Copies of a MDCH issued registry identification card for: 
	  (i) Each registered primary caregiver or registered qualifying patient storing, growing, transferring, cultivating, or processing marihuana at the facility; and 
	  (ii) Each registered qualifying patient legally registered to a registered primary caregiver who is storing, cultivating, growing, processing, or transferring marihuana at the facility. 
	 (b) A daily log of the amount and location of the marihuana on the premises for each registered primary caregiver and each patient; 
	 (c) A daily log of all transfers; and 
	 (d) Any other written records necessary to show compliance with applicable state and local laws. 
	6. The facility possesses and regularly uses an effective filtration system which: 
	 (a) Effectively contains the odors associated with storing, transferring, cultivating, growth, or processing marihuana, within the facility; and 
	 (b) Is approved by the building division. 
	7. No one processes or transfers marihuana on the property between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
	8. The facility is not occupied or used by more than a combination of seven (7) registered primary caregivers or qualifying patients for the growth, cultivation, processing or manufacturing of medical marihuana, and no more than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of the facility shall be occupied by the total combined aggregate of such caregivers and patients. 
	9. No one under the age of eighteen (18) is permitted on the premises, except for persons under the age of eighteen (18) who are registered qualifying patients and are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
	10. The facility is not located in the Downtown District, "DDA District" as described in the Code of Ordinances Chapter 2.5, Section 2-112, or the Van Dyke TIFA Authority District as described in Exhibit A of the Resolution Establishing Tax Increment Finance Authority adopted September 23, 1986. 
	11. The facility is located at least five hundred (500) feet from the nearest lot line of any of the following: 
	 (a) Residential zoning districts, R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, R-4, R-5 and any mixed residential zones including but not limited to a Planned Unit Development and the Downtown Center. 
	 (b) School; 
	 (c) Child care center or day care center; 
	 (d) Recreational facility; 
	 (e) Public library; 
	 (f) Public park. 
	12. Measurement: For purposes of subsection (11), measurements shall be made in accordance with the standard method set forth in section 4.43 of the zoning ordinance. 
	13. The medical marihuana uses permitted on the property are the growth, storage, cultivation, processing, or transfer of medical marihuana in accordance with this ordinance. No other sales, service, commodities, uses, or products relating to medical marihuana are permitted on the premises. The facility may not be used as a medical marihuana dispensary. 
	14. The owner of the facility must have: 
	 (a) A license under Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances; and 
	 (b) Certificate of compliance. 
	15. Each owner-occupant, or tenant in the facility must have all of the following: 
	 (a) A valid State of Michigan registry caregiver identification card or a State of Michigan registry patient identification card authorizing the patient to grow marihuana plants; 
	 (b) A license under Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances; and 
	 (c) A Certificate of compliance. 
	16. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 18, Certificate of Compliance application must include: 
  A waste disposal plan detailing plans for chemical disposal and plant waste and water disposal, subject to review and approval by the city engineer, and in compliance with regulations of the MDEQ and codes and ordinances of the City of Warren including codes and ordinances pertaining to the discharge of water and by-products into the city sewer system; 
	17. A floor plan identifying the number of plants, chemical storage space, and other relevant aspects of the layout, subject to review and approval by the building inspection division. To the extent permitted by law, floor plans will be kept confidential; 
	18. A heating system that is approved by the building division. 
	19. The area where a registered primary caregiver stores, cultivates, processes, or transfers marihuana is not used by any other registered primary caregivers for any purpose. 
	20. There is no storage of toxic, flammable, or hazardous materials on the premises. 
	21. There is no discharge of toxic, flammable, or hazardous materials into city sewer system. 
	22. No one uses or consumes marihuana on the property. 
	23. The marihuana is not visible to the public, and the plant materials are disposed of in secured areas and containers not accessible by the public. 
	24. The owner of the property must conspicuously post all required valid city-issued licenses, and any State of Michigan permit or certification inside the premises. 
	25. Any violation of these provisions will result in revocation of the license and other legal remedies and penalties. 
	26. If the growth, cultivation, or processing of marihuana leads to an event causing damage or injury to property or persons, including but not limited to an explosion, fire, or release of harmful substances, or violation of a state or local law, code or regulation, the owner and tenants are each responsible for reimbursing any costs associated with the emergency response, property repair, remediation and medical expenses caused by the event, and/ or prosecution. 
 
(Ord. No. 30-156, § 1, 12-22-64; Ord. No. 30-457, § 1, 2-12-74; Ord. No. 30-556, § 1, 3-28-78; Ord. No. 30-835, § 8, 2-22-84; Ord. No. 30-881, § 4, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 30-1002, § 4, 10-22-13; Ord. No. 30-1004, § 1, 6-11-14; Ord. No. 30-1020, § 5, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 30-1023, § 1, 9-13-16)  
Section 17.03 - Prohibited uses. 
In all industrial districts no building shall be erected or altered and no land shall be used for the carrying on of manufacturing activities of the character of or similar to slaughter houses, rendering plants, tanneries, stock yards, glue factories, soap factories, oil refineries or other similar factories, provided, however, the Board of Appeals may permit a prohibited use or a use of like character in an M-4 District on the following conditions: 
(a)  The use shall be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from every residential district. 
(b)  The use shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any non-residential district, except slaughtering, rendering and penning uses. 
(c)  All slaughtering, rendering and penning (only such animals are to be slaughtered on premises) shall be located in an M-4 Zoning District of at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any other zoned district. 
(d)  Dry rendering process only shall be used. 
(e)  The waste and by-products obtained from the slaughtering operations, conducted on the premises may be transported to some other location to be rendered; however, no rendering shall be permitted on products originating outside of said slaughter house. 
(f)  All paunch manure and all stock pen manure shall be removed daily. 
(g)  All sanitary facilities shall be approved by the City of Warren Building Department and the Macomb County Board of Health. 
(h)  The applicant shall furnish satisfactory evidence that the use can and will comply with the requirements of Industrial Performance Standards as specified in Section 17.02.  
Section 17.04 - Area and widths. 
Area and widths of industrial lots shall comply with the following schedule, except those lots of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance: 
Zone 	Lot Area 	Lot Width 
M-1 	10,000 sq.ft. 	 60 ft. 
M-2 	20,000 sq.ft. 	100 ft. 
M-3 	50,000 sq.ft. 	200 ft. 
M-4 	Subject to approval of Planning Commission 	
  
ARTICLE XVIII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT  
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE, INTENT AND QUALIFICATION 
 
Section 18.01 - General purpose. 
Because traditional zoning separates uses into different districts using restrictive placement controls, it does not allow for creative development incorporating a variety of uses. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development District is to encourage development of those parcels of land which, because of their size; their location being uniquely situated with regard to adjoining uses; or their unique environmental features, a more flexible development scheme could foster creative development design, or preserve desirable natural features, or significant historical landmarks and architectural features located within the Planned Unit Development District. Therefore, the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District modifies the traditional form of zoning and permits variety in design, site configuration, layout and use, minimizes paved surfaces, encourages efficiency in use of land and natural resources, while ensuring compatibility with surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.02 - General intent. 
The adoption of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is intended to encourage creativity through the unified development of a larger tract of property utilizing mixed residential and commercial uses that provide adequate housing and employment opportunities. It is the intent of this article to allow rezoning of qualifying properties to Planned Unit Development (PUD) District pursuant to MCL 125.584(b), thereby establishing a site specific use authorization. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.03 - Intent of requiring development agreement. 
It is recognized that because of the complexity and uniqueness of each parcel or tract of land proposed for Planned Unit Development rezoning, it is beneficial to the City and the development process if a development agreement which includes all site plans, development standards and specified conditions tailored to the particular parcel of property, are submitted together with the application for rezoning. This approach is intended to accomplish the objectives of the zoning ordinance by incorporating a land development project review process into the rezoning procedure to ensure integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.04 - Eligibility for PUD rezoning; qualifying conditions. 
To be eligible for PUD District rezoning as provided by this article, all of the following conditions must exist with regard to the proposed PUD site: 
a.  Rezoning to PUD District shall not be granted in situations where the same land use objectives may be established by the application of applicable conventional zoning provisions or standards. 
b.  The land proposed to be included within the PUD District must consist of sufficient acreage as recommended by the Planning Commission to meet the objectives of this ordinance. 
c.  The land proposed to be included in the PUD District shall have features the preservation of which will be enhanced through development as a PUD; or is uniquely situated with regard to adjoining uses which would permit variety in design, site configuration, layout and use; or has unique historical or environmental features or other characteristics which could foster creative development design and preserve desirable natural features. 
d.  The proposed land use patterns must be compatible with surrounding land uses and provide transitional buffers to residential areas. 
e.  The proposed land use patterns encourage efficiency in use of land, natural resources, provide for open space and minimize paved surfaces. 
f.  The PUD site must be served by public water and sanitary sewer service that meets or exceeds the existing City requirements for a development of the proposed size. 
g.  The PUD site must abut and have direct access to a major thoroughfare. 
h.  The proposed PUD shall be harmonious with the surrounding land uses and serve the public health, safety and welfare of the City as a whole. 
i.  The proposed PUD shall not cause a negative or environmental impact or loss of a historic structure on the subject site or surrounding land. 
j.  The proposed PUD is not merely an attempt to circumvent the strict application of the applicable zoning standards. 
k.  Any site that is zoned entirely R-1-A, R-1-B or R-1-C, as a One-Family Residential District, and where all property abutting the site is zoned One-Family Residential District, either R-1-A, R-1-B or R-1-C, shall not be eligible for PUD District rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.05 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USES PERMITTED IN A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
 
Section 18.06 - Principal permitted uses. 
In designing and developing a Planned Unit Development, compatibility of land uses both within the development and surrounding the development is very important to meeting the objectives of this article. In order to ensure integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the surrounding area, certain uses will be permitted and others will be prohibited. Subject to review and approval under the procedures and standards contained in this article, the following uses may be permitted in the PUD District: 
All residential, including nursing homes, senior congregate and assisted living. 
Professional business and office. 
Local business and general business. 
Technical center or industrial office. 
Office research. 
Urgent medical care facilities providing less than twenty-four-hour outpatient care. 
Recreational uses. 
Government, schools, libraries, and civic organizations. 
The permitted uses are designed to be compatible with uses permitted within the following zoning designations: R-1-A; R-1-B; R-1-C; R-1-P; R-2; R-3; R-3-A; PB; C-1; C-2; O; P. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.07 - Accessory uses permitted. 
All uses customarily accessory to principal uses may be permitted as designated on the approved master development plan or in the approved site plan or development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.08 - Prohibited uses. 
In order to ensure integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the surrounding area, certain land uses have been determined to be incompatible with the intent to provide a mixed residential and light commercial development in a PUD. Therefore, the following uses are prohibited in PUD Districts: 
Wholesale, not open to the general public and intensive business. 
Industrial and developmental manufacturing. 
Uses involving the processing of raw materials for shipment in bulk form to be used in an industrial or commercial operation at another location. 
Warehouses and storage yards. 
Outdoor storage or display of materials, equipment, or vehicles other than approved outdoor retail sales as an accessory to a permitted principal use. 
Automotive repair, service and sales, new and used. 
Automotive washes, self serve and automatic, except those customarily an accessory to a permitted principal use. 
Hospitals and sanitariums. 
Pawn shops. 
Sexually oriented businesses. 
Mobile home parks. 
Structures assembled or constructed off site. 
Funeral homes. 
Crematorium. 
Cemeteries. 
Dog kennels. 
Public stables and farms. 
Social halls. 
Boarding rooms, lodging and tourist homes. 
Motels and hotels. 
Outdoor drive-ins. 
Flea markets. 
Tattoo parlors. 
Arcades, golf ranges and golf domes. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Sections 18.09—18.11 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REZONING PROCEDURE 
 
Section 18.12 - Applicable regulations. 
The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is a zoning district which imposes site configuration, building layout, architectural design, density, set back, height, use, access, parking and other development regulations that apply to this district only. All other non-conflicting regulations and standards of this ordinance shall also apply to this district. In the event of a conflict between a regulation in the Code of Ordinances or a standard contained in the approved master development plan or development agreement and any other applicable regulation in this ordinance, the approved master development plan or development agreement standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.13 - Rezoning. 
Rezoning a parcel or tract of land to the PUD District may be initiated either by the request or with the authorization of the owner(s) of land proposed to be included in the PUD; by the Planning Commission; or the City Council as authorized by the Zoning Enabling Act. Any rezoning to PUD District shall be subject to the eligibility criteria and qualifying conditions contained in this article. A master development plan and a development agreement containing specific development standards and site plan drawings must be submitted with the application to rezone. Approval of the application to rezone, the master development plan and the development agreement must be obtained as required by this article prior to commencing development of any land proposed for rezoning to PUD District. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.14 - Application to rezone to Planned Unit Development District. 
The application to rezone shall include the following information and documents: 
1.  Ownership. The application form must be signed by the applicant, and authorized by all owners of any land to be included within the PUD District and include the address and telephone number of all applicants. 
2.  Qualification. The application shall include a narrative statement describing the overall objectives of the proposed PUD; demonstrate that the proposed site meets the qualifying conditions for a PUD rezoning; and explain why the property may not be developed as zoned as indicated by section 18.04(a). 
3.  Development impact. The application shall include a development impact statement addressing impact of the proposed development on: 
a.  Surrounding land uses. 
b.  Traffic. 
c.  Preservation of natural or historic features. 
d.  Public utilities. 
e.  Public services. 
f.  Economic impact. 
4.  Master development plan. The application shall include a proposed master development plan encompassing all phases of the proposed PUD, containing all information required by the Planning Commission and prepared at an acceptable scale. 
5.  Development agreement. The application shall include a proposed development agreement which shall include specific standards tailored to the PUD and use of the property in conjunction with the rezoning. The provisions contained in the agreement shall, upon approval and execution, be binding upon both parties. The agreement shall, at a minimum, include the following provisions: 
a.  Agreement and acknowledgment that the developer submitted and the City accepted the development proposal as set forth in the application to rezone, the master development plan, the site plans and the development agreement as submitted, and granted the rezoning based on the terms set forth therein. Further, that all provisions and conditions contained in the application to rezone, master development plan and development agreement are authorized by applicable law; that the agreement is valid, and was entered into on a voluntary basis, representing a permissible exercise of authority by the City and the applicant. 
b.  Agreement that the property shall not be developed or used in a manner inconsistent with the approved master development plan and development agreement. 
c.  Agreement that the approved rezoning, master development plan and development agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property owner(s), the City and their respective heirs, successors, assigns, and transferees. 
d.  Because of the complexity and uniqueness of the parcel or tract of land proposed for Planned Unit Development, the development agreement shall include specific standards for site configuration tailored for the proposed development, including: 
i.  Roadways; ingress, egress and other access including sidewalks. 
ii.  Building and structure placement, mass, bulk, height, articulation and setbacks. 
iii.  Installation and extension of utilities; including a preliminary drainage plan, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, identifying measures to be used for control and disposal of storm water runoff from the PUD site and water quality. 
iv.  Parking. 
v.  Landscaping and buffers. 
vi.  For residential uses: Maximum density and intensity of use for each proposed use addressing units per acre. For commercial and office uses: Maximum useable floor area. 
vii.  Preservation of no less than thirty (30) percent of undeveloped open space unless waived by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the Planning Commission. Open space to be preserved shall be calculated prior to making any site improvements to be performed on site and shall exclude existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
viii.  Preservation of natural features and provisions addressing the maintenance of natural resources and open space. 
ix.  Signage and lighting. 
x.  Permissible uses of the property consistent with this ordinance. 
xi.  Any areas proposed for commercial operations with twenty-four-hour operations shall be located five hundred (500) feet from residential areas and shall be provided with buffering and screening to protect the compatibility of the uses. The five hundred-foot measurement shall be calculated from the closest building envelope edge of the twenty-four-hour operation to the lot line of the closest residentially zoned property that lies within a platted subdivision. 
xii.  All utilities, including electricity, telephone and cable, shall be installed underground or otherwise installed out of sight to the surrounding community, excluding main transmission lines. 
e.  Architectural design and building materials. 
f.  Proposed association and condominium documents. 
g.  Site plan drawings including proposed site elevation contours; Typical elevation drawings, with identification of facade materials of all sides of each principal building type included in the PUD, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equal to one hundred (100) feet or other scale acceptable to the Planning Director. 
h.  An affidavit from a qualified environmental engineer that an environmental assessment has been performed and the results indicate that there is nothing to preclude the development as proposed. 
i.  Any other provisions proposed and approved by the parties. 
6.  Fee. Payment of the fee required by 24.03 for processing the application to rezone and approval of the master development plan and development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.15 - Public hearing on application to rezone; approval of master development plan and development agreement. 
a.  Upon receipt of a complete application to rezone, a master development plan and proposed development agreement, the Planning Commission shall schedule a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as required by section 24.02 of this Ordinance. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the request to rezone and approval of the master development plan and development agreement and shall consider whether the PUD as proposed meets all of the required standards. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.16 - Review by Planning Commission; standards for approval. 
The Planning Commission shall recommend approval upon a finding that the proposed PUD complies with all the following standards: 
a.  The application to rezone, the master development plan and development agreement contain all information required by this ordinance. The applicant shall follow standard procedures for application submission to the Planning Commission. 
b.  The proposed site meets the qualifying conditions for a PUD rezoning. 
c.  The proposed master development plan provides safe and efficient ingress and egress to the site, including access for fire or other emergency vehicles and safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
d.  The amount and type of traffic generated by the proposed PUD shall not create a substantial detrimental effect on neighboring properties or existing roadways. 
e.  The proposed development is compatible with surrounding uses of land and character of the surrounding area. 
f.  The design and placement of buildings and other structures, parking, lighting, signs, refuse storage, and landscaping: 1) ensures compatibility with surrounding properties; 2) ensures compatibility with properties within the proposed PUD; and 3) ensures that the development when viewed from public rights-of-way enhances the character of the surrounding area. 
g.  The uses proposed in the master development plan and development agreement are arranged in a logical relationship to each other and have sufficient buffers to prevent adverse impacts of one (1) use upon another. 
h.  The master development plan and development agreement is designed to have minimal adverse effects on the environment and to preserve and maintain to the maximum extent feasible the quality of natural topography, vegetation and other natural features of the site. 
i.  The proposed development shall be provided with adequate public facilities and services to support the proposed uses. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.17 - Planning Commission recommendation. 
After holding a public hearing and reviewing the proposed rezoning, the master development plan and the development agreement, the Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation to the City Council. Upon a finding that the plan and agreement meet all the standards set forth in this article, the Planning Commission may recommend approval, or approval with conditions, of the master development plan, the development agreement and rezoning of the property to PUD District. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.18 - City Council review of application to rezone; master development plan and development agreement. 
a.  The City Council shall be provided with a copy of the Planning Commission's report and recommendation, minutes from the public hearing and all supporting materials. 
b.  Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed application to rezone and approval of the master development plan and development agreement. 
c.  After the public hearing and review of the Planning Commission reports, recommendation and supporting materials provided, and a finding as to whether the PUD as proposed meets all of the standards as provided in this article, the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application to rezone to PUD District, the master development plan and the development agreement. Approval of the development agreement shall include authorizing execution by the Mayor and Clerk pursuant to City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.19 - Effect of approval of rezoning to PUD District, approval of master development plan and development agreement. 
Following approval by the City Council, the property shall be rezoned to PUD District. Once rezoned to PUD District, no improvements or construction shall be undertaken within the PUD except in conformity with the approved master development plan, the development agreement and any conditions imposed in connection with the PUD approval. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.20 - Modification of development agreement. 
Changes to the approved master development plan and development agreement shall require submittal of a revised master development plan and/or development agreement for review and approval as provided by this section. 
a.  Minor modifications. The following minor modifications may be made upon approval of the PUD committee which is an administrative team consisting of a representative of the Mayor, the Planning Director, the City Attorney, the City Engineer, the Building Director, a member of City Council and a member of the Planning Commission. Such minor modifications shall be provided in writing and upon approval shall be incorporated into the approved master development plan and/or development agreement. Minor modifications include but are not limited to: 
1.  Up to a five (5) percent reduction or increase of the size of structures, provided there shall be no increase in the number of dwelling units. 
2.  Up to a five (5) percent reduction or increase of the gross floor area of nonresidential buildings. 
3.  Up to a five (5) percent alteration of horizontal and vertical elevations of buildings. 
4.  Up to a five-foot relocation of building footprints, unless a specific setback or separation distance is imposed as a condition of approval. 
5.  Areas designated as not to be disturbed or open space may be increased in area. 
6.  Substitution of plant materials included in the landscape plan by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis. 
7.  Improvements to access and circulation systems, such as addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths. 
8.  Changes in exterior materials, provided that any changes provide in the use of materials are of equal or higher quality than those originally approved. 
9.  Reduction in size of signs and modification of sign setbacks. 
10.  Rearrangement of parking spaces in a parking lot, provided the total number of parking spaces is not reduced and circulation hazards or congestion are not created by the redesign. 
If for any reason the PUD Committee denies a request for minor modification, an appeal of the denial may be taken to the Planning Commission for review and approval of the minor modification. Upon approval of the Planning Commission, such modification shall be included with the approved master development plan and development agreement. A denial of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
b.  Major modifications. Any major modification to the approved master development plan or development agreement shall require submittal of a revised master development plan and/or development agreement for review and recommendation of the Planning Commission and final approval of the City Council. Upon final approval, the modification shall be incorporated into the approved master development plan and development agreement. Major modifications include but are not limited to: 
1.  Addition of uses different from those approved. 
2.  For nonresidential development, any increase greater than five (5) percent in the total square footage of all buildings, or any increase in the height or number of buildings. 
3.  For residential development, any increase in number of dwelling units above the maximum number authorized in the development agreement. 
4.  Major realignment of vehicular circulation patterns or reduction of parking spaces. 
5.  Reduction of open space. 
6.  Changes in exterior boundaries except survey adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.21 - Site plan approval. 
Site plan approval is required prior to commencement of any site improvement or construction of buildings within the PUD. Building permits shall not be issued prior to final site plan approval. For a multi-phased PUD, there shall be a separate site plan submitted and approved for the master improvement phase and each phase of the development prior to the commencement of site improvements for that phase. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan(s) submitted at a public hearing pursuant to this ordinance for compliance with the applicable ordinances, the master development plan and the development agreement. After reviewing the site plan(s), the Planning Commission may approve the site plan(s), approve with conditions or deny the request(s). 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.22 - Site improvement performance guarantees. 
A performance guarantee shall be required as part of site plan approval to assure that the site improvements are completed in compliance with the approved site plan(s), the master development plan, the standards set forth in the development agreement and all applicable ordinances. For a multi-phased PUD, a separate performance guarantee shall be provided for the master improvement phase and for each phase of development. The performance guarantee may consist of a cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, in an amount not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the projected cost of site improvements. A cash performance;b0;guarantee, if applicable, shall be deposited with the City Treasurer. A surety bond or letter of credit shall remain in effect until all site improvements for the applicable site plan are completed. If requested, the City shall rebate a proportional share of any cash deposit, or reduce the amount of performance guarantee required, based on the percentage of work completed on the date of the request, as attested to by the requestor and verified by the City Inspector. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Sections 18.23—18.29 - Reserved  
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION 
 
Section 18.30 - Commencement of site improvements. 
a.  Once the master development plan, development agreement and final site plans are approved, the site improvements shall be commenced within two (2) years after receiving approval of the final engineering plans. If the PUD is a multi-phased PUD, site improvements for any phase of development shall be commenced within two (2) years of receiving final engineering approval for the applicable phase. 
b.  If the site improvements are not commenced within the applicable two-year period, the Planning Commission may extend the time for commencement of site improvements upon the applicant requesting an extension prior to the expiration of the two-year period. 
c.  If the master development plan and development agreement are not implemented within the time periods required due to a failure to commence site improvements, a new application for approval must be submitted and the master development plan and development agreement shall be reviewed and may be revised to take into consideration any changes that may have occurred due to the passage of time. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Section 18.31 - Hours of construction. 
There shall not be any construction, demolition or excavation between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays and 7:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. weekends and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 30-951, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Sections 18.32—18.40 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS 
 
Section 19.01 - Height of public and semi-public buildings. 
The height of public or semi-public buildings, churches, cathedrals, temples, hospitals, sanitariums or schools, shall not in any case exceed fifty-five (55) feet, and if the height of any such building exceeds the height allowed in the district concerned, then any such building shall be set back from all lot lines not less than one (1) foot in addition to the required yard dimensions for each foot such buildings exceed the height allowed in the district concerned.  
Section 19.02 - Height of office buildings and technical laboratories. 
In M-3 and M-4 Districts office buildings and technical laboratories may be increased in height up to ten (10) stories or one hundred fifty (150) feet when such building is set back from all lot lines not less than one (1) foot in addition to the required district yard dimensions for each foot such building exceeds the height allowed in the district concerned. 
Office buildings in C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 Districts and technical laboratories in the M-1 and M-2 Districts may be increased in height up to eight (8) stories or one hundred (100) feet, provided that such buildings are set back: 
(a)  from the front property line a distance equal to the height of said building; 
(b)  from the side and rear property line a distance equal to one-half (½) the height of said building; 
(c)  from a residential lot line or residential district line a distance equal to the height of said building.  
Section 19.03 - Height of certain structures, when not included. 
Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators, silos, penthouses, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, sugar refineries, tanks, water towers, pumping towers, monuments, cupolas, and mechanical appurtenances pertaining to and necessary to the permitted uses of the district in which they are located, shall not be included in calculating the height of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 30-857, § 4, 1-9-96)  
Section 19.04 - Height of hotels. 
The height of hotels may be increased to ten (10) stories or one hundred fifty (150) feet provided such building shall set back from all lot lines not less than one (1) foot in addition to the required yard dimensions for each foot such buildings exceed the height allowed in the district concerned.  
ARTICLE XX. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, adopted July 28, 2009, amended Art. XX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XX, §§ 20.01—20.07, pertained to the board of appeals, and derived from Ord. No. 30-283, adopted June 25, 1968; Ord. No. 30-504, adopted July 5, 1976; Ord. No. 30-611, adopted June 10, 1980; Ord. No. 30-614, adopted July 8, 1980; Ord. No. 30-898, adopted Sept. 22, 1998; Ord. No. 30-945, adopted April 27, 2004; and Ord. No. 30-978, adopted Nov. 13, 2007. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - BOARD 
 
Section 20.01 - Established; membership; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  Established . The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established having the powers and duties authorized by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, found at MCL 125.3101 et seq. (formerly authorized under MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended. 
(b)  Regular Membership/appointment . The Board of Appeals shall consist of nine (9) regular members appointed by the Warren City Council. The regular members and any alternate member under subsection (d), shall be selected from the electors residing within the City of Warren and shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present within the City. Each regular member and any alternate member under subsection (d), shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the City Council, and shall not be a City employee or a City contractor. 
(c)  Term . Each regular member appointed and any alternate member under subsection (d), shall hold office for a term of three (3) years, except when an appointment is made to fill a vacancy, in which case the term of the member shall be for the duration of the unexpired term. The appointments shall be staggered to establish the appointment of three (3) regular members and no more than one (1) alternate member each year. Members shall be eligible for re-appointment to succeeding terms. Upon expiration of a term or in the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made not more than one (1) month after the term has expired or the vacancy occurred. 
(d)  Alternate membership/appointment . The Warren City Council may appoint up to two (2) alternate members for the Board of Appeals with the same term of years as a regular member. In the absence of a regular member, an alternate member may be called to serve as a member of the Board of Appeals. An alternate member may also be called to serve on the Board of Appeals in place of a regular member who has abstained due to a conflict of interest. In the event of a postponed hearing, if at the original hearing the Petitioner completed presenting his or her petition request, then the alternate member shall serve at the Petitioner's postponed hearing, until a final decision is made. When serving as a Board of Appeals member, an alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member. In addition, an alternate member shall receive the same per diem compensation and adhere to the same requirements and responsibilities as a regular member. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 30-1031, § 1, 11-14-17) 
State Law reference— Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 1001 of 2006, as amended, found at MCL 125.3101 et seq.  
Section 20.02 - Compensation. 
The members of the Board shall receive a per diem compensation as determined by Resolution of City Council. Travel requests to attend conferences or seminars shall follow standard City procedures. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.03 - Removal from office. 
A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the City Council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing before the City Council. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.04 - Adoption of rules of procedure. 
The Board shall adopt Rules of Procedure to govern its procedures consistent with this section. 
(a)  Officers. The Board shall elect from its membership a Chair, Vice-Chair, Secretary and Assistant Secretary and any other officers the Board deems necessary according to the Rules of Procedure. The Chair shall preside over the meetings and shall vote. The Chair shall have all duties and powers authorized by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3101 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Meetings. Regular meetings of the Board shall be held at least once per month at a time and place designated by the Board. Within ten (10) days after the first meeting of the calendar year, a notice setting forth the dates, time and place of the regular meetings scheduled for the calendar year shall be posted. If there is a change in the schedule of regular meetings of the Board, a notice shall be posted within three (3) days after the meeting at which the schedule was changed stating the changes made. For a rescheduled regular meeting, a notice stating the date, time and place of meeting shall be posted at least eighteen (18) hours before the meeting. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the Chair or Secretary of the Board. Notice of the special meeting shall be provided to members of the Board at least forty-eight (48) hours before the special meeting is held. A notice stating the date, time and place of meeting shall be posted at least eighteen (18) hours before the meeting. 
(c)  Compliance With Open Meetings Act. All meetings of the Board shall be public and shall adhere to the Open Meetings Act, P.A. 267 of 1976, as amended, MCL 15.261 et seq. A meeting agenda shall be part of the public notice and shall include a listing of each application to be considered by the Board. 
(d)  Conduct of business. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals are present. 
(e)  Record. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue its decision in writing signed by the Chair. The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, P.A. 267 of 1976, as amended, MCL 15.261, et seq. All public records shall be open to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq. and a copy of the record of proceedings shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(f)  Voting. Each member of the Board shall be entitled to one (1) vote and each member shall vote on all motions brought before the Board at any regular or special meeting at which the Board member is in attendance, unless the member disqualifies himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. The concurring vote of five (5) members of the Board of Appeals shall be required to approve an application for a non-use variance from a zoning ordinance requirement; or to approve a matter which the Ordinance requires approval of the Board; or to reverse an order, decision or determination of an administrative official. The concurring vote of six (6) members of the Board shall be required to approve a land use variance. 
(g)  Conflict of interest. No Board member shall vote on a motion in which the Board member has a direct or indirect personal, professional or financial interest and shall disqualify him or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. 
(h)  Decision final. Any decision of the Board is final. Decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals being final are not subject to reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 2. - JURISDICTION 
 
Section 20.05 - Jurisdiction. 
The Board of Appeals, in conformity with the provisions of this article and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3601 et seq., is hereby authorized 1) to hear and decide appeals from and review any administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of a zoning ordinance adopted under this article; and 2) to hear and decide questions related to the interpretation of the zoning ordinance; and 3) to hear and decide questions related to interpretation of the zoning maps; and 4) shall have the authority to grant land use and non-use variances according to the provisions of this article; and 5) to hear and decide matters which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass under this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS 
 
Section 20.06 - Appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination. 
An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of a zoning ordinance. The appeal may be filed by a person with a legal interest in the property that is the subject of the order, requirement, decision, or determination; or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the state or local unit of government; or by a person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of a zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.07 - Time to file appeal. 
An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date the administrative order, requirement, decision or determination is made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of a zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.08 - Written application. 
An application for appeal shall be filed in writing and shall be submitted together with thirteen (13) copies of all documentation submitted to support the appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals and one (1) copy submitted to the officer/department from whom the appeal is taken. The written application shall be complete, including all information required by the Rules of Procedure; shall specify the grounds for the appeal; and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of City Council. Notice of the public hearing on the appeal shall comply with section 20.39. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.09 - Transmittal of record. 
The body or officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.10 - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, except, any application filed for a variance pursuant to Division 5 of this article may be processed and considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals and is not subject to a stay of proceedings. However, if the body or officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the application of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the body or officer cause imminent peril to life or property, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.11 - Public hearing. 
If the Zoning Board of Appeals receives a written request seeking an appeal of an administrative decision, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on the request. Notice shall be given as required by section 20.42. However, if the request does not involve a specific parcel of property, notice need only be published as provided in subsection 20.42(a) and given to the person making the request as provided in subsection 20.42(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.12 - Appearance. 
At the hearing, an applicant may appear personally or by their designated agent or attorney. In order for the agent or representative to appear on behalf of the applicant at the hearing, without the applicant's appearance, the applicant shall file a written designation of representation with the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.13 - Decision. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed and upon reversing the decision appealed may direct the issuance of a permit. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the grounds for its determination and issue its decision in writing. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.14 - Appeal filed by an aggrieved person—No legal interest in property. 
If an appeal is filed by a person who does not have a legal interest in the property, the following additional regulations shall apply: 
(a)  Threshold Standard "Aggrieved Person". This means that in order for an application for appeal to be accepted by the Zoning Board of Appeals from a person who has no legal interest in the property, the person must initially demonstrate that the administrative order, requirement, decision or determination will result in a unique harm or injury impacting the use of their property that is not common to other property owners similarly situated. The determination that the person has demonstrated unique harm or injury qualifies the person to be an "aggrieved person" who has standing to appeal. 
(b)  Application. To accept an application for appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals from a person who has no legal interest in the subject property, the applicant must allege in the application facts which support that the administrative order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from will result in unique harm or injury not common to other property owners similarly situated. 
(c)  Notice. Upon receipt of an application for appeal from a person who has no legal interest in the subject property, the application shall be placed on the agenda for an administrative hearing to determine if the person meets the threshold standard as an "aggrieved person". Written notice of the receipt of the application for appeal shall be sent to the owners of record of the subject property. In addition, written notice of the time, date and place of the administrative hearing shall be sent to the applicant, the owners of record of the subject property and the officer/department from whom the appeal is taken at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the administrative hearing. 
(d)  Administrative Hearing. Upon receipt of a complete application for appeal from a person alleging they are an "aggrieved person", the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct an administrative hearing to determine whether the applicant is an "aggrieved person". The applicant/applicant representative shall be allowed to address the Board to demonstrate that they are an "aggrieved person". In addition, the owner/owner's representative of the property shall be allowed to address the Board regarding whether the applicant meets the threshold standard as an "aggrieved person". The administrative hearing shall be placed on the agenda and held at a public meeting, however, it is not a public hearing for the general public and is not a hearing on the appeal. 
(e)  Burden. The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating that he/she is an "aggrieved person" by showing that the decision upon which the Board will pass, poses a threat of unique harm or injury to the applicant not common to other property owners similarly situated. 
(f)  Decision. Based on the information presented at the administrative hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide whether the applicant met the threshold standard and is an "aggrieved person". If the Board determines by a vote of five (5) members that the applicant is an "aggrieved person", the appeal shall then be scheduled for a public hearing pursuant to section 20.11 and properly noticed in conformity with section 20.42. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.15 - Appeal of special land use decisions. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals is not authorized to accept appeals of the decision of the City Council on a request for approval of a special land use permit. Appeals of the decision of City Council shall be to the Circuit Court as provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 4. - ORDINANCE AND MAP INTERPRETATIONS 
 
Section 20.16 - Applications related to interpretation of the zoning ordinance or zoning maps. 
Applications related to the interpretation of the zoning ordinance or the zoning maps may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.17 - Written application. 
An application for an interpretation of the zoning ordinance or maps shall be filed in writing and shall be submitted together with thirteen (13) copies of all documentation submitted to support the interpretation appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals and one (1) copy submitted to the officer/department from whom the appeal is taken. The written application shall be complete, including all information required by the Rules of Procedure; shall specify the grounds for the appeal; and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of City Council. Notice of the public hearing on the appeal shall comply with section 20.42. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.18 - Report of Planning Director. 
A copy of the application for interpretation of the zoning ordinance or map shall be forwarded to the Planning Director for review. The Planning Director may provide a written report to the Board prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.19 - Public hearing. 
Upon receipt of a written request for an interpretation of the zoning ordinance or zoning map, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on the request. Notice shall be given as required under section 20.42. However, if the request does not involve a specific parcel of property, notice need only be published as provided in subsection 20.42(a) and given to the person making the request as provided in subsection 20.42(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.20 - Appearance. 
At the hearing, an applicant may appear personally or by their designated agent or attorney. In order for the agent or representative to appear on behalf of the applicant at the hearing, without the applicant's appearance, the applicant shall file a written designation of representation with the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.21 - Decision. 
Based on its determination on a request for an interpretation, the Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or interpretation appealed. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the grounds for its interpretation and issue its decision in writing. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 
 
Section 20.22 - Authorization. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to grant variances from the regulations of the zoning ordinance so that the spirit of the zoning ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all applications for variances. There are two (2) types of variances: non-use variances and land use variances. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 20.22.5. - Applicants applying to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance who are in default to the City. 
Default. Applicant shall not apply for or be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance request if he or she is in default to the City. "Default" is defined as any of the following: 
(1)  Applicant or Applicant's tenant is Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or more behind in property taxes associated with the subject property; 
(2)  Applicant or Applicant's tenant is Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or more behind in payments relating to an existing tax delinquent payment plan associated with the subject property; 
(3)  Applicant or Applicant's tenant is Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or more behind with the water bill payments associated with the subject property; 
Exception. An Applicant who is in default to the City may submit a letter of hardship to City Council for consideration and approval of a default waiver. Applicant shall explain and state his or her hardship to City Council. City council may grant the Applicant a default waiver, authorizing the variance application to be processed, allowing the Applicant to appear before the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-1032, § 1, 11-14-2017; Ord. No. 30-1031, § 1, 11-14-2017) 
State Law reference— The Home Rule City Act 279 of 1909, as amended, found at MCL 117.5(f).  
Section 20.23 - Non-use variance; practical difficulty standard. 
Non-use variances relate to the modification of applicable area, dimension or structural regulations. The concurring vote of five (5) members of the Board shall be required to approve a non-use variance. No variation from the provisions or requirements of this article shall be authorized by the Board unless the Board finds that the applicant has demonstrated all of the following to establish there is a practical difficulty in complying with the article requirement: 
(1)  Unreasonable impact/burden. Strict compliance with area, setback, frontage, height, bulk or density requirements would unreasonably prevent the applicant from using the property for a permitted purpose, or would be unnecessarily burdensome. 
(2)  Not self-imposed. The condition was not created by the applicant or a previous owner of the property or reasonably discoverable by the owner. 
(3)  Property unique. The property has unique physical features or characteristics; or the plight is due to unique circumstances of this property and is not due to general neighborhood conditions. 
(4)  Not a detriment. Granting the variance will not result in detriment to nearby properties; will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to the adjacent properties; will not impair the property values in the surrounding area; and will not cause public safety concerns. 
(5)  Not personal or economic. The variance request is not primarily related to personal or economic hardship, rather, it is related to the unique features of the property. 
(6)  Necessary. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.24 - Land use variance; unnecessary hardship standard. 
A land use variance allows property to be used for a specific use that otherwise is prohibited in the applicable zoning district. The concurring vote of six (6) members of the Board shall be required to approve a land use variance. A land use variance shall not be authorized by the Board unless the Board finds that the applicant has demonstrated all of the following criteria to establish an unnecessary hardship: 
(1)  Property cannot be used as zoned. The characteristics of the property are such that it cannot be used for any use permitted in the zoning district; or the property can only be used for a permitted use at a prohibitive expense and therefore, will not yield a reasonable rate of return; or the characteristics of the property render it valueless or to have only distress value for any of the uses permitted by the zoning district; or this article as it applies to the property is unreasonable and arbitrary; or confiscatory. 
(2)  Not self-imposed. The condition was not created by the applicant or a previous owner of the property or reasonably discoverable by the owner. 
(3)  Property unique. The property has unique physical features or characteristics or the plight is due to unique circumstances of this property and is not due to general neighborhood conditions. 
(4)  Not a detriment. Granting the variance will not result in detriment to nearby properties; will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to the adjacent properties; will not impair the property values in the surrounding area; will not alter the essential character of the area; and will not cause public safety concerns. 
(5)  Necessary. The land use variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the property. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.25 - Variance pursuant to the Uniform Condemnation Procedures Act. 
In addition, a variance in the zoning ordinance may be applied for and granted under section 4 of the Uniform Condemnation Procedures Act, found at, MCL 213.54, as amended, and as provided under this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.26 - Planned Unit Development Districts. 
A request for a variance from an ordinance provision applicable to property located in a Planned Unit Development District may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that the provision is not included in the Planned Unit Development Agreement as approved by the City Council. If the provision is included in the approved Planned Unit Development Agreement, the provisions related to major and minor modification as set forth in article 18 shall control. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.27 - Application for variance. 
A written application for a variance shall be submitted together with thirteen (13) copies of a plan drawn to scale showing the dimensional and land use elements for the property, and thirteen (13) copies of all documentation submitted to support the requested variance. All commercial, industrial and new construction plans shall be prepared by a professional architect, engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect or community planner and shall bear the seal of a registered professional, except variances for residential fences and accessory buildings. Applications for residential fences and accessory buildings shall not be accepted unless accompanied by a mortgage survey or other survey drawn to scale showing the dimensional elements of the property. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.28 - Application fee. 
No application shall be accepted unless it is a complete submission and includes the application fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
Further, variance requests related to subdivisions or multiple lots the following formula will be used in computing the required fee: 
(1)  Lots on the same side of a street containing the same size and dimensions, in consecutive order, one (1) application form is required. 
(2)  Should any break occur in the consecutive order of lots, a separate application form will be required. 
(3)  Lots on the opposite side of the street, but of the same size and dimensions, will also require a separate application form. 
(4)  Corner lots will require a separate application form. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.29 - Impact statement from Planning Director. 
A copy of the application for variance shall be forwarded to the Planning Director for review.;b0;The Planning Director may provide a written impact statement to the Board prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.30 - Hearing. 
Upon receiving a complete application for a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a hearing on the request. Notice shall be given as required under section 20.42. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.31 - Appearance. 
At the hearing, an applicant may appear personally or by their designated agent or attorney. In order for the agent or representative to appear on behalf of the applicant at the hearing, without the applicant's appearance, the applicant shall file a written designation of representation with the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.32 - Conditions of approval. 
In authorizing a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach conditions regarding the location, character, hours of operation, landscaping or use reasonably necessary to the furtherance of the intent and spirit of this article. In order to secure the performance of such reasonable conditions as the Board may require, pertaining to the improvement of off-street parking lots, or the installation of greenbelts or decorative walls or fences the Board may require the posting of a cash or surety bond in an amount equal to the cost of complying with the condition or conditions which the Board may require. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.33 - Failure to apply for site plan approval or permits within one year. 
If a request for a variance is approved, application for site plan approval or required permits shall be made within one (1) year of the date of variance approval. Because circumstances change over time, if application is not made within one (1) year, the approval shall be rescinded and the applicant shall be required to file a new application for consideration. In addition, if the property is transferred after approval of the variance and prior to commencing construction, the approval shall be rescinded and the applicant shall be required to file a new application for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.34 - Decision. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the grounds for its determination and issue its decision in writing. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS UPON APPROVAL OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Section 20.35 - Special exceptions defined. 
A special exception is where the zoning ordinance permits certain uses that are authorized by the ordinance upon the Zoning Board of Appeals determining that the use meets the stated conditions for the specified use of the property. Outdoor retail sales, circuses, fairs and carnivals are examples of special exceptions. Special exceptions are not variances and may be temporary, seasonal or permanent in nature as provided by the applicable ordinance provision. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.36 - Application for special exception. 
Whenever in this article the lawful exercise or existence of a use requires the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, a written application for approval of a special exception shall be submitted together with thirteen (13) copies of a plan drawn to scale showing the dimensional and land use elements for the property, and thirteen (13) copies of all documentation submitted to support the request. All plans shall be prepared by a professional architect, engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect or community planner and shall bear the seal of a registered professional. No application shall be accepted unless it is a complete submission and includes the application fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.37 - Special exceptions approval. 
Whenever in this article, the lawful exercise or existence of a use requires the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Board shall be guided by the following standards: 
(1)  Whether there is proper yard space, parking facilities, loading space and storage space to adequately carry on the use contemplated. 
(2)  Whether the location and size of the proposed use, the nature and intensity of the principal use and all accessory uses, the site layout and its relation to access streets will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the neighborhood. 
(3)  Whether, the traffic to and from the use or uses, and the assembly of persons in connection herewith, will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the neighborhood nor unduly conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood. 
(4)  Whether or not the proposed use will have a detrimental effect on the health, peace, safety and welfare of persons residing in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.38 - Conditions of approval. 
In approving a special exception, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach conditions regarding the location, character, hours of operation, landscaping or use reasonably necessary to the furtherance of the intent and spirit of this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.39 - Hearing. 
Upon receiving a complete application for a special exception, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a hearing on the request. Notice shall be given as required under section 20.42. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.40 - Appearance. 
At the hearing, an applicant may appear personally or by their designated agent or attorney. In order for the agent or representative to appear on behalf of the applicant at the hearing, without the applicant's appearance, the applicant shall file a written designation of representation with the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.41 - Decision. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the grounds for its determination and issue its decision in writing. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 7. - NOTICE 
 
Section 20.42 - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Public hearings only. If a public hearing is required under this article, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall publish notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the local unit of government not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public hearing in addition to the notice required by subsection (b). 
(b)  All hearings. For all hearings required by this article, including public hearings, notice shall be given complying with subsection (c) to all of the following: 
(1)  All owners of the property that is the subject of the request; 
(2)  All persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the property that is the subject of the request; 
(3)  The occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property regardless of whether the property or structure is located within the City of Warren. Notice need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. If a single structure contains more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
(c)  Delivery; contents. The notice is considered to be given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United States Postal Service or other public or private delivery service. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing date. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used for the intended recipient of the notice. Notices shall include the following information: 
(1)  Describe the nature of the request. 
(2)  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. 
(3)  The notice shall include a list of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. 
(4)  State when and where the hearing will be conducted and the request will be considered. 
(5)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 8. - APPEAL 
 
Section 20.43 - Decision final; appeal to circuit court. 
The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. A party aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Circuit Court for the County of Macomb as provided under MCL 125.3606. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Section 20.44 - Time to file appeal. 
An appeal from a decision of a Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the Zoning Board of Appeals issues its decision in writing signed by the Chair, or within twenty-one (21) days after the Zoning Board of Appeals approves the minutes of its decision. 
(Ord. No. 30-986, § 1, 7-28-09)  
ARTICLE XXI. - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Planning commission, § 7.22. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
Section 21.01 - Powers and duties. 
The City Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Commission as specified in Section 3, Act 285, Public Acts of Michigan 1931 [MCL 125.33], as amended, and in Section 4, Act 207, Public Acts of Michigan 1921 [MCL 125.584], as amended, and shall conform the duties of said Commission provided in these Acts, together with such other powers and duties as are given to such Commission by the provisions of this article, including authority to act on all matters requiring the approval or recommendation of such Commission. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 8, 4-12-83)  
Section 21.02 - Rules of procedure. 
The City Planning Commission is hereby authorized to adopt Rules of Procedure consistent with the statutes of Michigan and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 8, 4-12-83)  
Section 21.03 - Authority to approve special land uses. 
Whenever in this article the lawful exercise or existence of a use requires the approval of the City Planning Commission such Commission is hereby authorized and directed to investigate the matter requiring such approval, to conduct a hearing thereon, to make a determination, to either grant or refuse the approval and to do all things reasonably necessary to the making of such investigation and determination, subject to the provisions of Section 22.15 of this Ordinance and further pursuant to Section 4a, Act 207, Public Acts of Michigan 1921 [MCL 125.584a], as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 8, 4-12-83)  
Section 21.04 - Site plan review. 
In addition to those uses specifically mentioned above in this article requiring site plan approval, any multiple family structure, mobile home unit, commercial or industrial structure or addition thereto shall receive site plan review and approval pursuant to Section 22.16 of this article prior to the final processing of an application for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 8, 4-12-83)  
Section 21.05 - Court action - notice to property owners. 
In the event a legal action is commenced against the City relative to the application of the zoning ordinance, the Clerk for the City Council shall send a notice to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question by U. S. mail addressed to the property owners at the addresses given in the last assessment roll. The notice shall contain the title of the cause and Circuit Court Case number. 
When the results of the court action are received the Clerk for the City Council shall send a notice of the results to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question by U. S. mail addressed to property owners at the address given in the last assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 8, 4-12-83)  
Section 21.06 - Fee schedule. 
At the time of filing an application for hearing before the Planning Commission the applicant shall pay in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of City Council. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 8, 4-12-83)  
ARTICLE XXI-A. - VILLAGE HISTORIC DISTRICT[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-1006, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Sept. 23, 2014, repealed Art. XXI-A and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. XXI-A, §§ 21A.01—21A.12, pertained to Village Historic District Zoning and derived from Ord. No. 30-521, § 1(21A.01—21A.12), adopted Dec. 28, 1976, and Ord. No. 30-880, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 1997 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Section 21A.01 - Background and purpose. 
The ordinance is intended to protect the Village Historic District, because of its distinctive character and rich historical heritage; and to encourage interest in the City of Warren's historic past. Historic preservation is a public purpose. This article is established pursuant to the Michigan Local Historic Districts Act, P.A. 169 of 1970, as amended by MCL 399.201 et seq. Pursuant to this ordinance and the applicable provisions of the Michigan Local Historic Districts Act, the City of Warren (City) shall regulate the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in the Village Historic District. This ordinance is also intended to: 
(a)  Promote the economic and general welfare of our residents by fostering civic beauty through the encouragement of appropriate historic settings and conservation of desirable historical character. 
(b)  Encourage educational, recreational, and cultural activities within our municipality which advance the principles and goals of historic preservation and community development, as embodied in the Master Plan. 
(c)  Safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving the Village Historic District's history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture. 
(d)  Stabilize and improve property values in the Village Historic District and the surrounding areas. 
(e)  Strengthen the local economy. 
(f)  Promote the use of the Village Historic District for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the City and the State. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.02 - District boundaries. 
(a)  The City Council may, at any time, modify boundaries of the Village Historic District, or eliminate the Village Historic District. 
(b)  The Village Historic District is established. The Village Historic District boundaries are described as follows: 
THE VILLAGE OF WARREN 
THE VILLAGE OF WARREN 
Beginning at the intersection of the north side right-of-way line of Chicago Road and the southeast corner of lot 15 of Block 7 of Assessor's Addition to City of Warren; thence westerly along the north right-of-way line of Chicago Road to the southwest corner of lot 1 of re-plat John Warner Subdivision; thence in a southwesterly direction to the northeast corner of lot 7 of Block 3 of Hoard's and Martin's Plat of the City of Warren; thence south along the east property line of said lot to the southeast corner; thence westerly along the south property lines of lots 1 thru 7 of Block 3 of Hoard's and Martin's Plat of the City of Warren to the southwest corner of lot 1 of said plat; thence continuing westerly across Flynn Street and along the south property lines of lots 2 thru 7 of Block 4 of Hoard's and Martin's Plat of the City of Warren to the intersection of the southwest corner of lot 2 of said plat and the east right-of-way of Mound Road; thence northerly to a point on the west property line of and 33.42 ft. north of the southwest corner of lot 1 of Block 4 of Assessor's Addition to the City of Warren; thence in a westerly direction to the southeast corner of lot 2 of Block 3 of Assessor's Addition to the City of Warren; thence along the south property line (Beebe Ave) of lot 2 of said plat to a point on the east property line of and 30 ft. north of the southeast corner of lot 13 of Block 2 of the Assessor's Addition to the City of Warren; thence west to a point on the west property line of and 30 ft. north of the southwest corner of lot 13 of Block 2 of said plat; thence north along the west property lines of lots 13 thru 18 of Block 2 of Assessor's Plat of the City of Warren to a point on the west property line of and 116.34 ft. north of the southwest corner of lot 8 of said plat and the southeast corner of P.I.N. 13-05-429-023; thence westerly along the south property lines of P.I.N. 13-05-429-022 and 13-05-429-023, 159.48 ft. to the southwest corner of P.I.N. 13-05-429-022 and a point on the east property line of and 149.04 ft. south of the south side right-of-way of Chicago Road and northeast corner of P.I.N. 13-05-428-009; thence south 115 ft. to the southeast corner of P.I.N. 13-05-428-009; thence westerly 105.25 ft. to the southwest corner of said P.I.N.; thence northerly to a point on the west property line of and 40 ft. north of the southwest corner of said P.I.N. and the southeast corner of P.I.N. 13-05-428-001; thence west along the south property line of said P.I.N. 135.74 ft. to the center of Lexington Heights Street; thence northerly to a point on the north right-of-way line of Chicago Road and the southwest corner of P.I.N. 13-05-433-001 thru 13-05-433-006 Village West MCCP Condominiums; thence northerly along the west property line of said condominiums to a point on the south side of the Red Run Drain; thence easterly along the south side of the Red Run Drain traversing across Mound Road and continuing to a point being the northeast corner of P.I.N. 13-04-329-001; thence south along the east property line of said P.I.N. 405 ft. to the northeast corner of lot 15 of Block 7 of Assessor's Addition of the City of Warren; thence easterly along the north property line of said lot 67.70 ft.; thence southerly along the east property line of said lot to the point of beginning on the north side right-of-way of Chicago Road. 
Also non-contiguous parcels identified as follows: Eckstein Park consisting of P.I.N. 13-04-326-001 through 13-04-326-003; and Warren Union Cemetery consisting of P.I.N. 13-05-180-002. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, and phrases shall mean: 
Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
Applicant means any person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that wishes to perform work that requires a permit on a resource in the Village Historic District. 
Certificate of Appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
Commission means the City's Village Historic District Commission. 
Demolition means the entire or partial razing or destruction of a resource including, but not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate, and that adversely affects a resource. 
Fire alarm system means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire or by-products of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke alarms. 
Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection of resources that are significant in history, architecture, archeology, engineering, or culture. 
Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archeology, engineering, or culture of this State or a community within this State or of the United States. 
Notice to Proceed means the written permission for work that is inappropriate, and that adversely affects the resource. 
Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource, except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for purposes of this article. 
Permit means approval to perform work, indicated either by a Certificate of Appropriateness, or a Notice to Proceed. 
Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of this article. 
Resource means any publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space located in the Village Historic District. 
Smoke alarm means a single-station or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke and not connected to a system. As used in this subdivision, "single-station alarm" means an assembly incorporating a detector, the control equipment, and the alarm sounding device into a single unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation. "Multiple-station alarm" means two (2) or more single-station alarms that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one (1) alarm causes all integrated separate audible alarms to operate. 
Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition of a resource, excluding ordinary maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Sections 21A.04—21A.06 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEMBERSHIP, POWERS, AND DUTIES 
 
Section 21A.07 - Established; membership; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  Established . The Commission is hereby established. 
(b)  Membership and appointment. 
i.  The Mayor shall appoint the voting members of the Commission. 
ii.  The Commission shall consist of seven (7) voting members. 
iii.  The Commissioners shall: 
i.  Reside in the local unit as defined by MCL 399.201a; 
ii.  If available, include at least three (3) members who are property owners within the Village Historic District; 
iii.  Include at least two (2) members from a list of citizens submitted by a duly organized local historic preservation organization; 
iv.  Include a majority of members who have a clearly demonstrated interest in, or knowledge of historic preservation; and 
v.  If available, include a graduate of an accredited school of architecture who has two (2) years of architectural experience, or who is an architect registered in this State. 
iv.  The Mayor may also appoint one or more nonvoting delegates. 
i.  Nonvoting delegates shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in, or knowledge of historic preservation. 
ii.  The delegate shall not vote. 
iii.  The Mayor may remove nonvoting delegates at any time. 
v.  City Council may appoint a nonvoting ex-officio member. 
(c)  Terms. A Commissioners' term shall be three (3) years. The Commissioners currently serving on the Commission at the time of the adoption of this Article shall continue to serve on the Commission until their terms would have expired pursuant to the repealed enabling ordinance. Commissioners are eligible for re-appointment to succeeding terms. 
(d)  Vacancies . In the event of a vacancy on the Commission, the Mayor shall make an interim appointment within sixty (60) calendar days of being notified of the vacancy. The interim Commissioner shall complete the remainder of the outgoing Commissioner's term. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.08 - Powers and duties. 
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  To adopt rules of procedure. 
(b)  To review permit applications for work affecting resources. 
(c)  To issue (1) a Certificate of Appropriateness, for appropriate proposed work; or (2) a Notice to Proceed or a denial of the application for proposed inappropriate work, on a resource that affects the exterior appearance, or the interior arrangements, as provided in MCL 399.205(1) and (4). 
(d)  To issue a Notice to Proceed, or deny an application to demolish a resource. 
(e)  To give advice and guidance regarding any proposed work on a resource. 
(f)  To advise and assist property owners, City Departments, City Council, the Mayor, and the general public on physical and financial aspects, and benefits of historic preservation. 
(g)  To recommend to the City Council the designation of additional historic districts from resources chosen according to the criteria listed in MCL 399.203 and MCL 399.214. 
(h)  To accept and administer grants and gifts given to the Commission for the purpose of preserving the Village Historic District. 
(i)  To enter into agreements and contracts for the purpose of assisting the Commission in carrying out its duties. 
(j)  To write an annual report to the Mayor, at the end of the fiscal year, which reviews the budget and the Commission's work during the preceding year. 
(k)  To conduct an ongoing survey, in accordance with the survey procedures established by the State Historic Preservation Office, in order to identify properties, structures, and areas that exemplify the cultural, social, spiritual, economic, political, educational, engineering, or architectural history of the City, State, or nation. 
(l)  To keep a register of all designated historic resources within the Village Historic District, including all information required for each designation. 
(m)  To determine an appropriate system of markers, and to confer recognition on the owners of historic resources, within the Village Historic District, by means of certificates, plaques, or markers. 
(n)  To nominate Village Historic District historic resources to the State and National Register of Historic Places, and to review and comment on any nominations submitted to the Commission. 
(o)  To disseminate information to the public concerning those resources deemed worthy of preservation, and to encourage the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of resources of historic and/or architectural interest. 
(p)  To adopt design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment and seek approval of the standards and guidelines from the State Historic Preservation Office. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Sections 21A.09—21A.11 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND APPEAL 
 
Section 21A.12 - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. An applicant shall obtain a permit from the Commission before performing any work on a resource that affects: 
(1)  The exterior appearance of the resource including, but not limited to: (1) work to the interior that causes visible change to the exterior, and (2) demolition; or 
(2)  The interior of the resource that City Council specifically authorizes the Village Historic District Commission to review. 
(b)  Permit not required. A permit is not required for ordinary maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.13 - Application. 
An applicant shall file a complete permit application with the Commission. The permit application shall include information that the Commission deems necessary to review the application under Section 21A.15 and 21A.16. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.14 - Filing fee. 
(a)  At the time of making a permit application, an applicant shall pay a filing fee as set by resolution of the City Council. A permit application shall not be considered complete until the fee has been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.15 - Review of application. 
(a)  On receipt of a complete permit application, the Commission shall place the permit application on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting. 
(b)  The Commission shall review the permit application for compliance with the standards and guidelines stated in this Article. 
(c)  After reviewing the permit application, the Commission may issue: 
(1)  A Certificate of Appropriateness; 
(2)  A Notice to Proceed; or 
(3)  A denial of the permit. 
(d)  A Certificate of Appropriateness or a Notice to Proceed authorizes the proposed work to proceed, subject to all other provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  The Commission's failure to act shall constitute an approval of the application, if: 
(1)  Sixty (60) calendar days have passed since the date the applicant filed a complete application; and 
(2)  The Commission and the applicant do not sign a written extension agreement. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.16 - Commission action, and standards for review. 
(a)  Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(1)  The Commission shall only issue a Certificate of Appropriateness if the permit application provides: 
i.  For work that complies the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR Part 67, or design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts, if they are equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of Interior's standards and guidelines, and are established or approved by the State Historic Preservation Office; and 
ii.  That the resource has, or will have, before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the State Construction Code. 
(2)  In making a finding of whether to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission shall also consider all of the following: 
i.  The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area. 
ii.  The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area. 
iii.  The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used. 
iv.  Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission finds relevant. 
(b)  Notice to Proceed. 
(1)  The Commission may issue a Notice to Proceed for work that does not meet the standards for a Certificate of Appropriateness, if the Commission finds any of the following conditions prevail, and that a Notice to Proceed is necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
i.  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or the structure's occupants. 
ii.  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing and environmental clearances. 
iii.  Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value, or moving the resource to a vacant site within a historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner. The applicant shall provide proof of financial hardship as required and defined by the Commission. 
iv.  Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(c)  Denial of Permit Application . 
(1)  If the Commission finds that neither a Certificate of Appropriateness, nor a Notice to Proceed is proper, it shall deny the applicant's permit. 
(2)  If the Commission denies an applicant's permit, the applicant shall not perform the proposed work. 
(3)  If the Commission denies a permit, it shall provide to the applicant: 
i.  A written explanation of the reasons for denial; 
ii.  If applicable, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for Commission review when suggested changes have been made; and 
iii.  Notification of the applicant's right of appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board and the Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.17 - Notification of action. 
(a)  The Commission shall file Certificates of Appropriateness, Notices to Proceed, and denials of applications with the Division of Buildings Safety and Engineering and the Planning Department. The decision of the Commission shall be binding on all departments of the City. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.18 - Approval of minor classes of work. 
(a)  The Commission may delegate the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness for designated minor classes of work to the Director of the Division of Buildings Safety and Engineering. 
(b)  The Commission shall provide specific written standards to the Director of the Division of Buildings Safety and Engineering for issuing a Certificate of Appropriateness-Minor Class of Work. 
(c)  The Director of the Division of Buildings Safety and Engineering shall forward all Certificates of Appropriateness-Minor Class of Work to the Commission for record keeping. 
(d)  On at least a quarterly basis, the Commission shall review the Certificates of Appropriateness issued by the Director of the Division of Buildings Safety and Engineering to determine if the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.19 - Appeal from decision of the commission. 
(a)  An applicant aggrieved by the Commission's decision may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation Review Board. 
(b)  An applicant shall file the appeal within sixty (60) days after the Commission provides its decision to the applicant. The applicant may submit all, or part of his or her evidence and arguments in written form. 
(c)  An applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the Macomb County Circuit Court. 
(d)  A citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the City aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may appeal the decision to the Macomb County Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Sections 21A.20—21A.24 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - METHODS TO PRESERVE RESOURCES 
 
Section 21A.25 - Plan for preservation of resource. 
(a)  If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the Commission considers valuable to the City, State, or nation, and the Commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the City, State, or nation, the Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.26 - Prevention of demolition by neglect. 
(a)  On a finding by the Commission that a resource is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair, within a reasonable period of time, all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect; or 
(2)  If the owner does not, or cannot make repairs within the time prescribed, the Commission or its agents may seek a court order to enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. 
i.  The cost of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City as a special assessment against the property. 
ii.  The Commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section by obtaining an order from the Macomb County Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.27 - Demolition. 
(a)  Prior to issuing a Notice to Proceed to demolish a resource, the Commission may require an applicant to have a historical survey of the property done before or after demolishing the resource. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.28 - Remedies for work performed without a permit. 
(a)  When any person performs work or causes work to be performed on a resource without first obtaining a permit required by this Article, and the Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission may require the owner to, within a reasonable period of time: 
(1)  Restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work was done; or 
(2)  Modify the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(b)  If the owner does not comply with the Commission's restoration or modification requirement within the time prescribed, the Commission may seek an order from the Macomb County Circuit Court that requires the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(c)  If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the Court, and the order so provides, the Commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(1)  The cost of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City as a special assessment against the property. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.29 - Moratorium. 
(a)  If the City Council finds that pending work will cause irreparable harm to a resource, the City Council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period, not to exceed six (6) months. 
(b)  After the expiration of the initial emergency moratorium period, if the City Council finds that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present, it may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period, not to exceed six (6) months. 
(c)  The Commission may summarily deny any pending permit application concerning a resource that is subject to an emergency moratorium. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Section 21A.30 - Acquisition of resource by city. 
(a)  As provided by the Michigan Local Historic District's Act, MCL 399.207, the City Council may acquire, and the Commission may maintain a resource if: 
(1)  Efforts by the Commission to preserve a resource fail; or 
(2)  City Council determines, after review and recommendation of the Commission, that it is in the public interest to acquire the resource. 
(b)  On the recommendation of the Commission, the City may sell resources acquired under this Section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES 
 
Section 21A.31 - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or entity who violates any provision of this Article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of up to $5,000.00. 
(b)  Pursuant to MCL 399.215(2), a court may order the person or entity to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 30-1006, § 2, 9-23-14)  
Sections 21A.32—21A.35 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI-B. - DOWNTOWN CENTER[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-968, § 1, adopted March 28, 2006, repealed former Art. XXI-B, in its entirety, which pertained to the City Center District. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Art. XXI-B to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of Ord. No. 30-968. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE, INTENT AND GOALS 
 
Section 21B.01 - General purpose. 
The purpose of the Downtown Center is to encourage and support the development of a downtown center comprised of both public facilities and private development to provide a broad spectrum of activities and services in one (1) centralized area of the community which will include trade and commerce, professional services, specialized shops, governmental and cultural activities developed with appropriate density, scale and design integrity to allow the mixing of uses typically separated by district in a manner that ensures compatibility of uses. 
In order to carry out the spirit of this ordinance, it is intended that the area comprising the Downtown Center be developed according to the very carefully formulated design standards contained in this Article, recommended by the Urban Design Manual, the Streetscape Design Guidelines and tailored after the Downtown Development Authority Primary Corridor Design Study. These documents are on file with the Planning Department and the Downtown Development Authority. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.02 - Development goals. 
The regulations and design standards contained in this article are intended to encourage the development of a Downtown Center in accordance with the following goals: 
(1)  To promote the goals and objectives of the concept plan developed by Urban Design Associates, the Comprehensive Development Plan adopted in 1966 and other applicable long range plans. 
(2)  To encourage harmonious development of public facilities and private development to insure that the Downtown Center will offer a broad spectrum of activities, residential uses, trade, commerce, retail, specialized shops, governmental and cultural activities. 
(3)  To permanently preserve an open space or park area to provide a gathering place for visitors to the Downtown Center and allow for recreational, cultural, civic and ceremonial activities in the Downtown Center area. 
(4)  To encourage creative development design allowing a greater mix of uses to occur in close proximity to one another and to require specific placement and articulation of buildings so that a more pedestrian friendly urban fabric will be provided in the Downtown Center. 
(5)  To foster an appealing aesthetic appearance of the Downtown Center area through quality building design and site development; to provide trees and landscaping to enhance the development; and to emphasize pedestrian accessibility. 
(6)  To bring about and encourage redevelopment of sites where an orderly change of use is determined necessary to be consistent with the purpose of the Downtown Center. 
(7)  To encourage uses for parcels which can provide transitional buffers to single use residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.03—21B.05 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ZONING DISTRICT 
 
Section 21B.06 - Area. 
The Downtown Center shall consist of three (3) zones, referred to as Neighborhoods: the City Square Neighborhood, the Urban Neighborhood and the Gateway Neighborhood. The boundaries of the Downtown Center and each zone therein, are designated on the map attached hereto, and adopted herein by reference.  
Downtown Center Zoning Map 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.07 - Mixed use district. 
The Downtown Center is a mixed use district comprised of three (3) mixed use zones of varying intensity. The Downtown Center imposes specific use and site design standards for density, set back, height and other regulations applicable to each zone to encourage development of a Downtown with a transitional gateway area to serve as a graduated buffer to the surrounding residential areas. Each of the three (3) zones are unique to the Downtown Center due to their relationship to the City Hall, City Square and Downtown area. These standards are applicable only to the Downtown Center. In the event of a conflict between a regulation in this Article and any other applicable regulation in this ordinance, the standards for the Downtown Center shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.08 - City Square Neighborhood. 
The City Square Neighborhood is to serve as an active meeting point for the community providing essential services to the users of the Downtown. This zone shall serve as the heart of the city bringing together civic, governmental and cultural activities to create a unique sense of place. At street level, uses shall compliment the City Square and encourage interaction of the community, such as: civic and cultural uses, coffee shops, restaurants, and retail shops that will activate the street and provide amenities to the users of the City Square. Upper floors of buildings shall provide a myriad of office and housing options intended to provide around the clock vitality and energy to the street life. The buildings in close relation to the City Square shall have higher densities to provide a unique urban pedestrian life style in close relation to the City Square. Building size, placement and uses shall strictly conform to the regulations adopted to preserve the features of an urban zone. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.09 - Urban Neighborhood. 
The Urban Neighborhood shall provide a unique zone which allows both residential and business uses to operate in the context of a denser environment. Pedestrian activity is promoted by encouraging the physical layout of buildings close to the street and sidewalk edge. This layout places an emphasis on providing access for pedestrians. Parking demands generated by these uses shall be provided in designated areas so as not to impinge upon the pedestrian context. This zone shall allow a variety of retail, commercial, professional business, office and recreational uses at the street level to generate the desired vitality of the district. The residential densities shall be highest here to provide a round the clock urban pedestrian lifestyle. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.10 - Gateway Neighborhood. 
The Gateway Neighborhood shall provide land use transition from the higher intensity Urban Neighborhood to the surrounding residential zones. This transitional area shall provide an appropriate mix of uses to serve adjacent neighborhoods designating a lower level of intensity that will compliment the adjacent single use zoning. A mix of uses shall be allowed that appropriately transition from the Urban Neighborhood to the more residential nature of the Gateway Neighborhood by encouraging a greater percentage of residential and less intense office uses within this area. Retail opportunities shall focus on serving the immediate surrounding neighborhoods. A route shall be provided for pedestrian travel to the Urban Neighborhood and City Square. Parking requirements in this zone shall reflect the decreases in density. Building scale, size and density will step down in volume from that allowed in the Urban Neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.11 - Non-conforming uses. 
The adoption of the Downtown Center and the carefully formulated design standards may render a lawful existing use located in the Downtown Center dimensionally non-conforming. These uses may be continued exactly as they existed on the date the Downtown Center ordinance was enacted. Section 4.17 of the Zoning Ordinance shall regulate the continuation, restoration, repair, maintenance and removal of all lawful uses rendered non-conforming. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.12—21B.14 - Reserved  
DIVISION 3. - USES PERMITTED IN THE DOWNTOWN CENTER 
 
Section 21B.15 - In general. 
In order to meet the objectives of this article, to ensure compatibility of uses and to achieve the successful development of a downtown, uses permitted in each zone have been carefully tailored to foster and support the development of a downtown. Specific uses permitted in each zone are set forth in the following sections. Subject to the specific provisions of this article, the following general categories of uses may be permitted in the Downtown Center: 
Residential, Professional Business, Office, Local Business, General Business, Recreational, Governmental, Libraries, and Civic Organizations. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.16 - Accessory uses permitted. 
Uses customarily accessory to permitted principal uses may be permitted as approved by the planning commission during site plan approval and shall be designated on the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.17 - Prohibited uses. 
To promote and encourage the development of a downtown area as intended by this ordinance the following uses have been determined to be incompatible with the goals and objectives set forth for the development of this district. Therefore, the following uses are prohibited in the Downtown Center: 
Wholesale and intensive business 
Industrial and developmental manufacturing 
Uses involving the processing of raw materials including those for shipment in bulk form to be used in an industrial or commercial operation at another location 
Warehouses 
Automotive service and repair 
Gasoline stations and oil service stations 
Automobile washes 
Outdoor storage or display of materials, equipment, or vehicles except, outdoor retail sales approved pursuant to this ordinance 
New and used automobile dealerships/lots 
Hospitals and sanitariums 
Veterinary clinic, kennel or stable 
Pawn shops 
Amusement centers and arcades 
Sexually oriented businesses 
Mobile home parks 
Single-family residential 
Two-family residential 
Drive in restaurants 
Tattoo establishments 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.18 - Uses permitted in the City Square Neighborhood. 
(a)  Street level. To encourage development of the City Square as an active meeting point for the community and to serve as the heart of the city bringing together civic, governmental and cultural activities, the following categories of uses shall be allowed that will activate the street and provide amenities to the users of the City Square: 
Community buildings 
Public social clubs 
Day care centers 
Museums open to the public 
Libraries 
Professional business 
Office 
Local business 
General business 
Public and private parking structures 
(b)  Upper levels. Uses permitted in upper levels of buildings are encouraged to provide a variety of office and housing options which will provide around the clock vitality and energy to the street life. The buildings in close relation to the City Square shall have higher densities to provide a unique urban pedestrian life style in close relation to the City Square, therefore, the following uses shall be allowed in the upper floors in the City Square in addition to the uses listed above: 
Multiple-family housing 
High rise apartments 
Professional offices 
Medical offices excluding emergency care centers 
(c)  Sidewalk. Outdoor retail sales shall be allowed in the City Square as sidewalk sales of the goods sold in the principal business as regulated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.19 - Uses permitted in the Urban Neighborhood. 
(a)  Street level. The Urban Neighborhood shall provide a unique zone which allows both residential and business uses to operate in the context of a denser environment. Pedestrian activity is promoted by encouraging the physical layout of buildings close to the street and sidewalk edge. This layout places an emphasis on providing access for pedestrians. This zone shall allow a variety of retail, commercial, professional business, office and recreational uses to generate the desired vitality of the Downtown. The categories of uses allowed are listed as follows: 
Community buildings 
Public social clubs 
Day care centers 
Museums open to the public 
Libraries 
Professional business 
Office 
Local business 
General business 
Public and private parking structures and surface lots 
(b)  Upper levels. Upper levels of buildings shall also provide a myriad of office and housing options which will provide around the clock vitality and energy to the street life. The buildings in the Urban Neighborhood shall have higher densities to provide a unique urban pedestrian life style, therefore, in addition to the uses listed above, the following uses shall be allowed in the upper floors of buildings in the Urban Neighborhood: 
Multiple-family housing 
High rise apartments 
Professional offices 
Medical offices excluding emergency care centers 
(c)  Sidewalks. Outdoor retail sales shall be allowed in the Downtown Center as sidewalk sales of the goods sold in the principal business as regulated in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.20 - Uses permitted in the Gateway Neighborhood. 
(a)  Street level. The Gateway Neighborhood shall provide land use transition from the higher intensity Urban Neighborhood to the surrounding residential zones. A mix of uses shall be allowed that appropriately transition from the Urban Neighborhood to the more residential nature of the Gateway Neighborhood by encouraging a greater percentage of residential and less intense office uses within this area. Retail opportunities shall be encouraged that focus on serving the immediately surrounding neighborhoods. The following categories of uses shall be allowed at street level in the Gateway Neighborhood: 
Professional business 
Office 
Local business 
Schools, nursery and day care centers 
Medical office 
Private parking structures and surface lots 
Multiple-family housing 
Low rise apartments 
Senior housing and congregate living 
(b)  Upper levels. To encourage a greater percentage of residential, the following uses shall be allowed in the upper levels of buildings in the Gateway Neighborhood: 
Multiple-family housing 
Low rise apartments 
Senior housing and congregate living 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.21 - Mixed use standards; densities. 
Each neighborhood zone within the Downtown Center is unique. To ensure that differences in intensity between the neighborhoods are clearly preserved, the following mixed use standards and densities shall apply. 
(a)  City Square Neighborhood: 
1.  Eighty (80) percent of primary frontage must contain "Active Ground Floor Uses" as defined in Division 4, Definitions. 
2.  Residential uses are permissible only at densities not less than twenty (20) dwellings units per acre. 
3.  Residential uses must be located at least eighteen (18) feet above grade. 
(b)  Urban Neighborhood: 
1.  Seventy (70) percent of primary frontage must contain "Active Ground Floor Uses" as defined in Division 4, Definitions. 
2.  Residential uses are permissible only at densities not less than eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre. 
(c)  Gateway Neighborhood: 
1.  Twenty-five (25) percent of primary frontage must contain "Active Ground Floor Uses" as defined in Division 4, Definitions. 
2.  Residential uses are only permissible at densities not less than fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre. 
3.  Residential uses shall occupy at least fifty (50) percent of the building square footage. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.22—21B.25 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DOWNTOWN CENTER DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Section 21B.26 - Design standards. 
The Downtown Center imposes specific site design standards for density, set back, building height, building placement, building articulation, access and parking requirements developed for each zone within the Downtown Center to encourage development of a Downtown with higher densities to provide a unique urban pedestrian life with transitional areas intended to provide graduated buffers to the surrounding residential areas. Development shall conform to the design standards as set forth in this division. The Urban Design Manual reviewed by the Downtown Development Authority and adopted by the planning commission illustrates and can be used as a guide in implementing the design standards contained in this division. Although a guideline, the Urban Design Manual shall not have the effect of modifying any standard set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.27 - Definitions for design standards. 
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this article. 
Active ground floor use: A street level use located on a primary street that is open to the general public and occupies a minimum of eighteen (18) linear feet of frontage. Any lobby exclusively welcoming users or providing access to upper floors shall not be considered an active ground floor use. 
Alley: Internal block vehicular access drive. 
Build-to-zone: The portion of a parcel in which building walls are required to be situated within, to facilitate the development of a continuous street wall along a right-of-way. The configuration of the build-to-zone is determined by neighborhood and the adjacent street designations (Figure 1). 
Building envelope: Volume inside of which a building may be constructed as defined by the build-to zone and total allowable height (Figure 1).  
Building Envelope 
Building floor area ratio (FAR): Specifies the amount of development that is permitted on a specific site. Building floor area ratio shall be calculated based upon floor area measured from outside wall to outside wall divided by the total site area. For example, a 1.0 FAR means that for every square foot of lot area, one (1) square foot of gross building area may be developed on the site. A 5.0 FAR means that for every square foot of lot area, five (5) square feet of gross building area may be developed on the site (Figure 2).  
Building Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
Building floor plate: Area occupied by a single floor at the street level grade of a building measured from the outside of the exterior walls. 
Frontage: The parcel edge adjoining a right-of-way. 
Primary frontage: On parcels having more than one (1) frontage, the primary frontage shall be defined as the side of the parcel facing the R.O.W. with the highest designation according to the approved Streetscape Design Guidelines. Primary streets are the highest ranking followed by secondary streets, greenways and then tertiary streets. The Van Dyke Service Drive is a secondary street. Parcels with two (2) primary frontages are required to meet the requirements of the primary frontage on both frontages (Figure 3).  
Primary Frontage 
Secondary frontage: The edge of a parcel adjacent to a right-of-way that has a lesser street designation than the frontage that is deemed to be the primary frontage (Figure 3). 
Least significant frontage: Parcels with adjoining right-of-way on three (3) or more sides may have one (1) least significant frontage that will be determined as the frontage having the lowest ranking side pursuant to the adopted Streetscape Design Guidelines. This least significant frontage will be exempt from the build-to-zone requirements or the build-to-zone will equal zero (0) percent (Figure 3). 
Ground floor use: A use occupying the street level of a building. 
High rise apartment: A residential structure taller than sixty-four (64) feet. 
Public entrance: The main pedestrian access into a building. 
Recessed entries: Any building entry pushed back from the building facade with additional floors above that provide additional exterior standing room for people entering and exiting the building. Recessed entries will not count against the build-to zone requirements provided that they do not exceed fifteen (15) feet in depth or width and not more than twenty-four (24) feet in height (Figure 4).  
Recessed Entries 
R.O.W./right-of-way: Right-of-way applies to any existing or proposed public street right-of-way. Measured from property line to property line. 
Service area: Space exclusively reserved for loading docks, refuse collection, utility interface and building maintenance equipment. 
Signature sign: Building identification sign on a structure taller than six (6) stories, located on or above the highest occupied floor, with text no larger than three (3) feet in total height. 
Street level: The floor level of a building where there is pedestrian access to that level from the outside and which is no more than two (2) feet below or five (5) feet above the adjacent right-of-way grade. 
Upper level: All levels of a building above the street level. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.28 - Urban Design Manual and Streetscape Design Guidelines. 
The Urban Design Manual and the Streetscape Design Guidelines have been formulated as guidelines for development, including infrastructure, architectural design and exterior building materials in the Downtown Center. The Urban Design Manual and the Streetscape Design Guidelines shall be reviewed by the Downtown Development Authority and formally adopted by the planning commission. The design manual and guidelines are guidelines to be applied by the planning commission in the site plan review and approval process. The manual and guidelines shall be reviewed and modified periodically to reflect the advances in the industry. Any proposed modification shall be reviewed by the planning commission and submitted to city council for approval by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.29 - Exterior building materials. 
The exterior building material guidelines shall incorporate the following standards for all three (3) of the zones within the Downtown Center: 
1.  Walls visible from all rights-of-way shall be finished in a durable hard surface such as brick, glass, stone, ceramic, pre-cast panels, integrally tinted textured masonry block or concrete siding. 
2.  All exterior materials shall be used consistently on all sides of the building. 
3.  Concrete blocks or cinder blocks are prohibited on exterior walls of the building unless burnished, fluted or sculpturally textured. Residential grade sidings, plastic siding, wood and asphalt are also prohibited on exterior walls of the building. Exterior insulation finishing systems (EIFS), stucco, wood, reflective or color-tinted glass are prohibited as primary materials on exterior walls, however, may be used as accent materials ten (10) feet above grade. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.30 - Mass and height standards. 
Building mass is determined by the building floor area ratio and building height. These standards seek to balance higher density development with the need for access to air and light, views to and from the Downtown, safe pedestrian access and the vehicular carrying capacity of the street network. 
(a)  City Square Neighborhood standards: 
1.  Building floor area ratio for all development within the City Square Neighborhood must fall within 1.0—5.0 FAR. 
2.  Minimum building height of two (2) levels (not less than twenty-four (24) feet) along all rights-of-way is required. 
3.  Maximum building height is set forth in the maximum building height map based on the location of the property. 
4.  In buildings taller than five (5) levels, all floors above the fifth level shall have a maximum floor plate of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(b)  Urban Neighborhood standards: 
1.  Building floor area ratio for all development within the Urban Neighborhood must fall within 1.0—5.0 FAR. 
2.  Minimum building height of two (2) levels (not less than twenty-four (24) feet) along all rights-of-way is required. 
3.  Maximum building height is set forth in the maximum building height map based on the location of the property. 
4.  In buildings taller than five (5) levels, all floors above the fifth level shall have a maximum floor plate of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(c)  Gateway Neighborhood standards: 
1.  Building floor area ratio for all development within the Gateway Neighborhood must fall within 0.5—3.0 FAR. 
2.  Minimum building height of two (2) levels (not less than twenty (20) feet) along all rights-of-way is required. 
3.  Maximum building height is five (5) levels or sixty-four (64) feet as depicted in the maximum building height map. 
4.  Non-residential uses may not exceed a two thousand five hundred (2,500) square foot floor plate. 
 
Maximum Building Height Map 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.31 - Building scale and articulation. 
Design standards for building scale and articulation seek to provide visual interest at street level, discourage blank walls and minimize monumental scale construction as follows: 
(a)  City Square and Urban Neighborhoods. The following design standards shall apply to the City Square and the Urban Neighborhoods: 
1.  A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the ground floor building facade, calculated based on street frontage, must be transparent through the use of windows, doors or window displays. 
2.  Reflective glass is prohibited on the ground floor building facade. All glass shall possess a minimum transparency of sixty (60) percent, including the use of temporary signs. 
3.  Blank walls in excess of sixteen (16) linear feet are prohibited. 
(b)  Gateway Neighborhood. The following design standards shall apply to the Gateway Neighborhood: 
1.  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the ground floor building facade, calculated based on street frontage, must be transparent through the use of windows, doors or window displays. 
2.  Reflective glass is prohibited on the ground floor building facade. All glass shall possess a minimum transparency of sixty (60) percent. 
3.  Blank walls in excess of twelve (12) linear feet are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.32 - Pedestrian and vehicular access standards. 
Access standards are necessary to promote safe sidewalks, to minimize vehicular and pedestrian conflict points and to ensure consistent street character along primary, secondary, tertiary and greenway streets. The following access standards shall apply in the Downtown Center: 
1.  All public building entrances shall face a public right-of-way. 
2.  Any building adjacent to a primary street shall locate its public entrance on the primary street. 
3.  Parking structures and lots interior to blocks shall have defined pedestrian access ways to the street. 
4.  Service and delivery areas shall be in rear access alleys or docks. 
5.  Individual residential garage doors may not directly face a right-of-way. 
6.  Vehicular curb cuts shall not be permitted on primary streets, greenways, or streets surrounding a park. 
7.  Vehicular curb cuts shall be located at least one hundred twenty (120) feet from any other curb cut on the same side of the street, unless a shorter distance is approved by the planning commission pursuant to site plan approval. Further, no vehicular curb cut shall be located closer than one hundred twenty (120) feet from any intersection. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.33 - Building placement; build-to-zone standards. 
To support development of a downtown, building placement standards are adopted to encourage development parallel to the street. The pattern of continuous building facades adjacent to the sidewalk provides easy visual and physical access to buildings while further defining the street as a lively public space. For primarily residential streets, building placement standards encourage consistent front, side and rear yards that allow for the placement of trees, porches and driveways. Building placement with build-to-zone standards is illustrated in Figure 5 as follows:  
Primary Street R.O.W. 
(a)  Building placement standards for the City Square Neighborhood. 
1.  Building walls must be within the build-to-zone parallel to the right-of-way at a minimum of ninety (90) percent of primary frontage and sixty (60) percent of secondary frontage. 
2.  Build-to-zone shall extend from the right-of-way to five (5) feet inside the property line. 
3.  Sidewalks shall extend to the base of the building on all primary and secondary frontages. 
4.  Recessed entries are acceptable within a build-to-zone if they meet all requirements as set forth in the recessed entry provision of Division 4, Definitions. 
5.  Building walls within the build-to-zone must maintain minimum building height and must be parallel to the right-of-way. 
(b)  Building placement standards for the Urban Neighborhood. 
1.  Building walls must be within the build-to-zone parallel to the right-of-way at a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of primary frontage and fifty (50) percent of secondary frontage. 
2.  Build-to-zone shall extend from the right-of-way to ten (10) feet inside the property line. 
3.  Sidewalks shall extend to the base of the building on all primary and secondary frontages. 
4.  Recessed entries are acceptable within a build-to zone if they meet all requirements as set forth in the recessed entry provision of Division 4, Definitions. 
5.  Building walls within the build-to-zone must maintain minimum building height and must be parallel to the right-of-way. 
(c)  Building placement standards for the Gateway Neighborhood. 
1.  Building walls shall be within the build-to-zone parallel to the right-of-way at a minimum of sixty (60) percent of primary frontage and forty (40) percent of secondary frontage. 
2.  Build-to-zone shall extend from the right-of-way to twenty (20) feet inside the property line. 
3.  Recessed entries are acceptable within a build-to-zone if they meet all requirements as set forth in the recessed entry provision of Division 4, Definitions. 
4.  Building walls within the build-to-zone must maintain minimum building height and must be parallel to the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.34 - Utilities. 
All utility services to each building shall be completely installed in underground conduit. No utilities, public or private, shall be exposed overhead. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.35 - Sidewalk regulations. 
Sidewalks shall be required in all zones of the Downtown Center in accordance with this section to accommodate both pedestrian travel and use of the sidewalks for other needs such as, cafe seating, decorative planters, newspaper boxes, and public benches to create a lively and interactive downtown setting. There shall be provided a safe, clear zone along sidewalks for pedestrian travel despite the use of the sidewalk for other uses. The following regulations apply in the Downtown Center: 
1.  Width. Sidewalks widths shall comply with the standards set forth in section 21B.68. 
2.  Design. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and broom finish, to the line, grade and thickness as specified by the engineering division, except where concrete unit pavers are required as in section 21B.69. 
3.  Clear zone. A minimum six-foot clear zone shall be provided along all public sidewalks in the City Square, the Urban Neighborhood and the Gateway Neighborhood Zones. The clear zone is required to allow pedestrian travel and no permanent or temporary structure is allowed in the clear zone area (Figure 6). 
4.  Sidewalk cafe or other street furniture may be located on the public sidewalk; however, it shall not interfere with or encroach into the minimum six-foot clear zone. Use of sidewalks for storage of shopping carts, baskets or other property is prohibited. 
5.  Temporary movable sales racks associated with any permanent business shall be permitted on the public sidewalk between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. provided that the racks do not encroach into the required six-foot minimum clear zone and they do not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet or twenty (20) linear feet of frontage. 
6.  Snow removal. The occupant or owner of any premises is required to keep the sidewalks adjacent to such premises cleared of snow and ice to facilitate pedestrian use. 
 
Illustration of Clear Zone 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.36 - Awnings. 
The installation of awnings above windows and doorways is allowed in all zones of the Downtown Center to encourage greater use of outdoors areas. Compliance with the following standards is required: 
1.  All awnings, including all support structure, must be contained within a zone having a height between ten (10) feet and sixteen (16) feet above the sidewalk grade. Awnings shall not extend more than four (4) feet into the adjacent sidewalk or right-of-way. Side wind screens on awnings are permissible, provided that they do not project beyond the awning. 
2.  Awning supports or structures may not encroach into the right-of-way at heights below ten (10) feet above the adjacent sidewalk. 
3.  Awnings are limited to three (3) colors. One (1) logo of no greater than six (6) square feet including the name of the establishment is permitted. All other text and/or graphics is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.37 - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Design guidelines shall be developed for the location and design of parking structures and lots located within the Downtown Center. The Parking Design Guidelines shall be consistent with the standards set forth in subsection (b) and shall be approved by both the planning commission and the city council. The Parking Design Guidelines shall be kept on file in the planning department and the Downtown Development Authority. Any modification to the Design Guidelines shall be reviewed by the planning commission and submitted to the city council for approval by resolution. 
(b)  Parking areas shall be provided within the Downtown Center according to the requirements and regulations contained in this section and the Parking Design Guidelines and shall apply to all zones within the Downtown. 
1.  Parking shall be provided at a minimum of three (3) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of total gross building square feet. Surface parking, where allowed, shall not exceed three and one-half (3.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of total gross building square feet. 
2.  Developments unable to accommodate parking on site must participate in a shared parking plan approved by the planning commission. 
3.  Parking shall be provided within six hundred (600) feet of the use. 
4.  In the City Square Neighborhood, permanent surface parking lots are prohibited. 
5.  Parking structures shall have three and one-half (3½) feet high screen walls on all levels so that vehicles are not visible from opposite side of the right-of-way. 
6.  Parking structures are required to contain active ground floor uses at sixty (60) percent of total building frontage. 
7.  Parking in a structure or on a surface lot shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of building floor area ratio. 
8.  Parking shall not be located within ten (10) feet of any right-of-way. This setback may be reduced to five (5) feet with the use of a four-foot high screen wall. 
9.  Designated parking areas shall be used for the parking of private passenger vehicles only. No storage is allowed, except the parking of commercial trucks which do not exceed one-ton capacity, used in the operation of a business located in the Downtown Center. 
 
Illustration: Parking Structure Viewshed 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.38—21B.50 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - LANDSCAPE STANDARDS 
 
Section 21B.51 - In general; site plan approval. 
Landscaping provides aesthetic and functional amenities that enhance the character of the area, improve stormwater quality and reduce pollution, light glare, soil erosion and thermal heat island effects. In addition to the general landscape principles required herein, the pertinent sections of the site plan approval process shall also be complied with such as: Plant material standards; landscape area installation and maintenance requirements; and prohibited species sections. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.52 - Landscaping required. 
All areas not specified as vehicular, building, or pedestrian areas shall be appropriately landscaped with ground cover plantings, grass or organic (non-stone) mulch. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.53 - Service areas. 
All service areas shall be screened from view from all rights-of-way through use of a six-foot high screen wall installed in conformity with the provisions of section 21B.29. Landscape materials shall be utilized in conjunction with the wall. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.54 - Surface parking lots. 
All surface parking lots outside of the right-of-way shall be screened using a three-foot high opaque screen wall in combination with plant materials. Trees shall be located at a minimum every thirty (30) feet. A shrub or perennial planting shall be provided with a mature height minimum of two (2) feet and appropriately spaced for fifty (50) percent opacity in front of the screen wall. Breaks in the screen wall shall be provided at a minimum of fifty-foot intervals for pedestrian cut-through. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.55 - Berms. 
Berms are prohibited in the Downtown Center as a screening method as they discourage pedestrian movement and limit retail visibility. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.56—21B.59 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - SIGNAGE 
 
Section 21B.60 - Intent. 
Specific standards for the design, placement and quantity of signs in the Downtown Center are established to appropriately identify business and residential establishments; to coordinate and balance street facades; and to provide a user-friendly pedestrian environment. Article IV-A, Signs, of the Zoning Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as "sign ordinance") provides comprehensive signage regulations directed at current zoning classifications. It is intended that signage within the Downtown Center shall comply with the specific regulations contained in this division; however, all other non-conflicting regulations and standards of the sign ordinance shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.61 - General sign regulations. 
(a)  Size. Signs within the Downtown Center will be smaller than those that currently exist in commercial areas in Warren to respond to the dense urban environment, slower vehicular speeds and increased pedestrian traffic. Specific sign size will be determined by neighborhood as set forth in this ordinance. 
(b)  Location. A building facade zone is created where signs are allowed to unify the character of the Downtown Center and improve commercial way finding. Wall and projecting signs shall be located on building facades, awning/canopies or windows; and shall be installed within a zone ten (10) feet to sixteen (16) feet above the sidewalk elevation, with the exception of window signs and signature signs. 
(c)  Setback. In instances where the proposed building line meets the right-of-way, wall signs, projecting signs, canopy and awning signs may encroach into the right-of-way. All signs shall comply with the clearance requirements of the sign ordinance. Monument signs, when permitted shall meet sign ordinance setback requirements. 
(d)  Quantity. To limit visual clutter, the number of signs will be limited, by neighborhood and type, as set forth in this division. 
(e)  Color and illumination. Signs may be illuminated as provided in the sign ordinance. Sign colors, to maximize legibility and minimize confusion, shall be limited to no more than three (3) colors (including the background color) with the exception of logos. 
(f)  Prohibited sign types. The type of signs listed in the sign ordinance as prohibited are also prohibited in the Downtown Center. 
(g)  Permits. A permit shall be required for all signs, except those enumerated in section 4A.13 of the sign ordinance. 
(h)  Canopy/awning sign. One (1) canopy or one (1) awning sign per ground floor use is allowed in lieu of a wall sign. 
(i)  Informational sign. One (1) informational sign is permitted per ground floor use in compliance with the regulations of the sign ordinance. 
(j)  Identification sign. One (1) identification sign for non-ground floor tenants per building entry, of a size not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. Text size shall not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.62 - Permitted signs; size. 
In order to facilitate the objectives and goals of the Downtown Center, the sign regulations have been developed to appropriately identify business and residential establishments, coordinate and balance street facades and provide a user friendly pedestrian environment. Therefore, the following signage shall be allowed according to the zone in the Downtown Center. 
(a)  City Square and Urban Neighborhoods. 
1.  One (1) projecting sign per ground floor use, of a size not exceeding four (4) square feet. 
2.  One (1) wall sign per ground floor use, of a size not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet, except uses with Van Dyke Avenue frontage are allowed one (1) wall sign per ground floor use of a size not to exceed forty (40) square feet. 
3.  One (1) window sign per ground floor use, of a size not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. 
4.  Buildings that exceed eighty (80) feet in height are allowed one (1) signature sign per building, which shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet; except, buildings with Van Dyke Avenue frontage that exceed sixty-four (64) feet in height, are allowed one (1) signature sign per building, which shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. 
5.  Text height shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches, except for permitted signature signs; the text shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
6.  One (1) temporary sidewalk sign is permissible for any permanent business during the business hours of operation, provided that the sign is not located in the minimum clear zone, is free standing and does not exceed six (6) square feet in total area. 
7.  Freestanding and monument signs are prohibited. 
(b)  Gateway Neighborhood. 
1.  One (1) projecting sign per ground floor use, of a size not exceeding three (3) square feet. 
2.  One (1) wall sign per ground floor use, of a size not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet. 
3.  One (1) window sign per ground floor use, of a size not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. 
4.  Text size shall not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
5.  One (1) monument sign per ground floor use, of a size not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, with a five-foot set back. 
6.  One (1) temporary sidewalk sign is permissible for any permanent business during the business hours of operation, provided that the sign is not located in the minimum clear zone, is free standing and does not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.63—21B.65 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - STREETSCAPE STANDARDS 
 
Section 21B.66 - Streetscape Design Guidelines. 
All streets and rights-of-way within the Downtown Center shall be designed and installed in conformity with the approved Streetscape Design Guidelines, as amended, and reviewed by the Downtown Development Authority and adopted the planning commission in addition to meeting all engineering standards. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.67 - Streetscape types described. 
There shall be five (5) types of streetscapes within the Downtown Center described as follows: 
Primary streets are highly visible, commercial and civic oriented routes with high levels of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The following streets are designated primary streets in the Streetscape Design Guidelines: Main street; all streets surrounding the City Square; and the main ingress and egress roads from Van Dyke, named Kennedy Circle, North and South and Civic Center Drive. 
Secondary streets are commercial routes with moderate levels of pedestrian and vehicular traffic located adjacent to uses along primary streets. 
Tertiary streets are located on the eastern side of City Square, are pre-dominantly residential and have the lowest level of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
Greenway streets. The greenway streets are: Washington Boulevard, that portion of Civic Center that runs north and south and Common Road. Greenway streets are wider to accommodate separate bike lanes and a linear park with pedestrian paths thereby strengthening the connection to the north and east neighborhoods. 
Van Dyke Commercial Access Lanes shall be one-way southbound for efficient traffic movement with a sixty-foot landscaped buffer between the commercial access lane and the Van Dyke right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.68 - Required right-of-way widths. 
Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the following requirements: 
	Right-of-Way 	Roadway 

Pavement 	Sidewalks 
Primary Streets 	66' 	38' 	14' 
Civic Center Dr. 	76' 	48' 	14' 
Kennedy Circle 
(between Van Dyke and Main) 	76' 	48' 	14' 
Secondary Streets 	60' 	38' 	11' 
Tertiary Streets 	60' 	34' 	5' 
Greenway Streets 	86' 	40' 	11' 
Greenway streets shall have an additional five-foot bike lane 			
Commercial Access lanes 	30' 	19' 	11' 
Van Dyke Avenue 	30' 	19' 	11' 
 
Sidewalks and bike lanes shall be provided on both sides of street. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.69 - General streetscape regulations. 
(a)  Bump-outs that comply with the specifications of the engineering division, shall be required at major pedestrian crossings, all street corners and midway along a city block in excess of five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  Curb ramps shall be required at all pedestrian crosswalks with detectable warning markings. 
(c)  A continuous eighteen-inch concrete maintenance edge along back of curb shall be required. 
(d)  Driveway approaches are prohibited along the greenway and primary streets, however, are permitted as approved by the site plan along secondary, tertiary and commercial access lanes. 
(e)  Concrete unit pavers shall be installed at bump-outs, street corners and along the curb line of all streets except tertiary streets, to the specifications of the engineering division. 
(f)  Areas in the rights-of-way not designated as a pathway or sidewalk shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and turf in conformity with the planning commission landscape guidelines. No decorative stones allowed. 
(g)  All permanent roadway pavement shall be constructed of concrete to the specifications of the engineering division. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.70 - Lighting regulations. 
Lighting shall be required along all rights-of-way in accordance with the regulations contained in the lighting section of the adopted Streetscape Design Guidelines, including any amendments. Lighting on private property shall be provided as approved on the site plan by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.71 - Streetscape accessories. 
Streetscape accessories shall be required in accordance with the regulations contained in the adopted Streetscape Design Guidelines including light-post banners and flower baskets; planters; benches; trash receptacles; street trees and tree grates; bicycle stands, and any other accessories required by amendment. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.72—21B.80 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - SITE PLAN APPROVAL FOR DOWNTOWN CENTER 
 
Section 21B.81 - Pre-application conference. 
Prior to the submission of an application for site plan approval, the applicant shall submit a preliminary sketch and schedule a pre-application meeting with the planning department for the purpose of preliminary discussion and review regarding the proposed development. The pre-application conference shall be held at least fourteen (14) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the application will be considered. One (1) representative from the following departments shall be given notice and shall have an opportunity to provide input at the pre-application conference: Planning department, engineering division, building division, zoning division, city council, downtown development authority, and fire department. Statements made by any person during the course of a pre-application conference shall not be deemed to constitute legally binding commitments. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.82 - Application for site plan approval. 
The applicant shall submit an application for site plan approval in compliance with the planning commission standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.83 - Public hearing on application for site plan approval. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application for site plan approval, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing and comply with all requirements contained in section 22.16, site plan review, of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the planning department shall forward a copy of the proposed site plan to the following departments to provide input and the opportunity to make a written recommendation to the planning commission: Building division, city council, downtown development authority, engineering division, fire department and zoning. 
(c)  At the public hearing, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing and determine whether the site plan, as submitted, meets all of the required standards and criteria. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.84 - Written recommendation by planning commission; consideration by city council. 
(a)  Within seven (7) days after the public hearing, the planning commission shall forward a written recommendation to the city council recommending approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the request for site plan approval, stating the reasons for its recommendation. Together with its recommendation, the planning commission shall forward the site plan, and all other recommendations of record to the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall place the application for site plan approval on the agenda for consideration at its next regular meeting or a special meeting scheduled prior to the next regular meeting. The city council shall approve or deny the site plan at such meeting and shall forward a copy of the resolution of its action to petitioner within five (5) business days of the meeting. 
(c)  If city council action is not taken within thirty (30) days from receipt of the planning commission recommendation by the office of the city council, the recommendation of the planning commission shall be deemed the final decision of the city. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.85 - Standards for approval. 
A site plan shall not be approved unless it complies with all applicable standards set forth in this article, however, a proposed site plan which complies with all applicable standards shall be approved. A site plan shall be approved upon a finding that the proposed plan complies with all the following standards: 
1.  The site plan contains all information required by the ordinance and the planning commission. 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the intent and purpose of this article. 
3.  The proposed development conforms to the design standards set forth in the ordinance, in the Urban Design Manual and in the Streetscape Design Guidelines. 
4.  The proposed development complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, statutes and other laws. 
5.  The site plan indicates safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular access to the site, including access for fire or other emergency vehicles. 
6.  The site plan reflects safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
7.  The design and placement of buildings and other structures, parking, lighting, signs, refuse storage, and landscaping: 1) meets the design standards of this article; 2) ensures compatibility with surrounding properties; 3) meets the guidelines for infrastructure, architectural design and building materials; 4) ensures that the development when viewed from public rights-of-way contributes to the desired character for the Downtown Center. 
8.  The proposed development will not place demands on public services and facilities in excess of their capacity. 
9.  The proposed development was reviewed by the engineering department for grade, drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management and access. 
10.  The proposed development was reviewed by the Downtown Development Authority for consistency with the Downtown Development Plan. 
11.  The proposed development provides for sufficient public utilities. 
12.  The site plan includes an adequate landscaping plan. 
13.  The proposed development was reviewed by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.86 - Conditions attached to site plan approval. 
Reasonable conditions may be imposed in conjunction with approval of the proposed site plan, such as: 1) ensuring proper ownership or legal use of property; 2) requiring ownership association documents; 3) ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased services and facility loads caused by the land use or activity; and 4) promoting the use of land in conformity with the objectives set forth in this ordinance for the Downtown Center. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.87—21B.90 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - CONSTRUCTION 
 
Section 21B.91 - Performance guarantees. 
A performance guarantee shall be required as part of site plan approval to assure that the development is completed in compliance with the approved site plan and all applicable ordinances. The performance guarantee may consist of a cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city attorney, in a minimum amount equal to three (3) percent of the projected cost of development and not to exceed ten (10) percent of the projected cost of development as specified by the planning commission. A cash performance guarantee, if applicable, shall be deposited with the city treasurer. A surety bond or letter of credit shall remain in effect until the development is completed. If requested, the planning commission shall rebate a proportional share of any cash deposit, or reduce the amount of performance guarantee required, based on the percentage of work completed on the date of the request, as attested to by the requestor and verified by the city inspector. In the event the development as constructed does not comply with the approved site plan, the city may bid the required work out and apply the performance guaranteed to the costs incurred to bring the site into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.92 - Commencement of construction. 
(a)  Construction shall be commenced and shall be proceeding within two (2) years from the date of site plan approval for all or any phase of site development. 
(b)  If construction is not commenced within the applicable two-year period, approval of the site plan shall expire. However, the planning commission may extend the time for commencement of construction upon the applicant requesting an extension prior to the expiration of the two-year period. 
(c)  If site plan approval expires as provided by this section due to a failure to commence construction and proceed meaningfully toward completion within time periods required, a new application for site plan approval must be submitted for review and may be revised to take into consideration any changes that may have occurred due to the passage of time. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Section 21B.93 - Hours of construction. 
There shall not be any construction, demolition or excavation between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays and 7:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. weekends and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 30-968, § 2, 3-28-06)  
Sections 21B.94—21B.99 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI-C. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-974, § 1, adopted December 12, 2006, repealed Art. XXI-C, §§ 21C.01—21C-11, which pertained to flood hazard districts. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sections 21C.01—21C.11. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI-D. - ARSENAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. 
 
Section 21D.01 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of the Arsenal Industrial District ("Arsenal District") is to insure that development in this area is consistent with the Reuse Plan adopted by the Mayor and City Council in their capacity as the Local Redevelopment Authority ("LRA"), designated pursuant to the Base Realignment and Closure ("BRAC 95") of the Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant property. It is further intended that the "Arsenal District" provide special land use and development regulations to promote the following objectives: 1) the creation of high quality industrial and manufacturing jobs: 2) site plan design flexibility and uniformity based on coordinated planning in the district: 3) design criteria to ensure the most effective reuse of this area; 4) coordinated planning and development with shared use of parking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.02 - Area. 
The "Arsenal District" shall be the area of the former Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant that was declared as surplus by the U.S. Army in BRAC 95, which area is delineated on the map entitled "Warren Arsenal Industrial District", attached hereto and adopted herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.03 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and abbreviations shall have the following meaning when used in this Article 21D of this article: 
The term "Arsenal District" means the Arsenal Industrial District, which is the subject of this Article. 
The abbreviation "LRA" means the Local Redevelopment Authority designated through the BRAC 95 closing of the Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant. Specifically, the LRA is the Mayor of the City of Warren and the Warren City Council. 
The words "Reuse Plan" mean the Reuse plan adopted by the LRA, a copy of which is available for public inspection and review at the office of the City Planning Department. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.04 - Applicable regulations. 
The "Arsenal District" is a special industrial zone which imposes special land use, site design, density, set back and other development regulations that apply to this district only. All other non-conflicting regulations and standards of this article apply to this district. In the event of a conflict between a regulation in this article for the "Arsenal District" and any other regulation in this article, the "Arsenal District" regulation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.05 - Principal uses permitted. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected and no land shall hereafter be used in the area designated for this district, except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses or class of uses: 
Public, educational or governmental buildings, offices, auditoriums, entertainment/recreational buildings or arenas. 
Industrial and developmental manufacturing. 
Technical center or industrial offices. 
Other similar uses which have been determined by the Planning Commission as being consistent with the job creation and other goals of the Reuse Plan, and which are consistent with the light industrial, high technology, or developmental manufacturing nature of the "Arsenal District". 
Provided, however, that any principal use permitted that is included in the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) commercial subcategory I classification (which includes by way of example, but not limitation, uses where children, the elderly, the infirm or other sensitive subpopulations are housed, educated or otherwise cared for, such as schools, nursing homes and day cares) shall require approval from MDEQ, which may be by a Notice of Approved Environmental Remediation (N.A.E.R.), prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy. Failure to obtain this approval shall subject the property owner, occupant and/or user to all penalties provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97; Ord. No. 30-910, § 1, 8-24-99)  
Section 21D.06 - Principal uses prohibited. 
The following uses are prohibited as principal uses: 
Warehouses. 
Commercial and wholesale establishments. 
All residential and residentially related uses. 
Industrial/manufacturing uses which create excessive or unusual danger because of fire, explosion, toxicity, radiation or other noxious matter. 
Industrial/manufacturing uses which cause excessive or unusually noxious, offensive, unhealthy and harmful odors, fumes, dust, smoke, light, waste, noise or vibration. 
Those uses involving the processing of raw materials for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial or commercial operation at another location. 
Those uses intended primarily for the outside storage of materials, equipment or vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.07 - Accessory uses permitted. 
All uses customarily accessory to the principal uses are permitted. Certain prohibited uses, such as warehouses, may be permitted if the Planning Commission determines that these are incidental and necessary as an accessory use to the principal permitted use to which they are associated. 
Provided, however, that any accessory use permitted that is included in the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) commercial subcategory I classification (which includes by way of example, but not limitation, uses where children, the elderly, the infirm or other sensitive subpopulations are housed, educated or otherwise cared for, such as schools, nursing homes and day cares) shall require approval from MDEQ, which may be by a Notice of Approved Environmental Remediation (N.A.E.R.), prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy. Failure to obtain this approval shall subject the property owner, occupant and/or user to all penalties provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97; Ord. No. 30-910, § 2, 8-24-99)  
Section 21D.08 - Building arrangement, building height and building bulk. 
Building arrangement, location, height and bulk shall be generally provided in a manner which is consistent with the Reuse Plan and the design criteria set forth in this Article. Building height shall not exceed 3 stories or 65 ft., except that the height exception for office buildings and technical laboratories set forth in Article XIX, Section 19.02 shall apply in this district. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.09 - Setbacks and yard space. 
All setbacks, front yards, rear yards and side yards shall be determined by the Planning Commission consistent with the Reuse Plan, and the design criteria set forth in this Article, except that the following minimum setbacks/yard areas shall be required: 
a.  The setback for buildings, structures and parking areas along Van Dyke Avenue shall be 110 feet from the centerline of the Van Dyke R.O.W., as established by the City of Warren Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  The minimum set back for buildings and structures from any residentially zoned district shall be sixty (60) feet. This setback shall be increased an additional one (1) foot for each foot any building or structure exceeds thirty (30) feet in height. All parking areas shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any residentially zoned district. 
c.  All buildings and structures shall be setback at least thirty (30) feet from any other through streets in the District. 
d.  All buildings and structures shall generally be setback at least thirty (30) ft. from all front lot lines, twenty-five (25) ft. from all rear lot lines and twenty (20) ft. from all side lot lines. Nevertheless, coordinated site development between and among adjacent property owners is encouraged and the Planning Commission may alter these setbacks if it finds that such alterations are consistent with the Reuse Plan, the design guidelines of this Article, and sound planning principles. 
e.  All parking areas shall be setback a minimum fifteen (15) ft. from any through streets in this District and a minimum of five (5) ft. from any other side, front or rear lot lines. Nevertheless, coordinated site development between and among adjacent property owners is encouraged and the Planning Commission may alter these setbacks if it finds that such alterations are consistent with the Reuse Plan, the design guidelines of this Article, and sound planning principles. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.10 - Density. 
The density shall be regulated by the Planning Commission consistent with the Reuse Plan and the design criteria set forth in this Article. Nevertheless, the maximum site coverage ratio for buildings and structures (not including parking structures) shall not exceed 50% and the maximum site coverage including all impervious surface (buildings, walks, drives and paved areas[)] shall not exceed 80% on any parcel. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.11 - Utilities. 
The owner shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines for telephone and electric service, exclusive of main supply lines, perimeter feed lines, and related surface facilities such as padmount transformers, switching equipment and service pedestals, to be placed underground in accordance with the valid rules and regulations of the telephone or electric service company involved providing installation of such underground service. 
The owner shall provide easements for telephone and electric utilities and shall make suitable arrangements for their location with the telephone and electric service company involved. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.12 - Signs. 
Signs shall be limited to monument and/or wall signs, generally not exceeding 75 sq. ft. each in area. Monument signs shall generally not exceed five (5) ft. in height. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.13 - Off-street parking and loading. 
The parking requirements in Section 4.32 of this appendix shall apply in the "Arsenal District" except for the parking spaces table in Section 4.32 (h), which shall not apply. The amount of required off-street parking spaces for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions or new uses for existing buildings shall be determined by the Planning Commission, subject to the minimum requirements set forth in the following table: _____ 
	USE 	REQUIRED PARKING SPACES 
(1) 	Light industrial/manufacturing. 	Five (5) spaces plus one (1) for each 550 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 25,000 sq. ft. of area plus one (1) for each 700 sq. ft. of gross floor area for that portion of area greater than 25,000 sq. ft. but less than 50,000 sq. ft. plus one (1) for each 850 sq. ft. of gross floor area for that portion of area greater than 50,000 sq. ft; or three (3) for each four (4) employees, computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons to be employed at any one period during the day or night; which ever is greater. 
(2) 	Arenas, entertainment centers 	One (1) space for each 3 seats plus one (1) for each employee computed on this basis of the greatest number of persons to be employed at any one period during the day or night. 
(3) 	Government buildings, technical center, engineering or other related professional offices. 	One (1) space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 
 
_____ 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.14 - Development plan. 
In the "Arsenal District", no building shall be erected, constructed or reconstructed, nor shall any additions be made to the existing buildings, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose, unless the development plan is approved by the Commission as hereinafter specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.15 - Development plan approval. 
A.  Development plan approval shall be required in an "Arsenal District" for each of the following: 
1.  The erection or construction of a building. 
2.  The moving of a building onto property, or the relocation of a building or structure from one area to another. 
3.  A structural alteration which would change the exterior appearance of a structure. 
4.  The erection, construction, installation or alteration of a sign, wall, or fence. 
5.  The installation or alteration of outdoor lighting equipment which would change the exterior appearance of the use or structure. 
6.  Whenever an outdoor use is established, altered or changed to another use. 
B.  Application for development plan approval shall be made to the Planning Commission by the actual or prospective property owner or the authorized agent of either. Such application shall be accompanied by: 
1.  Accurately drawn maps showing the subject property and other properties within the same zone. 
2.  Plot plans of the subject property, showing all existing and proposed buildings and uses, if any, within the zone and adjacent roadways. 
3.  Architectural drawings and elevations of the proposed use. 
4.  All plans and information required for site plan review pursuant to Section 22.16. 
5.  Any other data or exhibits deemed necessary by the Planning Director to adequately present the matter to the Commission. 
It is the intent of this ordinance that in any application for development plan approval, the petitioner shall present to the Commission how the building or use in the development plan relates and complements the Reuse Plan as to the balance of the property within the "Arsenal District". Prior to submitting a development plan, the applicant, if he so desires, may submit to the Commission, for its review, a sketch plan showing the standards, design and layout of his proposed development for determining conformance to the Reuse Plan and the design criteria for the "Arsenal District". 
C.  In reviewing any development plan, the Commission may consider the following elements, as well as other pertinent factors: 
1.  The general exterior appearance of buildings, including height, bulk, size and shape. 
2.  Relationships to existing and proposed buildings and structures in the area, based on the Reuse Plan. 
3.  The setbacks and landscaping plan of yard and other open areas. 
4.  The design type and location of signs, walls, fences, and outdoor storage. 
5.  The illumination of buildings, grounds, parking areas, and signs. 
6.  Any other feature or item having a direct relationship to the general appearance of the buildings and premises. 
D.  The Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval, modification or disapproval of any proposed use, building or structure, or any change in an existing use, building or structure. The Commission may recommend disapproval when, in its sound judgment, the development would substantially affect the appearance or functionality of the area under consideration in a manner materially detrimental to the Arsenal District. The Commission may require changes in the architectural treatment of buildings or structures, may require additional landscaping and development improvements, and may impose conditions of development when, in its sound judgment, it determines that such is necessary to conform to the intent, purpose and requirements of the Reuse Plan and the "Arsenal District". Architectural requirements shall not specify a particular style or [of] architecture or particular design features but shall permit the applicant the maximum freedom of architectural design compatible to the "Arsenal District" and the design guidelines in this Article. 
E.  The City Council, after receiving a written report of the findings and determination of the Commission, shall approve, disapprove or modify the decisions of the Commission. Any disapproval or modification of any decision of the Commission shall require a majority vote of all the members of the City Council, except that no public hearing shall be required and the decision of the City Council may be made by motion or by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.16 - General design criteria guidelines. 
A.  The recommended development guidelines set forth in pages 86 through 94 of the Reuse Plan are adopted by reference as development and design guidelines for use in the preparation and review of development plans. 
B.  Additionally, in order to insure that development in the "Arsenal District" proceeds in accordance with the Reuse Plan and best promotes the general welfare of the City, the Commission shall consider the following in reviewing development plans: 
1.  All buildings and facilities in the "Arsenal District" should be limited to a single tenant or owner occupant. 
2.  All principal buildings should be freestanding. Common wall construction should generally not be permitted. 
3.  Multiple uses may be permitted in a building or facility only upon a specific finding and recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council that such multiple uses will be consistent with the goals of the Reuse Plan and will promote the creation of high quality jobs in the district. 
C.  The forgoing are intended as guidelines and not minimum Zoning Ordinance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
Section 21D.17 - Landscaping requirements. 
In addition to any greenbelt required by the Zoning Ordinance, ten (10) percent of the net site area (apart from existing and/or proposed thoroughfare rights-of-way) shall be developed as landscaped open space. The landscaped open space shall be countable only when located in the front and side setback areas, or within the parking area fronting the roadway. Pedestrian walks, plazas, planters, and other decorative elements may be included in such landscaped areas. 
In order to be countable toward the landscape area planting areas, no more than twenty (20) percent of the required landscaped area may consist of durable non-living landscape material. Under unique conditions, the Planning Commission may modify the percent of durable non-living landscape material. 
Landscaped areas shall be countable when equaling two hundred (200) square ft. or more in area, and when eight (8) ft. or more in width. Areas less than eight (8) ft. in width may be countable when added to a greenbelt area as required by the Zoning Ordinance, or when added to a live landscaped area when a minimum width of eight (8) ft. will result. 
Landscaped areas for storm drainage purposes, such as drain courses and 0 retention areas, in front or side yards, may be countable for a portion of the required landscaped area, not to exceed five (5) percent of the net site area, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Areas having 6:1 slopes or more shall not be countable. 
2.  Areas within fenced drain courses or retention ponds shall not be countable. 
3.  Drain course or stream bottoms shall not be countable. 
Such countable storm drainage areas shall be landscaped with materials which will not be damaged by the intermittent water conditions, and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Ord. No. 30-885, § 1, 12-23-97)  
ARTICLE XXII. - ADMINISTRATION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
 
Section 22.01 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building Department, through its Building Inspectors, officers or employees.  
Section 22.02 - Building permits. 
It shall be unlawful to build or use or permit the building or the use of any structure or land or part thereof hereafter created, erected or altered or to change or enlarge the use of any building or land or part thereof until a building permit in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, properly endorsed as to occupancy in a manner herein provided, shall have been issued by the Building Department.  
Section 22.03 - Duties of Building Department. 
The Building Department shall have the power to grant occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out its duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector to approve any plans, or to issue any permits for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this Ordinance. 
The Building Department shall keep a record of all non-conforming uses existing at the effective date of this Ordinance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Whenever the buildings, lands and uses thereof as set forth on the application are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall be the duty of the Building Department to issue a building permit within ten (10) days after the receipt of such application. 
All building permits, when issued, shall be conspicuously posted upon the premises. 
In all cases where the Building Department shall refuse to issue a building permit, the Building Department shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause and reasons for said refusal.  
Section 22.04 - Plans and specifications. 
The Building Department shall require that all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, including a plot plan, in duplicate for residential buildings and triplicate for commercial and industrial buildings and structures, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(a)  The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. 
(b)  The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved, and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
(c)  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including in residential areas the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(d)  All existing and proposed buildings on adjacent lots. 
(e)  Such other information concerning the lot, or adjoining lots, as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed.  
Section 22.05 - Duration of permit. 
In the event a building permit shall have been issued by the Building Department and no proceeding under authority thereof shall have been commenced by the applicant within six (6) months following the date of issuance, said permit shall lapse and become void and be ineffective as authority for acting thereunder unless, within ninety (90) days following such six (6) months' period the applicant shall apply for reinstatement thereof. 
The Building Director is hereby authorized to reinstate such permit, but no original building permit shall be reinstated more than once.  
Section 22.06 - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance may be revoked by the Building Department at any time, whenever the holder thereof: 
(a)  Shall have made any false or fraudulent statement in the application for such permit, or in the exercise of such permit. 
(b)  Shall have violated any of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(c)  Shall have failed to satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance or of any rules adopted pursuant thereto. 
(d)  Shall have caused, created or maintained, in the exercise of such permit, a menace or danger to the public health, safety or welfare.  
Section 22.07 - Accessory buildings. 
An accessory building, when erected at the same time as the principal building on a lot and shown on the application thereof shall not require a separate building permit.  
Section 22.08 - Schedule of fees for permits. 
Before any permit shall be issued under this Ordinance, an inspection fee shall be paid in an amount fixed by a schedule established by resolution of the City Council.  
Section 22.09 - Permits inspections. 
a.  Required. The holder of any permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building or structure, or part thereof, shall obtain all inspections required by the Michigan Construction Code and the Warren Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Duty to request. It shall be the duty of the holder of every permit to notify the Building Department of the time when such building or structure, or part thereof will be ready for inspection. 
c.  Certificate of Compliance required prior to use or occupancy. Final inspection approval and issuance of both a Certificate of Occupancy, pursuant to the State Construction Code, and a Certificate of Compliance shall be obtained prior to the use or occupancy of any building or structure, or part thereof for which a permit has been issued, or which requires the issuance of a permit. 
d.  Change in occupant. In the event the occupant of a building, or part thereof, changes, the new occupant shall obtain a Certificate of Compliance prior to occupancy; however, no inspection is required if there has not been any construction, alteration, repair or moving of any building or structure, or part thereof, and the building was inspected within the last year. 
(Ord. No. 30-994, § 2, 12-13-11)  
Section 22.10 - Zoning certificate of occupancy renamed certificate of compliance for nonresidential occupancy and use. 
a.  Certificate renamed. Since the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren, there has been a requirement that no land or building erected or altered shall be occupied, used or changed in use or a change in occupant, until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the Building Department. Because the State Construction Code uses the term "Certificate of Occupancy" to signify the approval of building construction, the term "Certificate of Occupancy" as required by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren shall be renamed a "Certificate of Compliance". The terms "Certificate of Occupancy" and "Certificate of Compliance" shall be interchangeable for purposes of any requirement that a Certificate of Occupancy shall be obtained prior to the use of land or a building in the City of Warren, other than as used in the State Construction Code. All certificates of occupancy issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance and which are in effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance shall remain in effect until a new Certificate of Compliance is required due to a new occupancy, alteration, repair, or change in use of the building, structure, or land. 
b.  Purpose. The purpose of a Certificate of Compliance is to regulate the nonresidential occupancy and use of all land, buildings or structures, or part thereof, located within the City to ensure compliance with the applicable provisions of the State Construction Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren and the provisions of the Warren Code of Ordinances administered and enforced by the Building Department. 
c.  Certificate required prior to occupancy, use, or change in use or occupant. No land, building or structure, or part thereof, erected or altered shall be occupied, used, changed in use or occupant, until a Certificate of Compliance shall have been issued by the Building Department stating that the land, building, structure or proposed use of the land, building or structure complies with all applicable provisions of the State Construction Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren and the provisions of the Warren Code of Ordinances administered and enforced by the Building Department. 
d.  Application requirements. An application for a Certificate of Compliance shall be made on forms supplied by the Building Department and must be accompanied by the fees specified. A Certificate of Compliance may be applied for concurrently with an application for a building permit, if a building permit is required. The Building Department shall determine if a nonresidential occupancy change requires site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission and shall notify the applicant if required. 
e.  Fees. The applicant for a Certificate of Compliance shall pay the required inspection and certificate fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
f.  Issuance of Certificate. A Certificate of Compliance shall be issued only after a determination by the Building Department that the proposed use of the land, building or structure, or part thereof, complies with all of the following: 
1.  All applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren; 
2.  The construction complies with all requirements of the State Construction Code; 
3.  The construction meets all engineering issued permits, applicable standards and requirements; 
4.  All applicable provisions of Chapter 9, Building Regulations; 
5.  All applicable provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code; 
6.  All outstanding fees or charges have been paid. 
g.  Denial of Certificate. The Building Department shall not issue a Certificate of Compliance when any of the following conditions are found to exist related to the use of the property: 
1.  The proposed use or activities are prohibited by state, federal, or local ordinance. 
2.  There is an outstanding violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren on the site. 
3.  There is an outstanding violation of the State Construction Code on the site. 
4.  There is an outstanding violation of the Warren Code of Ordinances on the site. 
If the request for a Certificate of Compliance is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reasons for denial. 
h.  Remains in effect. A Certificate of Compliance for a land use, a building or structure, or part thereof, shall remain in effect as long as the approved use continues. A new Certificate of Compliance shall be required for each new occupant, or any change in use or occupant of the building, structure, or land. 
i.  Record. A record of all certificates of compliance shall be kept in the office of the Building Department. Copies of such certificates shall be furnished upon request. 
j.  Site plan approval. Issuance of a Certificate of Compliance does not certify that the site complies with the approved site plan and any conditions imposed by site plan approval. 
k.  Failure to obtain a Certificate of Compliance; penalty. No land, building or structure, or part thereof, shall be occupied, used, or changed in use or occupant until a Certificate of Compliance shall have been issued by the Building Department in conformity with the provisions of this section. A violation of this provision shall be a municipal civil infraction which upon a determination of responsibility, shall result in the assessment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) per violation, plus costs and sanctions for each infraction as provided by the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, as amended, found at MCL 600.8727. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 30-545, § 2, 9-27-77; Ord. No. 30-994, § 2, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 30-1000, § 1, 2-27-13)  
Section 22.11 - Residential city certification for vacant residential dwellings posted "no occupancy." 
a.  Certification required for occupancy. No vacant residential dwelling that has been posted "no occupancy" shall be occupied until residential city certification is issued by the Building Department stating that the vacant residential dwelling complies with all applicable provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code and the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Warren. 
b.  Remains in effect for duration of occupancy. City certification for a residential dwelling shall remain in effect as long as the dwelling remains occupied. Any time a dwelling becomes vacant and is posted "no occupancy" the dwelling shall not be occupied until city certification is obtained. 
c.  Fees. The applicant for city certification for a residential dwelling shall pay the required inspection and certificate fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
d.  Record. A record of all residential city certifications shall be kept in the office of the Building Department. Copies of such certificates shall be furnished upon request. 
e.  Failure to obtain residential city certification prior to occupancy of a posted dwelling; penalty. No vacant residential dwelling posted "no occupancy" shall be occupied until residential city certification is issued by the Building Department in conformity with the provisions of this section. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this provision shall be a municipal civil infraction which upon a determination of responsibility, shall be ordered to pay a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000). In addition, a Defendant shall be ordered to pay costs as provided by the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, as amended, found at MCL 600.8727. 
(Ord. No. 30-994, § 2, 12-13-11)  
Section 22.12 - Authority of building department; limitations. 
Under no circumstances is the Building Department permitted to make changes to this ordinance or to vary the terms of any applicable ordinance in carrying out the duties of the Building Department; nor shall the Building Department be permitted to grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any regulation contained in this ordinance to any person making application for a building permit, a Certificate of Compliance or residential city certification. Further, under no circumstances shall the Building Department refuse to issue a permit when the applicant has demonstrated that they are in compliance with all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-994, § 2, 12-13-11)  
Section 22.13 - Certificate of Occupancy for nonconforming buildings. 
A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for each non-conforming use of buildings and land existing prior to the time of passage of this Ordinance. Application for such Certificate of Occupancy for non-conforming uses shall be filed with the Building Department by the owner or lessee of the building occupied by such non-conforming use within one (1) year from the effective date of this Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Building Department to issue a Certificate of Occupancy for such non-conforming use upon such application.  
Section 22.14 - Procedures for special land use approval. 
A.  An application for the approval of a special land use permit shall be made by the landowner and occupant of the land on which the special land use is to be located, to the Commission accompanied by the necessary fees and documents as prescribed by the Commission. 
B.  Upon receipt of an application for a special land use permit, except for those uses provided in Section 14.02 and Section 15.01(e) of this Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall review the application and required site plan for conformity with the required ordinances. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing at which time the application shall be considered. The public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedure established in the Zoning Enabling Act, 2006 Public Act No. 110, as amended (MCL 125.3101, et seq.). 
Upon receipt of an application for a special land use permit for any use provided for in Section 14.02 and Section 15.01(e) of this Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and review the application and required site plan for conformity with required ordinance and forward a recommendation regarding same to the City Council for approval. 
1.  The Special Use Permit shall only be approved if the following general standards are satisfied: 
a)  The proposed use is compatible with adjacent uses of land; 
b)  The proposed use is in compliance with the standards of this Ordinance and the conditions imposed thereunder; 
c)  The proposed use is compatible with the natural environment; 
d)  The proposed use is compatible with the capacities of the public services and facilities affected by the proposed use; and 
e)  The proposed use is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
2.  The approving authority may deny, approve, or approve with conditions, a request for special land use permit. The approving authority may require reasonable conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed use as it is deemed necessary to satisfy the general standards provided herein. 
3.  Any conditions required for approval of a special land use may include conditions necessary to insure that the public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall satisfy the following: 
a)  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare and the social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the City as a whole. 
b)  Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
c)  Be necessary to meet the Intent and Purpose of this Ordinance, be related to the standards established in this Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards. 
4.  The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use permit shall be recorded in the record of the approval action, and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the landowner and occupant. The approving authority shall maintain a record of conditions which are changed. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 9, 4-12-83; Ord. No. 30-1001, § 4, 8-27-13)  
Section 22.15 - Performance guarantees. 
A.  To insure compliance with this Ordinance and any conditions imposed hereunder, an approving authority as provided for in this ordinance may require that a cash deposit, certified check, or surety bond acceptable to the City covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with the project for which site plan approval is sought be deposited with the City Treasurer to insure faithful completion of the improvements within two (2) years. The amount of the bond or deposit shall be determined by the approving authority and shall be based upon a reasonable estimate of the cost of all improvements on the site. The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The deposit of the performance guarantee shall not be required prior to the time when the City is prepared to issue the permit. 
B.  As used in this Section "improvements" means those features and actions associated with the project which are considered necessary by the approving authority to protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and drainage. Improvements does not include the entire project which is the subject of site plan approval. 
C.  Any performance guarantee required as per this ordinance shall continue until such time as the City notifies the surety that the conditions imposed upon the development have been met. The bond will not be approved by the City, unless this provision is specifically set forth in bold type within the bond. The release of the site plan bond shall be done in conjunction with the release of the building permit bond. Inasmuch as the two bonds are related to the overall development, the approving authority will not release the site plan bond until the Building Department and approving authority are satisfied that the site is developed in accordance with the site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 10, 4-12-83)  
Section 22.16 - Site plan review. 
A.  Intent - The site plan review process is instituted to provide an opportunity for the approving authority to review a proposed site plan in relation to pedestrian and vehicular circulation, off-street parking, structural relationships, public utilities, landscaping, accessibility and other site design elements which may have an adverse effect upon the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare as well as to provide for the best interests of the property owner. 
B.  Procedures for Site Plan Review. 
1.  In addition to those uses specifically requiring site plan approval by this Ordinance, prior to the final processing of an application for a building permit for the construction of any multi-family, mobile home park, commercial or industrial structure the developer and/or petitioner shall submit a site plan to the approving authority for review and approval, showing the location the location of the principal building or use, general dimensions and proposed height, the location of all accessory buildings, the location of parking areas or driveways, the proposed grade and drainage, the proposed methods of water supply and sewage disposal, the proposed plantings and proposed screening and a building plan to the Fire Commissioner showing proposals for fire safety, fire separation, and egress for life safety. The approving authority shall review such site plan for space and orientation of buildings in relation to off-street parking and ingress and egress to the site; for safety convenience and adequacy of vehicular and pedestrian circulation; for adequacy of landscaping and proposed site improvements and overall conformity to provisions of the Master Plan of the City of Warren for conformity of the uses to the district. 
The approving authority shall submit copies of said plans to various governmental agencies within and without the local unit of government, such as the City Engineer, Michigan State Highway Department, Macomb County Road Commission, Fire Department, and Traffic Department, in order that their comments may be incorporated into the approving authority findings and recommendations in this matter. 
2.  An application for approval of a site plan shall be made by an owner of an interest in the land on which the site plan is to be developed or authorized representative of same to the approving authority accompanied by the necessary fees and documents as prescribed by the approving authority. 
3.  Upon receipt of an application as provided above the approving authority shall give a notice of the time, place, date and purpose of the approving authority meeting at which the site will be considered. Notice of public hearing shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet. The notice shall be given not less than five (5) days before the date of the public hearing. 
4.  The appointing authority shall approve a site plan only upon a finding that the proposed use will not, upon the facts known at the time of submission of the site plan, cause undue hardship or create unsafe or hazardous health, or safety conditions or create a nuisance condition to the detriment of adjoining land uses or the general public and only upon a finding that the plan contains the information required by this Ordinance and is in compliance with this Ordinance, the conditions imposed pursuant to this Ordinance, other applicable Ordinances and state and federal statutes. An approval or denial of a site plan must be based on the standards for review of special land uses set forth in Section 22.14B of this Ordinance. Any conditional approval of a site plan must meet the requirements set forth in Section 22.14B, (3) and (4) of this Ordinance. Any required modifications shall be directed to the specific elimination of unsafe or hazardous health or safety conditions or the prevention of nuisance conditions, and shall be so noted. 
5.  The approving authority shall communicate its approval or recommended site plan modifications to the applicant and the Building Director. If approved, the site plan shall become part of the record of approval, and subsequent actions relating to the activity authorized shall be consistent with the approved site plan, unless a change conforming to the provisions of this Ordinance receives the mutual agreement of the landowner and the approving authority. In cases where the modifications have been recommended, the applicant shall resubmit a site plan incorporating those modifications to the approving authority for its review. 
6.  If valid building permits have not been obtained within two (2) years from the date of approval of the site plan, the applicant shall appear before the approving authority and request an extension. The approving authority may upon application of a petition filed sixty (60) days before the expiration of the aforementioned two year period, approve an extension for a specified period of up to one (1) year. Subsequent further extensions for periods of up to one (1) year each may be granted subject to a petition filed sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the existing extension. Prior to granting any extension the approving authority shall review the site plan to determine if there have been any changes in circumstances from the standards applied at the time of prior approval. In the event there have been changes, the approving authority may impose new conditions in accordance with Section 22.14B (3) and (4) of this Ordinance. No site plan approval shall be granted without a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 30-657, § 11, 4-12-83)  
ARTICLE XXIII. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Section 23.01 - [Duty of person in charge.] 
It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons having charge of the establishment of any use of land or the erecting, altering, changing, or remodeling of any building or structure, including tents and trailer coaches, before beginning or undertaking any such work to see that a proper permit has been granted therefore and that such work does not conflict with and is not in violation of the terms of this Ordinance, and any such architect, builder, contractor or other person doing or performing any such work or erecting, preparing, altering, changing, or remodeling without such a permit having been issued or in violation of, or in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance, shall be deemed guilty of violation hereof in [the] same manner and to the same extent as the owner of the premises or the person or persons for whom such buildings are erected, repaired, altered, changed or remodeled or the use of land established in violation hereof and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for such violation.  
Section 23.02 - Penalty; compliance required; nuisance abatement. 
(a)  Unless the ordinance specifies it is a misdemeanor offense, a violation of this Zoning Ordinance is a blight violation. The Administrative Hearings Bureau shall punish a violator as provided in Warren Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2.5, Section 2.5-7. 
(b)  A violator with any unpaid civil fines or costs imposed under Chapter 2.5 of the Warren Code of Ordinances may be ineligible to apply for rezoning, site plan approval, special land use approval, planned unit development approval, variance, or other zoning authorization, except if: 
(1)  The violator (1) became the owner of the property by foreclosure or by taking a deed in lieu of foreclosure and (2) is a government-sponsored enterprise, a financial institution, a mortgage servicer, or a credit union service organization, as defined by Chapter 2.5, Section 2.5-2; or 
(2)  The violator shows that the zoning authorization will correct, in whole or in part, the blight violation that was the subject of the unpaid fines, costs, or justice system assessments. 
(c)  The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Any violation of this ordinance is a nuisance per se and may be abated by the Circuit Court through injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 30-858, § 4, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 30-888, § 2, 3-24-98; Ord. No. 30-963, § 1, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 30-977, § 1, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 30-990, § 2, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 30-1014, § 1, 8-11-15) 
State Law reference— MCL 125.3406.  
ARTICLE XXIV. - CHANGES, AMENDMENTS AND REZONING[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-970, § 1, adopted September 12, 2006, amended the title of Art. XXIV to read as herein set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PROCEDURE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-970, § 2, adopted September 12, 2006, designated §§ 24.01—24.03 as Div. 1, Procedure. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Section 24.01. - Boundary changes; amendment to regulations and rezoning of property. 
The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by law and this article, and after report by the planning commission, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein, or subsequently established herein pursuant to the authority and procedure established in Section 4, Act 207, Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 [MCL 125.584], as amended. In case a protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or change be presented to the legislative body at or before the public hearing required by this section to be held by the legislative body and the protest is duly signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land included in the proposed change; or the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change excluding public right of way, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (¾) of all the members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 30-233, § 1, 1-10-67; Ord. No. 30-533, § 1, 4-12-77; Ord. No. 30-898, § 1, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 30-970, § 3, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.02. - Notice. 
A.  Statutory notice and publication. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed change and/or amendment. Notice of publication of the public hearing shall be made in accordance with the requirements and procedures established in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3202, as amended. 
B.  Written notice of proposed rezoning. 
1.  Proposed rezoning of an individual property or ten (10) or fewer adjacent properties shall comply with the following notice requirements: 
a.  A notice stating the nature of the request and the time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. 
b.  Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. 
c.  The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be considered for approval. The notice shall include: 
1.  Describe the nature of the request. 
2.  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a list of all existing street addresses within the property. If there are no street addresses, parcel identification numbers may be used. 
3.  State when and where the request will be considered. 
4.  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
2.  Proposed rezoning of eleven (11) or more adjacent properties shall comply with the following notice requirements: 
a.  A notice stating the nature of the request and the time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. 
b.  The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be considered for approval. The notice shall include: 
1.  Describe the nature of the request. 
2.  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. 
3.  State when and where the request will be considered. 
4.  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
C.  Posting signs for proposed zoning district area or boundary changes. The petitioner requesting rezoning or changes in the zoning district area for any property shall be required to post an information sign on the property in question. Signs for rezoning of property shall be posted by the petitioner no later than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing in a location on the subject property that is approved by the planning department. In no instance shall a sign be located within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersection. City initiated rezoning is also required to be posted, and signs shall be located on the front street property line. All signs required by this section shall be designed and furnished by the city and issued to the petitioner. A deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be provided to the planning department before a sign will be issued. Signs must be removed by the petitioner within six (6) business days after final action by the city council or withdrawal of the application. Failure to remove the sign(s) and return them to the planning department by the seventh business day after final action or withdrawal will result in removal of the sign(s) by the city and forfeiture of the deposit. 
(Ord. No. 30-898, § 1, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 30-945, § 6, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 30-978, § 2, 11-13-07)  
Section 24.03 - Fees. 
A fee established by resolution of the city council shall be collected with each petition presented for change or amendment to the zoning ordinance. Fees assessed shall cover the cost of processing these petitions and shall be paid to the city treasurer to be credited to the general fund of the City of Warren. A rebate may be made in the event the application is not processed through the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 30-523, § 1, 1-11-77; Ord. No. 30-773, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 30-813, § 1, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 30-898, § 1, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 30-945, § 7, 4-27-04)  
Sections 24.04—24.09 - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REZONING WITH CONDITIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-970, § 5, adopted September 12, 2006, added Div. 2, entitled Rezoning with Conditions. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Section 24.10 - Purpose. 
It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning boundaries, if certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a request for a rezoning. It is the intent of this division to provide a process consistent with the provisions of the Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, which allows an owner seeking a rezoning to voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land which conditions may become required by the rezoning approval and shall be included in the public record of rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.11 - Application for conditional rezoning and offer of conditions. 
(a)  An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed or may be made at a later time during the rezoning process. 
(b)  The required application and process for considering a request for rezoning with conditions shall be the same as that for rezoning requests made without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this division. 
(c)  The owner's offer of conditions shall not include authorizing any use or development not permitted in the proposed rezoning district. 
(d)  If a special land use permit is required for the use proposed for rezoning with conditions, the special land use permit shall be an explicit condition to the rezoning with conditions approval and the approved rezoning with conditions shall not take effect until the special land use permit is approved. 
(e)  If a dimensional variance is required for the use or development proposed for rezoning with conditions, the dimensional variance shall be an explicit condition to the rezoning with conditions approval and the approved rezoning with conditions shall not take effect until the dimensional variance is approved. A use variance is inapplicable to rezoning with conditions due to the requirement listed in subsection (c), that the offer of conditions shall not include any use not permitted in the proposed rezoning district. 
(f)  An offer of conditions may be amended, in writing, during the process of rezoning with conditions provided that any amendment or additional conditions are made voluntarily by the landowner. A landowner may withdraw all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the city council. In the event a landowner withdraws all conditions offered subsequent to the planning commission public hearing on the original rezoning with conditions request, then the rezoning with conditions application shall be referred to the planning commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.12 - Planning commission review and recommendation. 
The planning commission, after public hearing and deliberation, may recommend to the city council, approval with recommended changes, or denial; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter voluntarily offered, in writing, by the landowner. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.13 - City council procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall be provided with a copy of the application for rezoning with conditions, the written offer of conditions, the planning commission report and recommendation, minutes from the public hearing and all supporting materials. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city council, pursuant to the rules of procedure, shall schedule and conduct a public hearing on the proposed application for rezoning with conditions and provide the required notice of the rezoning request. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.14 - Approval. 
(a)  If the city council approves the rezoning with conditions and adopts the offer of conditions, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written rezoning ordinance listing all conditions adopted. 
(b)  The written rezoning with conditions ordinance shall comply with all the following: 
1.  Be in a form recordable with the Macomb County Register of Deeds. 
2.  Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains. 
3.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the rezoning with conditions runs with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land. 
4.  Incorporate by attachment a map of the rezoning with conditions boundaries and include all conditions attached to the rezoning. if any documents are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where the document may be examined. 
5.  Contain the notarized signatures of all owners of the subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the rezoning with conditions ordinance. 
(c)  An approved rezoning with conditions shall not be published in a newspaper until there is full compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that the land was rezoned with conditions. The city clerk shall maintain all ordinances adopted by city council rezoning with conditions and a list of all land rezoned with conditions. 
(e)  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the city clerk shall record the approved rezoning with conditions ordinance with the Macomb County Register of Deeds. 
(f)  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use and development within the new zoning district as modified by the rezoning conditions adopted. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.15 - Compliance with conditions. 
(a)  Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in the rezoning with conditions ordinance. Any failure to comply with a condition contained in the ordinance shall constitute a violation of this zoning ordinance. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 
(b)  No permit or approval shall be granted under this Ordinance for any use and development that is contrary to the rezoning with conditions as adopted. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.16 - Site plan approval. 
The provisions of Sections 21.04 and 22.16 requiring site plan review shall apply to any use of development granted rezoning with conditions. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.17 - Time period for establishing development or use. 
The approved development and/or use of the land must be commenced within twenty-four (24) months after the rezoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may upon written request be extended for a specified period of time by the city council if it is demonstrated that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of the extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.18 - Reversion of zoning. 
If development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within the time frame specified under Section 24.17, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as required by the Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. The reversion process shall be initiated by the city council resolution directing the planning commission to proceed with rezoning of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for reversionary rezoning shall be the same as all rezoning requests. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.19 - Subsequent rezoning of land. 
Whenever land that is rezoned with conditions is thereafter rezoned, the conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. The city clerk shall record the new zoning ordinance and boundary map with the Macomb County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.20 - Amendment of conditions. 
(a)  Once the rezoning with conditions ordinance is approved, the city shall not add to or alter the conditions stated in the ordinance. 
(b)  After adoption, the conditions of an approved rezoning with conditions may only be amended following the procedure required for the original rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.21 - Right to rezone by city. 
Nothing in any approved rezoning with conditions or in any provision of this division shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any portion of land that is rezoned with conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with applicable provisions of this Ordinance and the Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Section 24.22 - Requiring an offer of conditions. 
The city shall not require a landowner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect a landowner's rights pursuant to the Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, this Ordinance or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 30-970, § 6, 9-12-06)  
Sections 24.23—24.30 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXV. - INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION 
 
Section 25.01 - [Generally.] 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance impose requirements of lower heights of buildings, or a less percentage of lot that may be occupied or require wider or larger courts or deeper yards than are imposed or required by existing provisions of law or ordinance the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. 
Where, however, the provisions of the State Housing Code or other ordinances or regulations of the City of Warren impose requirements for lower heights of buildings or less percentage of lot that may be occupied or require wider or larger courts or deeper yards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of the State Housing Code or other ordinances or regulations shall govern.  
ARTICLE XXVI. - VALIDITY 
 
Section 26.01 - [Severability.] 
This Ordinance and the various parts, sections and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.  
ARTICLE XXVII. - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS REPEALED 
 
Section 27.01 - [Generally.] 
The Zoning Ordinance enacted by the City Council on October 24, 1952, and known as the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Warren, and all amendments thereof and all ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance [are] hereby repealed.  
ARTICLE XXVIII. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
Section 28.01 - [Generally.] 
Provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health, safety, and welfare of people of the City of Warren and are hereby ordered to be given immediate effect and be in force from and after the earliest date allowed by law, and this Ordinance is hereby ordered to be published in the manner provided by law, published in the Tri-City Progress. Wednesday, the 27th day of July, 1960.  
ARTICLE XXIX. - ADOPTION 
 
Section 29.01 - [Generally.] 
This Ordinance was adopted by the City Council of Warren by authority of Act 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1921 [MCL 125.581 et seq.], as amended, at a meeting thereof duly called and held on the 21st day of July, 1960 and ordered to be given publication in the manner prescribed by law. 
	/s/ HILDEGARDE M. LOWE 
 	 
CITY CLERK  
City Center Overlying Zoning District Map 
 
Village Historic District Map  
Appendix B - GOVERNMENTAL MONEY PURCHASE PLAN AND TRUST[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Appendix B of Ordinance No. 80-546, as adopted on August 24, 1999. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE 
On April 8, 1997, city council authorized the establishment of a defined contribution money purchase retirement plan (401a) as an alternative to the defined benefit plan. City council approved the ICMA Retirement Corporation Prototype Money Purchase Plan & Trust Adoption Agreement #001-94 ("Plan"). On September 15, 1999, city council approved an amendment to the ICMA Governmental Money Purchase Plan & Trust Adoption Agreement. 
From time to time, ICMA Retirement Corporation updates plan documents to ensure compliance with current IRS regulations. On April 12, 2016, city council approved an amendment to the ICMA Retirement Corporation Governmental Money Purchase Plan & Trust Adoption Agreement along with the ICMA Retirement Corporation Governmental Money Purchase Plan & Trust. These documents, as amended, are incorporated by reference and are on file with the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 80-758, § 1, 7-11-17)  
ARTICLES II—XVI. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-758, § 1, adopted July 11, 2017, repealed articles II—XVI, §§ 2.01—16.11, which pertained to definitions, eligibility, contributions, limitation on allocations, trust and investment of accounts, vesting, benefits claim, commencement of benefits, distribution requirements, modes of distribution of benefits, spousal benefit requirements, loans to participants, plan amendment, termination and optional provisions, administration, and miscellaneous and derived from Ordinance No. 80-546, as adopted on August 24, 1999. 
